

Scanned and proofed by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





                                WITHIN THE
                                  TIDES


                                  TALES

    . . . Go, make you ready. HAMLET _to the_ PLAYERS. [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                                * * * * *

                             LONDON & TORONTO
                          J. M. DENT & SONS LTD.
                        PARIS: J. M. DENT ET. FILS

                                * * * * *

FIRST EDITION       _February_ 1915
REPRINTED           _April_ 1915; _August_ 1919

                                * * * * *

                                    To
                       MR. AND MRS. RALPH WEDGWOOD

                THIS SHEAF OF CARE-FREE ANTE-BELLUM PAGES
               IN GRATITUDE FOR THEIR CHARMING HOSPITALITY
                        IN THE LAST MONTH OF PEACE




Contents

                                      PAGE
THE PLANTER OF MALATA                    3
THE PARTNER                            119
THE INN OF THE TWO WITCHES             175
BECAUSE OF THE DOLLARS                 223



THE PLANTER OF MALATA


CHAPTER I


In the private editorial office of the principal newspaper in a great
colonial city two men were talking. They were both young. The stouter
of the two, fair, and with more of an urban look about him, was the
editor and part-owner of the important newspaper. The other's name was Renouard. That he was exercised in his mind about
something was evident on his fine bronzed face. He was a lean, lounging,
active man. The journalist continued the conversation. "And so you were dining yesterday at old Dunster's." He used the word old not in the endearing sense in which it is sometimes
applied to intimates, but as a matter of sober fact. The Dunster in
question was old. He had been an eminent colonial statesman, but had now
retired from active politics after a tour in Europe and a lengthy stay in
England, during which he had had a very good press indeed. The colony
was proud of him. "Yes. I dined there," said Renouard. "Young Dunster asked me just as I
was going out of his office. It seemed to be like a sudden thought. And
yet I can't help suspecting some purpose behind it. He was very
pressing. He swore that his uncle would be very pleased to see me. Said
his uncle had mentioned lately that the granting to me of the Malata
concession was the last act of his official life." "Very touching. The old boy sentimentalises over the past now and then." "I really don't know why I accepted," continued the other. "Sentiment
does not move me very easily. Old Dunster was civil to me of course, but
he did not even inquire how I was getting on with my silk plants. Forgot
there was such a thing probably. I must say there were more people there
than I expected to meet. Quite a big party." "I was asked," remarked the newspaper man. "Only I couldn't go. But
when did you arrive from Malata?" "I arrived yesterday at daylight. I am anchored out there in the
bay--off Garden Point. I was in Dunster's office before he had finished
reading his letters. Have you ever seen young Dunster reading his
letters? I had a glimpse of him through the open door. He holds the
paper in both hands, hunches his shoulders up to his ugly ears, and
brings his long nose and his thick lips on to it like a sucking
apparatus. A commercial monster." "Here we don't consider him a monster," said the newspaper man looking at
his visitor thoughtfully. "Probably not. You are used to see his face and to see other faces. I
don't know how it is that, when I come to town, the appearance of the
people in the street strike me with such force. They seem so awfully
expressive." "And not charming." "Well--no. Not as a rule. The effect is forcible without being clear. . . . I know that you think it's because of my solitary manner of life away
there." "Yes. I do think so. It is demoralising. You don't see any one for
months at a stretch. You're leading an unhealthy life." The other hardly smiled and murmured the admission that true enough it
was a good eleven months since he had been in town last. "You see," insisted the other. "Solitude works like a sort of poison. And then you perceive suggestions in faces--mysterious and forcible, that
no sound man would be bothered with. Of course you do." Geoffrey Renouard did not tell his journalist friend that the suggestions
of his own face, the face of a friend, bothered him as much as the
others. He detected a degrading quality in the touches of age which
every day adds to a human countenance. They moved and disturbed him,
like the signs of a horrible inward travail which was frightfully
apparent to the fresh eye he had brought from his isolation in Malata,
where he had settled after five strenuous years of adventure and
exploration. "It's a fact," he said, "that when I am at home in Malata I see no one
consciously. I take the plantation boys for granted." "Well, and we here take the people in the streets for granted. And
that's sanity." The visitor said nothing to this for fear of engaging a discussion. What
he had come to seek in the editorial office was not controversy, but
information. Yet somehow he hesitated to approach the subject. Solitary
life makes a man reticent in respect of anything in the nature of gossip,
which those to whom chatting about their kind is an everyday exercise
regard as the commonest use of speech. "You very busy?" he asked. The Editor making red marks on a long slip of printed paper threw the
pencil down. "No. I am done. Social paragraphs. This office is the place where
everything is known about everybody--including even a great deal of
nobodies. Queer fellows drift in and out of this room. Waifs and strays
from home, from up-country, from the Pacific. And, by the way, last time
you were here you picked up one of that sort for your assistant--didn't
you?" "I engaged an assistant only to stop your preaching about the evils of
solitude," said Renouard hastily; and the pressman laughed at the
half-resentful tone. His laugh was not very loud, but his plump person
shook all over. He was aware that his younger friend's deference to his
advice was based only on an imperfect belief in his wisdom--or his
sagacity. But it was he who had first helped Renouard in his plans of
exploration: the five-years' programme of scientific adventure, of work,
of danger and endurance, carried out with such distinction and rewarded
modestly with the lease of Malata island by the frugal colonial
government. And this reward, too, had been due to the journalist's
advocacy with word and pen--for he was an influential man in the
community. Doubting very much if Renouard really liked him, he was
himself without great sympathy for a certain side of that man which he
could not quite make out. He only felt it obscurely to be his real
personality--the true--and, perhaps, the absurd. As, for instance, in
that case of the assistant. Renouard had given way to the arguments of
his friend and backer--the argument against the unwholesome effect of
solitude, the argument for the safety of companionship even if
quarrelsome. Very well. In this docility he was sensible and even
likeable. But what did he do next? Instead of taking counsel as to the
choice with his old backer and friend, and a man, besides, knowing
everybody employed and unemployed on the pavements of the town, this
extraordinary Renouard suddenly and almost surreptitiously picked up a
fellow--God knows who--and sailed away with him back to Malata in a
hurry; a proceeding obviously rash and at the same time not quite
straight. That was the sort of thing. The secretly unforgiving
journalist laughed a little longer and then ceased to shake all over. "Oh, yes. About that assistant of yours. . . ." "What about him," said Renouard, after waiting a while, with a shadow of
uneasiness on his face. "Have you nothing to tell me of him?" "Nothing except. . . ." Incipient grimness vanished out of Renouard's
aspect and his voice, while he hesitated as if reflecting seriously
before he changed his mind. "No. Nothing whatever." "You haven't brought him along with you by chance--for a change." The Planter of Malata stared, then shook his head, and finally murmured
carelessly: "I think he's very well where he is. But I wish you could
tell me why young Dunster insisted so much on my dining with his uncle
last night. Everybody knows I am not a society man." The Editor exclaimed at so much modesty. Didn't his friend know that he
was their one and only explorer--that he was the man experimenting with
the silk plant. . . . "Still, that doesn't tell me why I was invited yesterday. For young
Dunster never thought of this civility before. . . ." "Our Willie," said the popular journalist, "never does anything without a
purpose, that's a fact." "And to his uncle's house too!" "He lives there." "Yes. But he might have given me a feed somewhere else. The
extraordinary part is that the old man did not seem to have anything
special to say. He smiled kindly on me once or twice, and that was all. It was quite a party, sixteen people." The Editor then, after expressing his regret that he had not been able to
come, wanted to know if the party had been entertaining. Renouard regretted that his friend had not been there. Being a man whose
business or at least whose profession was to know everything that went on
in this part of the globe, he could probably have told him something of
some people lately arrived from home, who were amongst the guests. Young
Dunster (Willie), with his large shirt-front and streaks of white skin
shining unpleasantly through the thin black hair plastered over the top
of his head, bore down on him and introduced him to that party, as if he
had been a trained dog or a child phenomenon. Decidedly, he said, he
disliked Willie--one of these large oppressive men. . . . A silence fell, and it was as if Renouard were not going to say anything
more when, suddenly, he came out with the real object of his visit to the
editorial room. "They looked to me like people under a spell." The Editor gazed at him appreciatively, thinking that, whether the effect
of solitude or not, this was a proof of a sensitive perception of the
expression of faces. "You omitted to tell me their name, but I can make a guess. You mean
Professor Moorsom, his daughter and sister--don't you?" Renouard assented. Yes, a white-haired lady. But from his silence, with
his eyes fixed, yet avoiding his friend, it was easy to guess that it was
not in the white-haired lady that he was interested. "Upon my word," he said, recovering his usual bearing. "It looks to me
as if I had been asked there only for the daughter to talk to me." He did not conceal that he had been greatly struck by her appearance. Nobody could have helped being impressed. She was different from
everybody else in that house, and it was not only the effect of her
London clothes. He did not take her down to dinner. Willie did that. It was afterwards, on the terrace. . . . The evening was delightfully calm. He was sitting apart and alone, and
wishing himself somewhere else--on board the schooner for choice, with
the dinner-harness off. He hadn't exchanged forty words altogether
during the evening with the other guests. He saw her suddenly all by
herself coming towards him along the dimly lighted terrace, quite from a
distance. She was tall and supple, carrying nobly on her straight body a head of a
character which to him appeared peculiar, something--well--pagan, crowned
with a great wealth of hair. He had been about to rise, but her decided
approach caused him to remain on the seat. He had not looked much at her
that evening. He had not that freedom of gaze acquired by the habit of
society and the frequent meetings with strangers. It was not shyness,
but the reserve of a man not used to the world and to the practice of
covert staring, with careless curiosity. All he had captured by his
first, keen, instantly lowered, glance was the impression that her hair
was magnificently red and her eyes very black. It was a troubling
effect, but it had been evanescent; he had forgotten it almost till very
unexpectedly he saw her coming down the terrace slow and eager, as if she
were restraining herself, and with a rhythmic upward undulation of her
whole figure. The light from an open window fell across her path, and
suddenly all that mass of arranged hair appeared incandescent, chiselled
and fluid, with the daring suggestion of a helmet of burnished copper and
the flowing lines of molten metal. It kindled in him an astonished
admiration. But he said nothing of it to his friend the Editor. Neither
did he tell him that her approach woke up in his brain the image of
love's infinite grace and the sense of the inexhaustible joy that lives
in beauty. No! What he imparted to the Editor were no emotions, but
mere facts conveyed in a deliberate voice and in uninspired words. "That young lady came and sat down by me. She said: 'Are you French, Mr. Renouard?'" He had breathed a whiff of perfume of which he said nothing either--of
some perfume he did not know. Her voice was low and distinct. Her
shoulders and her bare arms gleamed with an extraordinary splendour, and
when she advanced her head into the light he saw the admirable contour of
the face, the straight fine nose with delicate nostrils, the exquisite
crimson brushstroke of the lips on this oval without colour. The
expression of the eyes was lost in a shadowy mysterious play of jet and
silver, stirring under the red coppery gold of the hair as though she had
been a being made of ivory and precious metals changed into living
tissue. ". . . I told her my people were living in Canada, but that I was brought
up in England before coming out here. I can't imagine what interest she
could have in my history." "And you complain of her interest?" The accent of the all-knowing journalist seemed to jar on the Planter of
Malata. "No!" he said, in a deadened voice that was almost sullen. But after a
short silence he went on. "Very extraordinary. I told her I came out to
wander at large in the world when I was nineteen, almost directly after I
left school. It seems that her late brother was in the same school a
couple of years before me. She wanted me to tell her what I did at first
when I came out here; what other men found to do when they came
out--where they went, what was likely to happen to them--as if I could
guess and foretell from my experience the fates of men who come out here
with a hundred different projects, for hundreds of different reasons--for
no reason but restlessness--who come, and go, and disappear! Preposterous. She seemed to want to hear their histories. I told her
that most of them were not worth telling." The distinguished journalist leaning on his elbow, his head resting
against the knuckles of his left hand, listened with great attention, but
gave no sign of that surprise which Renouard, pausing, seemed to expect. "You know something," the latter said brusquely. The all-knowing man
moved his head slightly and said, "Yes. But go on." "It's just this. There is no more to it. I found myself talking to her
of my adventures, of my early days. It couldn't possibly have interested
her. Really," he cried, "this is most extraordinary. Those people have
something on their minds. We sat in the light of the window, and her
father prowled about the terrace, with his hands behind his back and his
head drooping. The white-haired lady came to the dining-room window
twice--to look at us I am certain. The other guests began to go
away--and still we sat there. Apparently these people are staying with
the Dunsters. It was old Mrs. Dunster who put an end to the thing. The
father and the aunt circled about as if they were afraid of interfering
with the girl. Then she got up all at once, gave me her hand, and said
she hoped she would see me again." While he was speaking Renouard saw again the sway of her figure in a
movement of grace and strength--felt the pressure of her hand--heard the
last accents of the deep murmur that came from her throat so white in the
light of the window, and remembered the black rays of her steady eyes
passing off his face when she turned away. He remembered all this
visually, and it was not exactly pleasurable. It was rather startling
like the discovery of a new faculty in himself. There are faculties one
would rather do without--such, for instance, as seeing through a stone
wall or remembering a person with this uncanny vividness. And what about
those two people belonging to her with their air of expectant solicitude! Really, those figures from home got in front of one. In fact, their
persistence in getting between him and the solid forms of the everyday
material world had driven Renouard to call on his friend at the office. He hoped that a little common, gossipy information would lay the ghost of
that unexpected dinner-party. Of course the proper person to go to would
have been young Dunster, but, he couldn't stand Willie Dunster--not at
any price. In the pause the Editor had changed his attitude, faced his desk, and
smiled a faint knowing smile. "Striking girl--eh?" he said. The incongruity of the word was enough to make one jump out of the chair. Striking! That girl striking! Stri . . .! But Renouard restrained his
feelings. His friend was not a person to give oneself away to. And,
after all, this sort of speech was what he had come there to hear. As,
however, he had made a movement he re-settled himself comfortably and
said, with very creditable indifference, that yes--she was, rather. Especially amongst a lot of over-dressed frumps. There wasn't one woman
under forty there. "Is that the way to speak of the cream of our society; the 'top of the
basket,' as the French say," the Editor remonstrated with mock
indignation. "You aren't moderate in your expressions--you know." "I express myself very little," interjected Renouard seriously. "I will tell you what you are. You are a fellow that doesn't count the
cost. Of course you are safe with me, but will you never learn. . . ." "What struck me most," interrupted the other, "is that she should pick me
out for such a long conversation." "That's perhaps because you were the most remarkable of the men there." Renouard shook his head. "This shot doesn't seem to me to hit the mark," he said calmly. "Try
again." "Don't you believe me? Oh, you modest creature. Well, let me assure you
that under ordinary circumstances it would have been a good shot. You
are sufficiently remarkable. But you seem a pretty acute customer too. The circumstances are extraordinary. By Jove they are!" He mused. After a time the Planter of Malata dropped a negligent--

"And you know them." "And I know them," assented the all-knowing Editor, soberly, as though
the occasion were too special for a display of professional vanity; a
vanity so well known to Renouard that its absence augmented his wonder
and almost made him uneasy as if portending bad news of some sort. "You have met those people?" he asked. "No. I was to have met them last night, but I had to send an apology to
Willie in the morning. It was then that he had the bright idea to invite
you to fill the place, from a muddled notion that you could be of use. Willie is stupid sometimes. For it is clear that you are the last man
able to help." "How on earth do I come to be mixed up in this--whatever it is?" Renouard's voice was slightly altered by nervous irritation. "I only
arrived here yesterday morning." CHAPTER II


His friend the Editor turned to him squarely. "Willie took me into
consultation, and since he seems to have let you in I may just as well
tell you what is up. I shall try to be as short as I can. But in
confidence--mind!" He waited. Renouard, his uneasiness growing on him unreasonably,
assented by a nod, and the other lost no time in beginning. Professor
Moorsom--physicist and philosopher--fine head of white hair, to judge
from the photographs--plenty of brains in the head too--all these famous
books--surely even Renouard would know. . . . Renouard muttered moodily that it wasn't his sort of reading, and his
friend hastened to assure him earnestly that neither was it his
sort--except as a matter of business and duty, for the literary page of
that newspaper which was his property (and the pride of his life). The
only literary newspaper in the Antipodes could not ignore the fashionable
philosopher of the age. Not that anybody read Moorsom at the Antipodes,
but everybody had heard of him--women, children, dock labourers, cabmen. The only person (besides himself) who had read Moorsom, as far as he
knew, was old Dunster, who used to call himself a Moorsomian (or was it
Moorsomite) years and years ago, long before Moorsom had worked himself
up into the great swell he was now, in every way. . . Socially too. Quite the fashion in the highest world. Renouard listened with profoundly concealed attention. "A charlatan," he
muttered languidly. "Well--no. I should say not. I shouldn't wonder though if most of his
writing had been done with his tongue in his cheek. Of course. That's
to be expected. I tell you what: the only really honest writing is to be
found in newspapers and nowhere else--and don't you forget it." The Editor paused with a basilisk stare till Renouard had conceded a
casual: "I dare say," and only then went on to explain that old Dunster,
during his European tour, had been made rather a lion of in London, where
he stayed with the Moorsoms--he meant the father and the girl. The
professor had been a widower for a long time. "She doesn't look just a girl," muttered Renouard. The other agreed. Very likely not. Had been playing the London hostess to tip-top people
ever since she put her hair up, probably. "I don't expect to see any girlish bloom on her when I do have the
privilege," he continued. "Those people are staying with the Dunster's
_incog._, in a manner, you understand--something like royalties. They
don't deceive anybody, but they want to be left to themselves. We have
even kept them out of the paper--to oblige old Dunster. But we shall put
your arrival in--our local celebrity." "Heavens!" "Yes. Mr. G. Renouard, the explorer, whose indomitable energy, etc., and
who is now working for the prosperity of our country in another way on
his Malata plantation . . . And, by the by, how's the silk
plant--flourishing?" "Yes." "Did you bring any fibre?" "Schooner-full." "I see. To be transhipped to Liverpool for experimental manufacture, eh? Eminent capitalists at home very much interested, aren't they?" "They are." A silence fell. Then the Editor uttered slowly--"You will be a rich man
some day." Renouard's face did not betray his opinion of that confident prophecy. He didn't say anything till his friend suggested in the same meditative
voice--

"You ought to interest Moorsom in the affair too--since Willie has let
you in." "A philosopher!" "I suppose he isn't above making a bit of money. And he may be clever at
it for all you know. I have a notion that he's a fairly practical old
cove. . . . Anyhow," and here the tone of the speaker took on a tinge of
respect, "he has made philosophy pay." Renouard raised his eyes, repressed an impulse to jump up, and got out of
the arm-chair slowly. "It isn't perhaps a bad idea," he said. "I'll
have to call there in any case." He wondered whether he had managed to keep his voice steady, its tone
unconcerned enough; for his emotion was strong though it had nothing to
do with the business aspect of this suggestion. He moved in the room in
vague preparation for departure, when he heard a soft laugh. He spun
about quickly with a frown, but the Editor was not laughing at him. He
was chuckling across the big desk at the wall: a preliminary of some
speech for which Renouard, recalled to himself, waited silent and
mistrustful. "No! You would never guess! No one would ever guess what these people
are after. Willie's eyes bulged out when he came to me with the tale." "They always do," remarked Renouard with disgust. "He's stupid." "He was startled. And so was I after he told me. It's a search party. They are out looking for a man. Willie's soft heart's enlisted in the
cause." Renouard repeated: "Looking for a man." He sat down suddenly as if on purpose to stare. "Did Willie come to you
to borrow the lantern," he asked sarcastically, and got up again for no
apparent reason. "What lantern?" snapped the puzzled Editor, and his face darkened with
suspicion. "You, Renouard, are always alluding to things that aren't
clear to me. If you were in politics, I, as a party journalist, wouldn't
trust you further than I could see you. Not an inch further. You are
such a sophisticated beggar. Listen: the man is the man Miss Moorsom was
engaged to for a year. He couldn't have been a nobody, anyhow. But he
doesn't seem to have been very wise. Hard luck for the young lady." He spoke with feeling. It was clear that what he had to tell appealed to
his sentiment. Yet, as an experienced man of the world, he marked his
amused wonder. Young man of good family and connections, going
everywhere, yet not merely a man about town, but with a foot in the two
big F's. Renouard lounging aimlessly in the room turned round: "And what the
devil's that?" he asked faintly. "Why Fashion and Finance," explained the Editor. "That's how I call it. There are the three R's at the bottom of the social edifice and the two
F's on the top. See?" "Ha! Ha! Excellent! Ha! Ha!" Renouard laughed with stony eyes. "And you proceed from one set to the other in this democratic age," the
Editor went on with unperturbed complacency. "That is if you are clever
enough. The only danger is in being too clever. And I think something
of the sort happened here. That swell I am speaking of got himself into
a mess. Apparently a very ugly mess of a financial character. You will
understand that Willie did not go into details with me. They were not
imparted to him with very great abundance either. But a bad
mess--something of the criminal order. Of course he was innocent. But
he had to quit all the same." "Ha! Ha!" Renouard laughed again abruptly, staring as before. "So
there's one more big F in the tale." "What do you mean?" inquired the Editor quickly, with an air as if his
patent were being infringed. "I mean--Fool." "No. I wouldn't say that. I wouldn't say that." "Well--let him be a scoundrel then. What the devil do I care." "But hold on! You haven't heard the end of the story." Renouard, his hat on his head already, sat down with the disdainful smile
of a man who had discounted the moral of the story. Still he sat down
and the Editor swung his revolving chair right round. He was full of
unction. "Imprudent, I should say. In many ways money is as dangerous to handle
as gunpowder. You can't be too careful either as to who you are working
with. Anyhow there was a mighty flashy burst up, a sensation, and--his
familiar haunts knew him no more. But before he vanished he went to see
Miss Moorsom. That very fact argues for his innocence--don't it? What
was said between them no man knows--unless the professor had the
confidence from his daughter. There couldn't have been much to say. There was nothing for it but to let him go--was there?--for the affair
had got into the papers. And perhaps the kindest thing would have been
to forget him. Anyway the easiest. Forgiveness would have been more
difficult, I fancy, for a young lady of spirit and position drawn into an
ugly affair like that. Any ordinary young lady, I mean. Well, the
fellow asked nothing better than to be forgotten, only he didn't find it
easy to do so himself, because he would write home now and then. Not to
any of his friends though. He had no near relations. The professor had
been his guardian. No, the poor devil wrote now and then to an old
retired butler of his late father, somewhere in the country, forbidding
him at the same time to let any one know of his whereabouts. So that
worthy old ass would go up and dodge about the Moorsom's town house,
perhaps waylay Miss Moorsom's maid, and then would write to 'Master
Arthur' that the young lady looked well and happy, or some such cheerful
intelligence. I dare say he wanted to be forgotten, but I shouldn't
think he was much cheered by the news. What would you say?" Renouard, his legs stretched out and his chin on his breast, said
nothing. A sensation which was not curiosity, but rather a vague nervous
anxiety, distinctly unpleasant, like a mysterious symptom of some malady,
prevented him from getting up and going away. "Mixed feelings," the Editor opined. "Many fellows out here receive news
from home with mixed feelings. But what will his feelings be when he
hears what I am going to tell you now? For we know he has not heard yet. Six months ago a city clerk, just a common drudge of finance, gets
himself convicted of a common embezzlement or something of that kind. Then seeing he's in for a long sentence he thinks of making his
conscience comfortable, and makes a clean breast of an old story of
tampered with, or else suppressed, documents, a story which clears
altogether the honesty of our ruined gentleman. That embezzling fellow
was in a position to know, having been employed by the firm before the
smash. There was no doubt about the character being cleared--but where
the cleared man was nobody could tell. Another sensation in society. And then Miss Moorsom says: 'He will come back to claim me, and I'll
marry him.' But he didn't come back. Between you and me I don't think
he was much wanted--except by Miss Moorsom. I imagine she's used to have
her own way. She grew impatient, and declared that if she knew where the
man was she would go to him. But all that could be got out of the old
butler was that the last envelope bore the postmark of our beautiful
city; and that this was the only address of 'Master Arthur' that he ever
had. That and no more. In fact the fellow was at his last gasp--with a
bad heart. Miss Moorsom wasn't allowed to see him. She had gone herself
into the country to learn what she could, but she had to stay downstairs
while the old chap's wife went up to the invalid. She brought down the
scrap of intelligence I've told you of. He was already too far gone to
be cross-examined on it, and that very night he died. He didn't leave
behind him much to go by, did he? Our Willie hinted to me that there had
been pretty stormy days in the professor's house, but--here they are. I
have a notion she isn't the kind of everyday young lady who may be
permitted to gallop about the world all by herself--eh? Well, I think it
rather fine of her, but I quite understand that the professor needed all
his philosophy under the circumstances. She is his only child now--and
brilliant--what? Willie positively spluttered trying to describe her to
me; and I could see directly you came in that you had an uncommon
experience." Renouard, with an irritated gesture, tilted his hat more forward on his
eyes, as though he were bored. The Editor went on with the remark that
to be sure neither he (Renouard) nor yet Willie were much used to meet
girls of that remarkable superiority. Willie when learning business with
a firm in London, years before, had seen none but boarding-house society,
he guessed. As to himself in the good old days, when he trod the
glorious flags of Fleet Street, he neither had access to, nor yet would
have cared for the swells. Nothing interested him then but parliamentary
politics and the oratory of the House of Commons. He paid to this not very distant past the tribute of a tender,
reminiscent smile, and returned to his first idea that for a society girl
her action was rather fine. All the same the professor could not be very
pleased. The fellow if he was as pure as a lily now was just about as
devoid of the goods of the earth. And there were misfortunes, however
undeserved, which damaged a man's standing permanently. On the other
hand, it was difficult to oppose cynically a noble impulse--not to speak
of the great love at the root of it. Ah! Love! And then the lady was
quite capable of going off by herself. She was of age, she had money of
her own, plenty of pluck too. Moorsom must have concluded that it was
more truly paternal, more prudent too, and generally safer all round to
let himself be dragged into this chase. The aunt came along for the same
reasons. It was given out at home as a trip round the world of the usual
kind. Renouard had risen and remained standing with his heart beating, and
strangely affected by this tale, robbed as it was of all glamour by the
prosaic personality of the narrator. The Editor added: "I've been asked
to help in the search--you know." Renouard muttered something about an appointment and went out into the
street. His inborn sanity could not defend him from a misty creeping
jealousy. He thought that obviously no man of that sort could be worthy
of such a woman's devoted fidelity. Renouard, however, had lived long
enough to reflect that a man's activities, his views, and even his ideas
may be very inferior to his character; and moved by a delicate
consideration for that splendid girl he tried to think out for the man a
character of inward excellence and outward gifts--some extraordinary
seduction. But in vain. Fresh from months of solitude and from days at
sea, her splendour presented itself to him absolutely unconquerable in
its perfection, unless by her own folly. It was easier to suspect her of
this than to imagine in the man qualities which would be worthy of her. Easier and less degrading. Because folly may be generous--could be
nothing else but generosity in her; whereas to imagine her subjugated by
something common was intolerable. Because of the force of the physical impression he had received from her
personality (and such impressions are the real origins of the deepest
movements of our soul) this conception of her was even inconceivable. But no Prince Charming has ever lived out of a fairy tale. He doesn't
walk the worlds of Fashion and Finance--and with a stumbling gait at
that. Generosity. Yes. It was her generosity. But this generosity was
altogether regal in its splendour, almost absurd in its lavishness--or,
perhaps, divine. In the evening, on board his schooner, sitting on the rail, his arms
folded on his breast and his eyes fixed on the deck, he let the darkness
catch him unawares in the midst of a meditation on the mechanism of
sentiment and the springs of passion. And all the time he had an abiding
consciousness of her bodily presence. The effect on his senses had been
so penetrating that in the middle of the night, rousing up suddenly,
wide-eyed in the darkness of his cabin, he did not create a faint mental
vision of her person for himself, but, more intimately affected, he
scented distinctly the faint perfume she used, and could almost have
sworn that he had been awakened by the soft rustle of her dress. He even
sat up listening in the dark for a time, then sighed and lay down again,
not agitated but, on the contrary, oppressed by the sensation of
something that had happened to him and could not be undone. CHAPTER III


In the afternoon he lounged into the editorial office, carrying with
affected nonchalance that weight of the irremediable he had felt laid on
him suddenly in the small hours of the night--that consciousness of
something that could no longer be helped. His patronising friend
informed him at once that he had made the acquaintance of the Moorsom
party last night. At the Dunsters, of course. Dinner. "Very quiet. Nobody there. It was much better for the business. I say . . ." Renouard, his hand grasping the back of a chair, stared down at him
dumbly. "Phew! That's a stunning girl. . . Why do you want to sit on that chair? It's uncomfortable!" "I wasn't going to sit on it." Renouard walked slowly to the window,
glad to find in himself enough self-control to let go the chair instead
of raising it on high and bringing it down on the Editor's head. "Willie kept on gazing at her with tears in his boiled eyes. You should
have seen him bending sentimentally over her at dinner." "Don't," said Renouard in such an anguished tone that the Editor turned
right round to look at his back. "You push your dislike of young Dunster too far. It's positively
morbid," he disapproved mildly. "We can't be all beautiful after thirty. . . . I talked a little, about you mostly, to the professor. He appeared
to be interested in the silk plant--if only as a change from the great
subject. Miss Moorsom didn't seem to mind when I confessed to her that I
had taken you into the confidence of the thing. Our Willie approved too. Old Dunster with his white beard seemed to give me his blessing. All
those people have a great opinion of you, simply because I told them that
you've led every sort of life one can think of before you got struck on
exploration. They want you to make suggestions. What do you think
'Master Arthur' is likely to have taken to?" "Something easy," muttered Renouard without unclenching his teeth. "Hunting man. Athlete. Don't be hard on the chap. He may be riding
boundaries, or droving cattle, or humping his swag about the back-blocks
away to the devil--somewhere. He may be even prospecting at the back of
beyond--this very moment." "Or lying dead drunk in a roadside pub. It's late enough in the day for
that." The Editor looked up instinctively. The clock was pointing at a quarter
to five. "Yes, it is," he admitted. "But it needn't be. And he may
have lit out into the Western Pacific all of a sudden--say in a trading
schooner. Though I really don't see in what capacity. Still . . . " "Or he may be passing at this very moment under this very window." "Not he . . . and I wish you would get away from it to where one can see
your face. I hate talking to a man's back. You stand there like a
hermit on a sea-shore growling to yourself. I tell you what it is,
Geoffrey, you don't like mankind." "I don't make my living by talking about mankind's affairs," Renouard
defended himself. But he came away obediently and sat down in the
arm-chair. "How can you be so certain that your man isn't down there in
the street?" he asked. "It's neither more nor less probable than every
single one of your other suppositions." Placated by Renouard's docility the Editor gazed at him for a while. "Aha! I'll tell you how. Learn then that we have begun the campaign. We have telegraphed his description to the police of every township up
and down the land. And what's more we've ascertained definitely that he
hasn't been in this town for the last three months at least. How much
longer he's been away we can't tell." "That's very curious." "It's very simple. Miss Moorsom wrote to him, to the post office here
directly she returned to London after her excursion into the country to
see the old butler. Well--her letter is still lying there. It has not
been called for. Ergo, this town is not his usual abode. Personally, I
never thought it was. But he cannot fail to turn up some time or other. Our main hope lies just in the certitude that he must come to town sooner
or later. Remember he doesn't know that the butler is dead, and he will
want to inquire for a letter. Well, he'll find a note from Miss
Moorsom." Renouard, silent, thought that it was likely enough. His profound
distaste for this conversation was betrayed by an air of weariness
darkening his energetic sun-tanned features, and by the augmented
dreaminess of his eyes. The Editor noted it as a further proof of that
immoral detachment from mankind, of that callousness of sentiment
fostered by the unhealthy conditions of solitude--according to his own
favourite theory. Aloud he observed that as long as a man had not given
up correspondence he could not be looked upon as lost. Fugitive
criminals had been tracked in that way by justice, he reminded his
friend; then suddenly changed the bearing of the subject somewhat by
asking if Renouard had heard from his people lately, and if every member
of his large tribe was well and happy. "Yes, thanks." The tone was curt, as if repelling a liberty. Renouard did not like
being asked about his people, for whom he had a profound and remorseful
affection. He had not seen a single human being to whom he was related,
for many years, and he was extremely different from them all. On the very morning of his arrival from his island he had gone to a set
of pigeon-holes in Willie Dunster's outer office and had taken out from a
compartment labelled "Malata" a very small accumulation of envelopes, a
few addressed to himself, and one addressed to his assistant, all to the
care of the firm, W. Dunster and Co.  As opportunity offered, the firm
used to send them on to Malata either by a man-of-war schooner going on a
cruise, or by some trading craft proceeding that way. But for the last
four months there had been no opportunity. "You going to stay here some time?" asked the Editor, after a longish
silence. Renouard, perfunctorily, did see no reason why he should make a long
stay. "For health, for your mental health, my boy," rejoined the newspaper man. "To get used to human faces so that they don't hit you in the eye so hard
when you walk about the streets. To get friendly with your kind. I
suppose that assistant of yours can be trusted to look after things?" "There's the half-caste too. The Portuguese. He knows what's to be
done." "Aha!" The Editor looked sharply at his friend. "What's his name?" "Who's name?" "The assistant's you picked up on the sly behind my back." Renouard made a slight movement of impatience. "I met him unexpectedly one evening. I thought he would do as well as
another. He had come from up country and didn't seem happy in a town. He told me his name was Walter. I did not ask him for proofs, you know." "I don't think you get on very well with him." "Why? What makes you think so." "I don't know. Something reluctant in your manner when he's in
question." "Really. My manner! I don't think he's a great subject for
conversation, perhaps. Why not drop him?" "Of course! You wouldn't confess to a mistake. Not you. Nevertheless I
have my suspicions about it." Renouard got up to go, but hesitated, looking down at the seated Editor. "How funny," he said at last with the utmost seriousness, and was making
for the door, when the voice of his friend stopped him. "You know what has been said of you? That you couldn't get on with
anybody you couldn't kick. Now, confess--is there any truth in the soft
impeachment?" "No," said Renouard. "Did you print that in your paper." "No. I didn't quite believe it. But I will tell you what I believe. I
believe that when your heart is set on some object you are a man that
doesn't count the cost to yourself or others. And this shall get printed
some day." "Obituary notice?" Renouard dropped negligently. "Certain--some day." "Do you then regard yourself as immortal?" "No, my boy. I am not immortal. But the voice of the press goes on for
ever. . . . And it will say that this was the secret of your great
success in a task where better men than you--meaning no offence--did fail
repeatedly." "Success," muttered Renouard, pulling-to the office door after him with
considerable energy. And the letters of the word PRIVATE like a row of
white eyes seemed to stare after his back sinking down the staircase of
that temple of publicity. Renouard had no doubt that all the means of publicity would be put at the
service of love and used for the discovery of the loved man. He did not
wish him dead. He did not wish him any harm. We are all equipped with a
fund of humanity which is not exhausted without many and repeated
provocations--and this man had done him no evil. But before Renouard had
left old Dunster's house, at the conclusion of the call he made there
that very afternoon, he had discovered in himself the desire that the
search might last long. He never really flattered himself that it might
fail. It seemed to him that there was no other course in this world for
himself, for all mankind, but resignation. And he could not help
thinking that Professor Moorsom had arrived at the same conclusion too. Professor Moorsom, slight frame of middle height, a thoughtful keen head
under the thick wavy hair, veiled dark eyes under straight eyebrows, and
with an inward gaze which when disengaged and arriving at one seemed to
issue from an obscure dream of books, from the limbo of meditation,
showed himself extremely gracious to him. Renouard guessed in him a man
whom an incurable habit of investigation and analysis had made gentle and
indulgent; inapt for action, and more sensitive to the thoughts than to
the events of existence. Withal not crushed, sub-ironic without a trace
of acidity, and with a simple manner which put people at ease quickly. They had a long conversation on the terrace commanding an extended view
of the town and the harbour. The splendid immobility of the bay resting under his gaze, with its grey
spurs and shining indentations, helped Renouard to regain his
self-possession, which he had felt shaken, in coming out on the terrace,
into the setting of the most powerful emotion of his life, when he had
sat within a foot of Miss Moorsom with fire in his breast, a humming in
his ears, and in a complete disorder of his mind. There was the very
garden seat on which he had been enveloped in the radiant spell. And
presently he was sitting on it again with the professor talking of her. Near by the patriarchal Dunster leaned forward in a wicker arm-chair,
benign and a little deaf, his big hand to his ear with the innocent
eagerness of his advanced age remembering the fires of life. It was with a sort of apprehension that Renouard looked forward to seeing
Miss Moorsom. And strangely enough it resembled the state of mind of a
man who fears disenchantment more than sortilege. But he need not have
been afraid. Directly he saw her in a distance at the other end of the
terrace he shuddered to the roots of his hair. With her approach the
power of speech left him for a time. Mrs. Dunster and her aunt were
accompanying her. All these people sat down; it was an intimate circle
into which Renouard felt himself cordially admitted; and the talk was of
the great search which occupied all their minds. Discretion was expected
by these people, but of reticence as to the object of the journey there
could be no question. Nothing but ways and means and arrangements could
be talked about. By fixing his eyes obstinately on the ground, which gave him an air of
reflective sadness, Renouard managed to recover his self-possession. He
used it to keep his voice in a low key and to measure his words on the
great subject. And he took care with a great inward effort to make them
reasonable without giving them a discouraging complexion. For he did not
want the quest to be given up, since it would mean her going away with
her two attendant grey-heads to the other side of the world. He was asked to come again, to come often and take part in the counsels
of all these people captivated by the sentimental enterprise of a
declared love. On taking Miss Moorsom's hand he looked up, would have
liked to say something, but found himself voiceless, with his lips
suddenly sealed. She returned the pressure of his fingers, and he left
her with her eyes vaguely staring beyond him, an air of listening for an
expected sound, and the faintest possible smile on her lips. A smile not
for him, evidently, but the reflection of some deep and inscrutable
thought. CHAPTER IV


He went on board his schooner. She lay white, and as if suspended, in
the crepuscular atmosphere of sunset mingling with the ashy gleam of the
vast anchorage. He tried to keep his thoughts as sober, as reasonable,
as measured as his words had been, lest they should get away from him and
cause some sort of moral disaster. What he was afraid of in the coming
night was sleeplessness and the endless strain of that wearisome task. It had to be faced however. He lay on his back, sighing profoundly in
the dark, and suddenly beheld his very own self, carrying a small bizarre
lamp, reflected in a long mirror inside a room in an empty and
unfurnished palace. In this startling image of himself he recognised
somebody he had to follow--the frightened guide of his dream. He
traversed endless galleries, no end of lofty halls, innumerable doors. He lost himself utterly--he found his way again. Room succeeded room. At last the lamp went out, and he stumbled against some object which,
when he stooped for it, he found to be very cold and heavy to lift. The
sickly white light of dawn showed him the head of a statue. Its marble
hair was done in the bold lines of a helmet, on its lips the chisel had
left a faint smile, and it resembled Miss Moorsom. While he was staring
at it fixedly, the head began to grow light in his fingers, to diminish
and crumble to pieces, and at last turned into a handful of dust, which
was blown away by a puff of wind so chilly that he woke up with a
desperate shiver and leaped headlong out of his bed-place. The day had
really come. He sat down by the cabin table, and taking his head between
his hands, did not stir for a very long time. Very quiet, he set himself to review this dream. The lamp, of course, he
connected with the search for a man. But on closer examination he
perceived that the reflection of himself in the mirror was not really the
true Renouard, but somebody else whose face he could not remember. In
the deserted palace he recognised a sinister adaptation by his brain of
the long corridors with many doors, in the great building in which his
friend's newspaper was lodged on the first floor. The marble head with
Miss Moorsom's face! Well! What other face could he have dreamed of? And her complexion was fairer than Parian marble, than the heads of
angels. The wind at the end was the morning breeze entering through the
open porthole and touching his face before the schooner could swing to
the chilly gust. Yes! And all this rational explanation of the fantastic made it only
more mysterious and weird. There was something daemonic in that dream. It was one of those experiences which throw a man out of conformity with
the established order of his kind and make him a creature of obscure
suggestions. Henceforth, without ever trying to resist, he went every afternoon to the
house where she lived. He went there as passively as if in a dream. He
could never make out how he had attained the footing of intimacy in the
Dunster mansion above the bay--whether on the ground of personal merit or
as the pioneer of the vegetable silk industry. It must have been the
last, because he remembered distinctly, as distinctly as in a dream,
hearing old Dunster once telling him that his next public task would be a
careful survey of the Northern Districts to discover tracts suitable for
the cultivation of the silk plant. The old man wagged his beard at him
sagely. It was indeed as absurd as a dream. Willie of course would be there in the evening. But he was more of a
figure out of a nightmare, hovering about the circle of chairs in his
dress-clothes like a gigantic, repulsive, and sentimental bat. "Do away
with the beastly cocoons all over the world," he buzzed in his blurred,
water-logged voice. He affected a great horror of insects of all kinds. One evening he appeared with a red flower in his button-hole. Nothing
could have been more disgustingly fantastic. And he would also say to
Renouard: "You may yet change the history of our country. For economic
conditions do shape the history of nations. Eh? What?" And he would
turn to Miss Moorsom for approval, lowering protectingly his spatulous
nose and looking up with feeling from under his absurd eyebrows, which
grew thin, in the manner of canebrakes, out of his spongy skin. For this
large, bilious creature was an economist and a sentimentalist, facile to
tears, and a member of the Cobden Club. In order to see as little of him as possible Renouard began coming
earlier so as to get away before his arrival, without curtailing too much
the hours of secret contemplation for which he lived. He had given up
trying to deceive himself. His resignation was without bounds. He
accepted the immense misfortune of being in love with a woman who was in
search of another man only to throw herself into his arms. With such
desperate precision he defined in his thoughts the situation, the
consciousness of which traversed like a sharp arrow the sudden silences
of general conversation. The only thought before which he quailed was
the thought that this could not last; that it must come to an end. He
feared it instinctively as a sick man may fear death. For it seemed to
him that it must be the death of him followed by a lightless, bottomless
pit. But his resignation was not spared the torments of jealousy: the
cruel, insensate, poignant, and imbecile jealousy, when it seems that a
woman betrays us simply by this that she exists, that she breathes--and
when the deep movements of her nerves or her soul become a matter of
distracting suspicion, of killing doubt, of mortal anxiety. In the peculiar condition of their sojourn Miss Moorsom went out very
little. She accepted this seclusion at the Dunsters' mansion as in a
hermitage, and lived there, watched over by a group of old people, with
the lofty endurance of a condescending and strong-headed goddess. It was
impossible to say if she suffered from anything in the world, and whether
this was the insensibility of a great passion concentrated on itself, or
a perfect restraint of manner, or the indifference of superiority so
complete as to be sufficient to itself. But it was visible to Renouard
that she took some pleasure in talking to him at times. Was it because
he was the only person near her age? Was this, then, the secret of his
admission to the circle? He admired her voice as well poised as her movements, as her attitudes. He himself had always been a man of tranquil tones. But the power of
fascination had torn him out of his very nature so completely that to
preserve his habitual calmness from going to pieces had become a terrible
effort. He used to go from her on board the schooner exhausted, broken, shaken
up, as though he had been put to the most exquisite torture. When he saw
her approaching he always had a moment of hallucination. She was a misty
and fair creature, fitted for invisible music, for the shadows of love,
for the murmurs of waters. After a time (he could not be always staring
at the ground) he would summon up all his resolution and look at her. There was a sparkle in the clear obscurity of her eyes; and when she
turned them on him they seemed to give a new meaning to life. He would
say to himself that another man would have found long before the happy
release of madness, his wits burnt to cinders in that radiance. But no
such luck for him. His wits had come unscathed through the furnaces of
hot suns, of blazing deserts, of flaming angers against the weaknesses of
men and the obstinate cruelties of hostile nature. Being sane he had to be constantly on his guard against falling into
adoring silences or breaking out into wild speeches. He had to keep
watch on his eyes, his limbs, on the muscles of his face. Their
conversations were such as they could be between these two people: she a
young lady fresh from the thick twilight of four million people and the
artificiality of several London seasons; he the man of definite
conquering tasks, the familiar of wide horizons, and in his very repose
holding aloof from these agglomerations of units in which one loses one's
importance even to oneself. They had no common conversational small
change. They had to use the great pieces of general ideas, but they
exchanged them trivially. It was no serious commerce. Perhaps she had
not much of that coin. Nothing significant came from her. It could not
be said that she had received from the contacts of the external world
impressions of a personal kind, different from other women. What was
ravishing in her was her quietness and, in her grave attitudes, the
unfailing brilliance of her femininity. He did not know what there was
under that ivory forehead so splendidly shaped, so gloriously crowned. He could not tell what were her thoughts, her feelings. Her replies were
reflective, always preceded by a short silence, while he hung on her lips
anxiously. He felt himself in the presence of a mysterious being in whom
spoke an unknown voice, like the voice of oracles, bringing everlasting
unrest to the heart. He was thankful enough to sit in silence with secretly clenched teeth,
devoured by jealousy--and nobody could have guessed that his quiet
deferential bearing to all these grey-heads was the supreme effort of
stoicism, that the man was engaged in keeping a sinister watch on his
tortures lest his strength should fail him. As before, when grappling
with other forces of nature, he could find in himself all sorts of
courage except the courage to run away. It was perhaps from the lack of subjects they could have in common that
Miss Moorsom made him so often speak of his own life. He did not shrink
from talking about himself, for he was free from that exacerbated, timid
vanity which seals so many vain-glorious lips. He talked to her in his
restrained voice, gazing at the tip of her shoe, and thinking that the
time was bound to come soon when her very inattention would get weary of
him. And indeed on stealing a glance he would see her dazzling and
perfect, her eyes vague, staring in mournful immobility, with a drooping
head that made him think of a tragic Venus arising before him, not from
the foam of the sea, but from a distant, still more formless, mysterious,
and potent immensity of mankind. CHAPTER V


One afternoon Renouard stepping out on the terrace found nobody there. It was for him, at the same time, a melancholy disappointment and a
poignant relief. The heat was great, the air was still, all the long windows of the house
stood wide open. At the further end, grouped round a lady's work-table,
several chairs disposed sociably suggested invisible occupants, a company
of conversing shades. Renouard looked towards them with a sort of dread. A most elusive, faint sound of ghostly talk issuing from one of the rooms
added to the illusion and stopped his already hesitating footsteps. He
leaned over the balustrade of stone near a squat vase holding a tropical
plant of a bizarre shape. Professor Moorsom coming up from the garden
with a book under his arm and a white parasol held over his bare head,
found him there and, closing the parasol, leaned over by his side with a
remark on the increasing heat of the season. Renouard assented and
changed his position a little; the other, after a short silence,
administered unexpectedly a question which, like the blow of a club on
the head, deprived Renouard of the power of speech and even thought, but,
more cruel, left him quivering with apprehension, not of death but of
everlasting torment. Yet the words were extremely simple. "Something will have to be done soon. We can't remain in a state of
suspended expectation for ever. Tell me what do you think of our
chances?" Renouard, speechless, produced a faint smile. The professor confessed in
a jocular tone his impatience to complete the circuit of the globe and be
done with it. It was impossible to remain quartered on the dear
excellent Dunsters for an indefinite time. And then there were the
lectures he had arranged to deliver in Paris. A serious matter. That lectures by Professor Moorsom were a European event and that
brilliant audiences would gather to hear them Renouard did not know. All
he was aware of was the shock of this hint of departure. The menace of
separation fell on his head like a thunderbolt. And he saw the absurdity
of his emotion, for hadn't he lived all these days under the very cloud? The professor, his elbows spread out, looked down into the garden and
went on unburdening his mind. Yes. The department of sentiment was
directed by his daughter, and she had plenty of volunteered moral
support; but he had to look after the practical side of life without
assistance. "I have the less hesitation in speaking to you about my anxiety, because
I feel you are friendly to us and at the same time you are detached from
all these sublimities--confound them." "What do you mean?" murmured Renouard. "I mean that you are capable of calm judgment. Here the atmosphere is
simply detestable. Everybody has knuckled under to sentiment. Perhaps
your deliberate opinion could influence . . ." "You want Miss Moorsom to give it up?" The professor turned to the young
man dismally. "Heaven only knows what I want." Renouard leaning his back against the balustrade folded his arms on his
breast, appeared to meditate profoundly. His face, shaded softly by the
broad brim of a planter's Panama hat, with the straight line of the nose
level with the forehead, the eyes lost in the depth of the setting, and
the chin well forward, had such a profile as may be seen amongst the
bronzes of classical museums, pure under a crested helmet--recalled
vaguely a Minerva's head. "This is the most troublesome time I ever had in my life," exclaimed the
professor testily. "Surely the man must be worth it," muttered Renouard with a pang of
jealousy traversing his breast like a self-inflicted stab. Whether enervated by the heat or giving way to pent up irritation the
professor surrendered himself to the mood of sincerity. "He began by being a pleasantly dull boy. He developed into a
pointlessly clever young man, without, I suspect, ever trying to
understand anything. My daughter knew him from childhood. I am a busy
man, and I confess that their engagement was a complete surprise to me. I wish their reasons for that step had been more naive. But simplicity
was out of fashion in their set. From a worldly point of view he seems
to have been a mere baby. Of course, now, I am assured that he is the
victim of his noble confidence in the rectitude of his kind. But that's
mere idealising of a sad reality. For my part I will tell you that from
the very beginning I had the gravest doubts of his dishonesty. Unfortunately my clever daughter hadn't. And now we behold the reaction. No. To be earnestly dishonest one must be really poor. This was only a
manifestation of his extremely refined cleverness. The complicated
simpleton. He had an awful awakening though." In such words did Professor Moorsom give his "young friend" to understand
the state of his feelings toward the lost man. It was evident that the
father of Miss Moorsom wished him to remain lost. Perhaps the
unprecedented heat of the season made him long for the cool spaces of the
Pacific, the sweep of the ocean's free wind along the promenade decks,
cumbered with long chairs, of a ship steaming towards the Californian
coast. To Renouard the philosopher appeared simply the most treacherous
of fathers. He was amazed. But he was not at the end of his
discoveries. "He may be dead," the professor murmured. "Why? People don't die here sooner than in Europe. If he had gone to
hide in Italy, for instance, you wouldn't think of saying that." "Well! And suppose he has become morally disintegrated. You know he was
not a strong personality," the professor suggested moodily. "My
daughter's future is in question here." Renouard thought that the love of such a woman was enough to pull any
broken man together--to drag a man out of his grave. And he thought this
with inward despair, which kept him silent as much almost as his
astonishment. At last he managed to stammer out a generous--

"Oh! Don't let us even suppose. . ." The professor struck in with a sadder accent than before--

"It's good to be young. And then you have been a man of action, and
necessarily a believer in success. But I have been looking too long at
life not to distrust its surprises. Age! Age! Here I stand before you
a man full of doubts and hesitation--_spe lentus_, _timidus futuri_." He made a sign to Renouard not to interrupt, and in a lowered voice, as
if afraid of being overheard, even there, in the solitude of the
terrace--

"And the worst is that I am not even sure how far this sentimental
pilgrimage is genuine. Yes. I doubt my own child. It's true that she's
a woman. . . . " Renouard detected with horror a tone of resentment, as if the professor
had never forgiven his daughter for not dying instead of his son. The
latter noticed the young man's stony stare. "Ah! you don't understand. Yes, she's clever, open-minded, popular,
and--well, charming. But you don't know what it is to have moved,
breathed, existed, and even triumphed in the mere smother and froth of
life--the brilliant froth. There thoughts, sentiments, opinions,
feelings, actions too, are nothing but agitation in empty space--to amuse
life--a sort of superior debauchery, exciting and fatiguing, meaning
nothing, leading nowhere. She is the creature of that circle. And I ask
myself if she is obeying the uneasiness of an instinct seeking its
satisfaction, or is it a revulsion of feeling, or is she merely deceiving
her own heart by this dangerous trifling with romantic images. And
everything is possible--except sincerity, such as only stark, struggling
humanity can know. No woman can stand that mode of life in which women
rule, and remain a perfectly genuine, simple human being. Ah! There's
some people coming out." He moved off a pace, then turning his head: "Upon my word! I would be
infinitely obliged to you if you could throw a little cold water. . . " and at a vaguely dismayed gesture of Renouard, he added: "Don't be
afraid. You wouldn't be putting out a sacred fire." Renouard could hardly find words for a protest: "I assure you that I
never talk with Miss Moorsom--on--on--that. And if you, her father . . .
" "I envy you your innocence," sighed the professor. "A father is only an
everyday person. Flat. Stale. Moreover, my child would naturally
mistrust me. We belong to the same set. Whereas you carry with you the
prestige of the unknown. You have proved yourself to be a force." Thereupon the professor followed by Renouard joined the circle of all the
inmates of the house assembled at the other end of the terrace about a
tea-table; three white heads and that resplendent vision of woman's
glory, the sight of which had the power to flutter his heart like a
reminder of the mortality of his frame. He avoided the seat by the side of Miss Moorsom. The others were talking
together languidly. Unnoticed he looked at that woman so marvellous that
centuries seemed to lie between them. He was oppressed and overcome at
the thought of what she could give to some man who really would be a
force! What a glorious struggle with this amazon. What noble burden for
the victorious strength. Dear old Mrs. Dunster was dispensing tea, looking from time to time with
interest towards Miss Moorsom. The aged statesman having eaten a raw
tomato and drunk a glass of milk (a habit of his early farming days, long
before politics, when, pioneer of wheat-growing, he demonstrated the
possibility of raising crops on ground looking barren enough to
discourage a magician), smoothed his white beard, and struck lightly
Renouard's knee with his big wrinkled hand. "You had better come back to-night and dine with us quietly." He liked this young man, a pioneer, too, in more than one direction. Mrs. Dunster added: "Do. It will be very quiet. I don't even know if
Willie will be home for dinner." Renouard murmured his thanks, and left
the terrace to go on board the schooner. While lingering in the
drawing-room doorway he heard the resonant voice of old Dunster uttering
oracularly--

". . . the leading man here some day. . . . Like me." Renouard let the thin summer portiere of the doorway fall behind him. The voice of Professor Moorsom said--

"I am told that he has made an enemy of almost every man who had to work
with him." "That's nothing. He did his work. . . . Like me." "He never counted the cost they say. Not even of lives." Renouard understood that they were talking of him. Before he could move
away, Mrs. Dunster struck in placidly--

"Don't let yourself be shocked by the tales you may hear of him, my dear. Most of it is envy." Then he heard Miss Moorsom's voice replying to the old lady--

"Oh! I am not easily deceived. I think I may say I have an instinct for
truth." He hastened away from that house with his heart full of dread. CHAPTER VI


On board the schooner, lying on the settee on his back with the knuckles
of his hands pressed over his eyes, he made up his mind that he would not
return to that house for dinner--that he would never go back there any
more. He made up his mind some twenty times. The knowledge that he had
only to go up on the quarter deck, utter quietly the words: "Man the
windlass," and that the schooner springing into life would run a hundred
miles out to sea before sunrise, deceived his struggling will. Nothing
easier! Yet, in the end, this young man, almost ill-famed for his
ruthless daring, the inflexible leader of two tragically successful
expeditions, shrank from that act of savage energy, and began, instead,
to hunt for excuses. No! It was not for him to run away like an incurable who cuts his
throat. He finished dressing and looked at his own impassive face in the
saloon mirror scornfully. While being pulled on shore in the gig, he
remembered suddenly the wild beauty of a waterfall seen when hardly more
than a boy, years ago, in Menado. There was a legend of a
governor-general of the Dutch East Indies, on official tour, committing
suicide on that spot by leaping into the chasm. It was supposed that a
painful disease had made him weary of life. But was there ever a
visitation like his own, at the same time binding one to life and so
cruelly mortal! The dinner was indeed quiet. Willie, given half an hour's grace, failed
to turn up, and his chair remained vacant by the side of Miss Moorsom. Renouard had the professor's sister on his left, dressed in an expensive
gown becoming her age. That maiden lady in her wonderful preservation
reminded Renouard somehow of a wax flower under glass. There were no
traces of the dust of life's battles on her anywhere. She did not like
him very much in the afternoons, in his white drill suit and planter's
hat, which seemed to her an unduly Bohemian costume for calling in a
house where there were ladies. But in the evening, lithe and elegant in
his dress clothes and with his pleasant, slightly veiled voice, he always
made her conquest afresh. He might have been anybody distinguished--the
son of a duke. Falling under that charm probably (and also because her
brother had given her a hint), she attempted to open her heart to
Renouard, who was watching with all the power of his soul her niece
across the table. She spoke to him as frankly as though that miserable
mortal envelope, emptied of everything but hopeless passion, were indeed
the son of a duke. Inattentive, he heard her only in snatches, till the final confidential
burst: ". . . glad if you would express an opinion. Look at her, so
charming, such a great favourite, so generally admired! It would be too
sad. We all hoped she would make a brilliant marriage with somebody very
rich and of high position, have a house in London and in the country, and
entertain us all splendidly. She's so eminently fitted for it. She has
such hosts of distinguished friends! And then--this instead! . . . My
heart really aches." Her well-bred if anxious whisper was covered by the voice of professor
Moorsom discoursing subtly down the short length of the dinner table on
the Impermanency of the Measurable to his venerable disciple. It might
have been a chapter in a new and popular book of Moorsomian philosophy. Patriarchal and delighted, old Dunster leaned forward a little, his eyes
shining youthfully, two spots of colour at the roots of his white beard;
and Renouard, glancing at the senile excitement, recalled the words heard
on those subtle lips, adopted their scorn for his own, saw their truth
before this man ready to be amused by the side of the grave. Yes! Intellectual debauchery in the froth of existence! Froth and fraud! On the same side of the table Miss Moorsom never once looked towards her
father, all her grace as if frozen, her red lips compressed, the faintest
rosiness under her dazzling complexion, her black eyes burning
motionless, and the very coppery gleams of light lying still on the waves
and undulation of her hair. Renouard fancied himself overturning the
table, smashing crystal and china, treading fruit and flowers under foot,
seizing her in his arms, carrying her off in a tumult of shrieks from all
these people, a silent frightened mortal, into some profound retreat as
in the age of Cavern men. Suddenly everybody got up, and he hastened to
rise too, finding himself out of breath and quite unsteady on his feet. On the terrace the philosopher, after lighting a cigar, slipped his hand
condescendingly under his "dear young friend's" arm. Renouard regarded
him now with the profoundest mistrust. But the great man seemed really
to have a liking for his young friend--one of those mysterious
sympathies, disregarding the differences of age and position, which in
this case might have been explained by the failure of philosophy to meet
a very real worry of a practical kind. After a turn or two and some casual talk the professor said suddenly: "My
late son was in your school--do you know? 