

E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team from images provided by the Million Book Project



THE FRONTIERSMEN

by

CHARLES EGBERT CRADDOCK

Author of _A Spectre of Power_, _The Prophet of the Great Smoky
Mountains_, _In the Tennessee Mountains_, etc. 1904







CONTENTS


THE LINGUISTER

A VICTOR AT CHUNGKE

THE CAPTIVE OF THE ADA-WEHI

THE FATE OF THE CHEERA-TAGHE

THE BEWITCHED BALL-STICKS

THE VISIT OF THE TURBULENT GRANDFATHER

NOTES




THE LINGUISTER


The mental image of the world is of individual and varying compass. It
may be likened to one of those curious Chinese balls of quaintly carved
ivory, containing other balls, one within another, the proportions ever
dwindling with each successive inclosure, yet each a more minute
duplicate of the external sphere. This might seem the least world of
all,--the restricted limits of the quadrangle of this primitive
stockade,--but Peninnah Penelope Anne Mivane had known no other than
such as this. It was large enough for her, for a fairy-like face, very
fair, with golden brown hair, that seemed to have entangled the
sunshine, and lustrous brown eyes, looked out of an embrasure (locally
called "port-hole") of the blockhouse, more formidable than the swivel
gun once mounted there, commanding the entrance to the stockade gate. Her aspect might have suggested that Titania herself had resorted to
military methods and was ensconced in primitive defenses. It was even
large enough for her name, which must have been conferred upon her, as
the wits of the Blue Lick Station jocularly averred, in the hope of
adding some size to her. It was large enough also for the drama of
battle and the tragedy of bloody death--both had befallen within its
limits. There had been a night, glooming very dark in the past, an unwary night
when the row of log houses, all connected by the palisades from one to
the other, presenting a blank wall without, broken only by loopholes for
musketry, had been scaled by the crafty Cherokees, swarming over the
roofs, and attacking the English settlers through the easy access of the
unglazed windows and flimsy batten doors that opened upon the
quadrangle. Although finally beaten off, the Indians had inflicted great
loss. Her father had been one of the slain settlers who thus paid
penalty for the false sense of security, fostered by long immunity. Even
more troublous times came later,--the tumult of open war was rife in all
the land; the station was repeatedly attacked, and although it held out
stanchly, fear and suspense and grief filled the stockade,--yet still
there was space for Cupid to go swaggering hither and thither within the
guarded gates, and aim his arrows with his old-time dainty skill, albeit
his bow and quiver might seem somewhat archaic in these days of powder
and lead. For Peninnah Penelope Anne Mivane spent much of her time in
the moulding of bullets. Perhaps it was appropriate, since both she and
her young pioneer lover dealt so largely in missiles, that it was thus
the sentimental dart was sped. Lead was precious in those days, but
sundry bullets, that she had moulded, Ralph Emsden never rammed down
into the long barrel of his flintlock rifle. Some question as to whether
the balls had cooled, or perhaps some mere meditative pause, had carried
the bits of lead in her fingers to her lips, as they sat together on the
hearth and talked and worked in the fire-lit dusk for their common
defense. He was wont to watch, lynx-eyed, the spot where these
consecrated bullets were placed, and afterward carried them in a
separate buckskin bag over his heart, and mentally called them his
"kisses;" for the youths of those days were even such fools as now,
although in the lapse of time they have come to pose successfully in the
dignified guise of the "wise patriots of the pioneer period." More than
once when the station was attacked and the women loaded the guns of the
men to expedite the shooting, she kept stanchly at his elbow throughout
the thunderous conflict, and charged and primed the alternate rifles
which he fired. [1] Over the trigger, in fact, the fateful word was
spoken. "Oh, Nan," he exclaimed, looking down at her while taking the weapon
from her hand in the vague dusk where she knelt beside him,--he stood on
the shelf that served as banquette to bring him within reach of the
loophole, placed so high in the hope that a chance shot entering might
range only among the rafters,--"How quick you are! How you help me!" The thunderous crash of the double volley of the settlers firing twice,
by the aid of their feminine auxiliaries, to every volley of the
Indians, overwhelmed for the moment the tumult of the fiendish whoops in
the wild darkness outside, and then the fusillade of the return fire,
like leaden hail, rattled against the tough log walls of the station. "Are you afraid, Nan?" he asked, as he received again the loaded weapon
from her hand. "_Afraid?_--No!" exclaimed Peninnah Penelope Anne Mivane--hardly taller
than the ramrod with which she was once more driving the charge home. He saw her face, delicate and blonde, in the vivid white flare from the
rifle as he thrust it through the loophole and fired. "You think I can
take care of you?" he demanded, while the echo died away, and a lull
ensued. "I know you can," she replied, adjusting with the steady hand of an
expert the patching over the muzzle of the discharged weapon in the
semi-obscurity. A blood-curdling shout came from the Cherokees in the woods with a
deeper roar of musketry at closer quarters; and a hollow groan within
the blockhouse, where there was a sudden commotion in the dim light,
told that some bullet had found its billet. "They are coming to the attack again--Hand me the
rifle--quick--quick--Oh, Nan, how you help me! How brave you are--I love
you! I love you!" "Look out now for a flash in the pan!" Peninnah Penelope Anne merely
admonished him. Being susceptible to superstition and a ponderer on omens, Ralph Emsden
often thought fretfully afterward on the double meaning of these words,
and sought to displace them in their possible evil influence on his
future by some assurance more cheerful and confident. With this view he
often earnestly beset her, but could secure nothing more pleasing than a
reference to the will of her grandfather and a protestation to abide by
his decision in the matter. Now Peninnah Penelope Anne's grandfather was deaf. His was that hopeless
variety of the infirmity which heard no more than he desired. His
memory, however, was unimpaired, and it may be that certain
recollections of his own experiences in the past remained with him,
making him a fine judge of the signs of the present. Emsden, appalled by
the necessity of shrieking out his love within the acute and
well-applied hearing facilities of the families of some ten
"stationers," to use the phrase of the day, diligently sought to decoy,
on successive occasions, Richard Mivane out to the comparative solitudes
of the hunting, the fishing, the cropping. In vain. Richard Mivane
displayed sudden extreme prudential care against surprise and capture by
Indians, when this was possible, and when impossible he developed
unexpected and unexampled resources of protective rheumatism. The young
lover was equally precluded from setting forth the state of his
affections and the prospects of his future in writing. Apart from the
absurdity of thus approaching a man whom he saw twenty times a day, old
Mivane would permit no such intimation of the extent of his
affliction,--it being a point of pride with him that he was merely
slightly hard of hearing, and suffered only from the indistinctness of
the enunciation of people in general. And indeed, it was variously
contended that he was so deaf that he could not hear a gun fired at his
elbow; and yet that he heard all manner of secrets which chanced to be
detailed in his presence, in inadvertent reliance on his incapacity, and
had not the smallest hesitation afterward in their disclosure, being
entitled to them by right of discovery, as it were. Emsden, in keen anxiety, doubtful if his suit were seriously
disapproved, or if these demonstrations were only prompted by old
Mivane's selfish aversion to give away his granddaughter, finally
summoned all his courage, and in a stentorian roar proclaimed to the old
gentleman his sentiments. Richard Mivane was a man of many punctilious habitudes, who wore cloth
instead of buckskin, however hard it might be to come by, and silver
knee-buckles and well-knit hose on his still shapely calves, and a
peruke carefully powdered and tended. He had a keen, wrinkled, bloodless
face, discerning, clever, gray eyes, heavy, overhanging, grizzled
eyebrows, and a gentlemanly mouth of a diplomatic, well-bred,
conservative expression. It was said at Blue Lick Station that he had fled from his own country,
the north of England, on account of an affair of honor,--a duel in early
life,--and that however distasteful the hardships and comparative
poverty of this new home, it was far safer for him than the land of his
birth. His worldly position there gave him sundry claims of superiority,
for all of which his hardy pioneer son had had scant sympathy; and Ralph
Emsden, in the difficult crisis of the disclosure of the state of his
affections, heaved many a sigh for this simple manly soul's untimely
fate. The elder Mivane, with his head bent forward, his hand behind his ear,
sat in his arm-chair while he hearkened blandly to the sentimental
statements which Emsden was obliged to shout forth twice. Then Richard
Mivane cleared his throat with a sort of preliminary gentlemanly
embarrassment, and went fluently on with that suave low voice so common
to the very deaf. "Command me, sir, command me! It will give me much
pleasure to use my influence on your behalf to obtain an ensigncy. I
will myself write at the first opportunity, the first express, to
Lieutenant-Governor Bull, who is acquainted with my family connections
in England. It is very praiseworthy, very laudable indeed, that you
should aspire to a commission in the military service,--the provincial
forces. I honor you for your readiness to fight--although, to be sure,
being Irish, you can't help it. Still, it is to your credit that you are
Irish. I am very partial to the Irish traits of character--was once in
Ireland myself--visited an uncle there"--and so forth and so forth. And thus poor Ralph Emsden, who was only Irish by descent, and could not
have found Ireland on the map were he to hang for his ignorance, and had
been born and bred in the Royal province of South Carolina,--which
country he considered the crown and glory of the world,--was constrained
to listen to all the doings and sayings of Richard Mivane in Ireland
from the time that he embarked on the wild Irish Sea, which scrupled not
to take unprecedented liberties with so untried a sailor, till the
entrance of other pioneers cut short a beguiling account of his first
meeting with potheen in its native haunts, and the bewildering pranks
that he and that tricksy sprite played together in those the
irresponsible days of his youth. Emsden told no one, not even Peninnah Penelope Anne, of his
discomfiture; but alack, there were youngsters in the family of
unaffected minds and unimpaired hearing. This was made amply manifest a
day or so afterward, when he chanced to pause at the door of the log
cabin and glance in, hoping that, perhaps, the queen of his dreams might
materialize in this humble domicile. The old gentleman slept in his chair, with dreams of his own, perchance,
for his early life might have furnished a myriad gay fancies for his
later years. The glare of noonday lay on the unshaded spaces of the
quadrangle without; for all trees had been felled, even far around the
inclosure, lest thence they might afford vantage and ambush for musketry
fire or a flight of arrows into the stockade. Through rifts in the
foliage at considerable distance one could see the dark mountain looming
high above, and catch glimpses of the further reaches of the Great Smoky
Range, blue and shimmering far away, and even distinguish the crest of
"Big Injun Mountain" on the skyline. The several cabins, all connected
by that row of protective palisades from one to another like a visible
expression of the chord of sympathy and mutual helpful neighborliness,
were quiet, their denizens dining within. At the blockhouse a guard was
mounted--doubtless a watchful and stanch lookout, but unconforming to
military methods, for he sang, to speed the time, a metrical psalm of
David's; the awkward collocation of the words of this version would
forever distort the royal poet's meaning if he had no other vehicle of
his inspiration. There were long waits between the drowsy lines, and in
the intervals certain callow voices, with the penetrating timbre of
youth, came to Emsden's ear. His eyes followed the sound quickly. The little sisters of Peninnah Penelope Anne were on the floor before a
playhouse, outlined by stones and sticks, and with rapt faces and
competent fancies, saw whatsoever they would. In these riches of
imagination a little brother also partook. A stick, accoutred in such
wise with scraps of buckskin as to imitate a gallant of the place and
period, was bowing respectfully before another stick, vested in the
affabilities of age and the simulacrum of a dressing-gown. "I love your granddaughter, sir, and wish to make her my wife," said the
bowing stick. "Command me, sir; command me!" suavely replied the stick stricken in
years. The scene had been an eye-opener to the tender youth of the little
Mivanes; the pomp and circumstance of a sentimental disclosure they
would never forget. Emsden, as hardy a pioneer as ever drew a bead on a panther or an
Indian, passed on, quaking at the thought of the wits of the Station as
he had never yet feared man, and his respected Irish blood ran cold. And
when it waxed warm with wrath once more it came to pass that to utter
the simple phrase "Command me" was as much as a man's life was worth at
Blue Lick Station. Emsden thought ruefully of the girl's mother and wondered if her
intercession would avail aught with the old autocrat. But he had not yet
ventured upon this. There was nothing certain about Mrs. Mivane but her
uncertainty. She never gave a positive opinion. Her attitude of mind was
only to be divined by inference. She never gave a categorical answer. And indeed he would not have been encouraged to learn that Richard
Mivane himself had already consulted his daughter-in-law, as in this
highhanded evasion of any decision he felt the need of support. For once
the old gentleman was not displeased with her reply, comprehensive,
although glancing aside from the point. Since there were so many young
men in the country, said Mrs. Mivane, she saw no reason for despair! With this approval of his temporizing policy Richard Mivane left the
matter to the development of the future. Emsden's depression would have been more serious had he not fortunately
sundry tokens of the old man's favor to cherish in his memory, which
seemed to intimate that this elusiveness was only a shrewd scheme to
delay and thwart him rather than a positive and reasonable disposition
to deny his suit. In short, Emsden began to realize that instead of a
damsel of eighteen he had to court a coquette rising sixty, of the
sterner sex, and deafer than an adder when he chose. His artful quirks
were destined to try the young lover's diplomacy to the utmost, and
Emsden appreciated this, but he reassured himself with the reflection
that it was better thus than if it were the girl who vacillated and
delighted to torture him with all the arts of a first-class jilt. He was
constantly in and out of the house almost as familiarly as if he were
already betrothed, for in the troublous period that seemed now closing,
with its sudden flights, its panics, its desperate conflicts with the
Indians, he had been able to give an almost filial aid to Richard Mivane
in the stead of the son whom the old man had lost. Richard Mivane had always felt himself an alien, a sojourner in this new
land, and perchance he might not have been able even partially to
reconcile himself to the ruder conditions of his later life if the
bursting of a financial bubble had not swept away all hope of returning
to the status of his earlier home in England when the tragedy of the
duel had been sunk in oblivion. The frontier was a fine place to hide
one's poverty and fading graces, he had once remarked, and thereafter
had seemed to resign himself to its hardships,--indeed, sometimes he
consigned his negro body-servant, Caesar, to other duties than his
exclusive attendance. He had even been known to breakfast with his head
tied up in a handkerchief when some domestic crisis had supervened, such
as the escape of all the horses from the pinfold, to call away his
barber. As this functionary was of an active temperament and not at all
averse to the labor in the fields, he proved of more value thus utilized
than in merely furnishing covert amusement to the stationers by his
pompous duplication of his master's attitude of being too cultured,
traveled, and polished for his surroundings. He was a trained valet,
however, expert in all the details of dressing hair, powdering, curling,
pomatuming, and other intricacies of the toilet of a man of fashion of
that day. Caesar had many arts at command touching the burnishing of
buckles and buttons, and even in clear-starching steinkirks and the
cambric ruffles of shirts. As he ploughed he was wont to tell of his
wonderful experiences while in his master's service in London (although
he had never crossed the seas); and these being accepted with seeming
seriousness, he carried his travels a step farther and described the
life he remembered in the interior of Guinea (although he had never seen
the shores of Africa). This life so closely resembled that of London
that it was often difficult to distinguish the locality of the
incidents, an incongruity that enchanted the wags of the settlement, who
continually incited him to prodigies of narration. The hairbreadth
escapes that he and his fellow-servants, as well as the white people,
had had from the wrath of the Indians, whom the negroes feared beyond
measure, and their swift flights from one stockade to another in those
sudden panics during the troubled period preceding the Cherokee War,
might have seemed more exciting material for romancing for a venturesome
Munchausen, but perhaps these realities were too stern to afford any
interest in the present or glamour in the past. It was somewhat as a prelude to the siege of Fort Loudon by the
Cherokees in 1760 that they stormed and triumphantly carried several
minor stations to the southeast. Although Blue Lick sustained the
attack, still, in view of the loss of a number of its gallant defenders,
the settlers retreated at the first opportunity to the more sheltered
frontier beyond Fort Prince George, living from hand to mouth, some at
Long Cane and some at Ninety-Six, through those years when first
Montgomerie and then Grant made their furious forays through the
Cherokee country. Emsden, having served in the provincial regiment,
eagerly coveted a commission, of which Richard Mivane had feigned to
speak. Now that the Cherokees were ostensibly pacified,--that is,
exhausted, decimated, their towns burned, their best and bravest slain,
their hearts broken,--the fugitives from this settlement on the
Eupharsee River, as the Hiwassee was then called, gathered their
household gods and journeyed back to Blue Lick, to cry out in the
wilderness that they were "home" once more, and clasp each other's hands
in joyful gratulation to witness the roofs and stockade rise again,
rebuilt as of yore. Strangely enough, there were old Cherokee friends to
greet them anew and to be welcomed into the stockade; for even the rigid
rule of war and hate must needs be proved by its exceptions. And there
were one or two pensive philosophers among the English settlers vaguely
sad to see all the Cherokee traditions and prestige, and remnants of
prehistoric pseudo-civilization, shattered in the dust, and the
tremulous, foreign, unaccustomed effort--half-hearted, half-believing,
half-understanding--to put on the habitude of a new civilization. "The white man's religion permits poverty, but the Indian divides his
store with the needy, and there are none suffered to be poor," said
Atta-Kulla-Kulla, the famous chief. "The white men wrangle and quarrel
together, even brother with brother; with us the inner tribal peace is
ever unbroken. The white men slay and rob and oppress the poor, and with
many cunning treaties take now our lands and now our lives; then they
offer us their religion;--why does it seem so like an empty bowl?" "Atta-Kulla-Kulla, you know that I am deaf," said Richard Mivane, "and
you ask me such hard questions that I am not able to hear them." It is more than probable that these stationers in the vanguard of the
irrepressible march of western emigration had been trespassers, and thus
earned their misfortunes, in some sort, by their encroachment on Indian
territory; although since the war the Cherokee boundaries had become
more vague than heretofore, it being considered that Grant's operations
had extended the frontier by some seventy miles. It may be, too, that
the Blue Lick settlers held their own by right of private purchase; for
the inhibition to the acquisition of land in this way from the Indians
was not enacted till the following year, 1763, after the events to be
herein detailed, and, indeed, such purchases even further west and of an
earlier date are of record, albeit of doubtful legality. Now that peace in whatever maimed sort had come to this stricken land
and these adventurous settlers, who held their lives, their all, by such
precarious tenure, internecine strife must needs arise among them; not
the hand of brother against brother,--they were spared that grief,--but
one tender, struggling community against another. And it came about in this wise. One day Peninnah Penelope Anne Mivane, watching from the "port-hole" of
the blockhouse, where the muzzle of that dog of war the little swivel
gun had once been wont to look forth, beheld Ralph Emsden ride out from
the stockade gate for a week's absence with a party of hunters; with
bluff but tender assurance he waved his hat and hand to her in farewell. "Before all the men!" she said to herself, half in prudish dismay at his
effrontery, and yet pleased that he did not sheepishly seek to conceal
his preference. And although the men (there were but two or three and
not half the province, as her horror of this publicity would seem to
imply) said with a grin "Command me!" they said it _sotto voce_ and only
to each other. Spring was once more afoot in the land. They daily marked her advance as
they went. Halfway up the mountains she had climbed: for the maples were
blooming in rich dark reds that made the nearer slopes even more
splendid of garb than the velvet azure of the distant ranges, the elms
had put forth delicate sprays of emerald tint, and the pines all bore
great wax-like tapers amidst their evergreen boughs, as if ready for
kindling for some great festival. It is a wonderful thing to hear a wind
singing in myriads of their branches at once. The surging tones of this
oratorio of nature resounded for miles along the deep indented ravines
and the rocky slopes of the Great Smoky Mountains. Now and again the
flow of a torrent or the dash of a cataract added fugue-like effects. The men were constantly impressed by these paeans of the forests; the
tuft of violets abloom beneath a horse's hoofs might be crushed
unnoticed, but the acoustic conditions of the air and the high floating
of the tenuous white clouds against a dense blue sky, promising rain in
due season, evoked a throb of satisfaction in the farmer's heart not
less sincere because unaesthetic. The farmer's toil had hardly yet
begun, the winter's hunt being just concluded, and each of the
stationers with a string of led horses was bound for his camps and
caches to bring in the skins that made the profit of the season. One of this group of three was the psalm-singer of the blockhouse. His
name was Xerxes Alexander Anxley, and he was unceremoniously called by
the community "X," and by Mivane "the unknown quantity," for he was
something of an enigma, and his predilections provoked much speculation. He was a religionist of ascetic, extreme views,--a type rare in this
region,--coming originally from the colony of the Salzburgers
established in Georgia. We are less disposed to be tolerant of individual persuasions which
imply a personal and unpleasant reflection. Xerxes Alexander Anxley
disapproved of dancing, and the community questioned his sanity; for
these early pioneers in the region of the Great Smoky Range carried the
rifle over one shoulder and the fiddle over the other. He disapproved of
secular songs and idle stories, and the settlement questioned his taste;
for it was the delight of the stationers, old and young, to gather
around the hearth, and, while the chestnuts roasted in the fire for the
juniors, and the jovial horn, as it was called, circulated among the
elders, the oft-told story was rehearsed and the old song sung anew. He
even disapproved of the jovial horn--and the settlement questioned his
sincerity. This man Anxley looked his ascetic character. He had a hard pragmatic
countenance, and one of those noses which though large and bony come
suddenly short and blunted. His eyes, small, gray, and inscrutable,
seemed unfriendly, so baffling, introspective, unnoting was their
inattentiveness. His hair was of a sort of carrot tint, which color was
reproduced in paler guise in his fringed buckskin shirt and leggings,
worn on a sturdy and powerful frame. His mouth was shut hard and fast
upon his convictions, as if to denote that he could not be argued out of
them, and when the lips parted its lines were scarcely more mobile, and
his words were usually framed to doubt one's state of grace and to
contravene one's tenets as to final salvation. He rode much of the time
with the reins loose on his horse's neck, and perhaps no man in the
saddle had ever been so addicted to psalmody since the days of
Cromwell's troopers. His theological disputations grated peculiarly upon
Emsden's mood, and he always laid at his door the disaster that
followed. "If I hadn't been so traveled that day,--dragged through hell and
skirting of purgatory and knocking at the gates of heaven,--I wouldn't
have lost my wits so suddenly when I came back to earth with a bounce,"
Emsden afterward declared. For as the hunters were coming at a brisk trot in single file along the
"old trading path," as it was called even then, the fleecy white clouds
racing above in the dense blue of the sky, their violet shadows fleeting
as swift along the slopes of the velvet-soft azure mountains, and the
wind far outstripping them in the vernal budding woods, a sudden stir
near at hand caused Emsden to turn his head. Just above him, on a rugged
slope where no trees grew save a scraggy cedar here and there amidst the
shelving ledges of rock outcropping through the soft verdant turf, he
saw a stealthy, furtive shape; he was aware of a hasty cowed glance over
the shoulder, and then a stretching of supple limbs in flight. Before he
himself hardly knew it the sharp crack of his rifle rang out,--the aim
was almost instinctive. And it was as true as instinct,--a large black wolf, his pelt glossy and
fresh with the renewal of the season, lay stretched dead in an instant
upon the slope. Emsden sprang from his horse, tossed the reins to "X,"
and, drawing his knife, ran up the steep ascent to secure the animal's
skin. Only vaguely, as in a dream, he heard a sudden deep roar, beheld a
horned creature leaping heavily upon its fore quarters, tossing its hind
legs and tail into the air. Then an infuriated bull, breaking from the
bushes, charged fiercely down upon him. Emsden threw himself into a
posture of defense as instantly as if he had been a trained bullfighter
and the arena his wonted sphere, holding the knife close in front of
him, presenting the blade with a quick keen calculation for the animal's
jugular. The knife was Emsden's only weapon, for his pistols were in the
holster on the saddle, and his discharged rifle lay where he had flung
it on the ground after firing. He had only time to wonder that his
comrades vouchsafed him no assistance in his extremity. Men of such
accurate aim and constant practice could easily risk sending a
rifle-ball past him to stop that furious career. He could see the pupil
of the bull's wild dilated eyes, fiery as with a spark of actual flame. He could even feel the hot puffs of the creature's breath upon his
cheeks, when all at once the horned head so close above his own swerved
aside with a snort from the dead body of the wolf at his feet. The bull
passed him like a thunderbolt, and he heard the infuriated stamping
which fairly shook the ground in the thicket below, where this king of
the herds paused to bellow and paw the earth, throwing clods high above
the environing copse. The woods seemed full of maddened, frightened cattle, and Emsden's horse
was frantically galloping after the cavalcade of hunters and their
pack-train, all the animals more or less beyond the control of the men. He felt it an ill chance that left him thus alone and afoot in this
dense wilderness, several days' travel from the station. He was hardly
sure that he would be missed by his comrades, themselves scattered, the
pack-horses having broken from the path which they had traveled in
single file, and now with their burdens of value all foolishly careering
wildly through the woods. The first prudential care of the hunters he
knew would be to recover them and re-align the train, lest some
miscreant, encountering the animals, plunder the estrays of their loads
of hard-won deerskins and furs. The presence of cattle suggested to Emsden the proximity of human
dwellings, and yet this was problematic, for beyond branding and
occasional saltings the herds ranged within large bounds on lands
selected for their suitability as pasturage. The dwellings of these
pioneer herdsmen might be far away indeed, and in what direction he
could not guess. Since the Cherokee War, and the obliteration of all
previous marks of white settlements in this remote region, Emsden was
unfamiliar with the more recent location of "cow-pens," as the ranches
were called, and was only approximately acquainted with the new site of
the settlers' stations. Nothing so alters the face of a country as the
moral and physical convulsion of war. Even many of the Indian towns were
deserted and half charred,--burned by the orders of the British
commanders. One such stood in a valley through which he passed on his
homeward way; the tender vernal aspect of this green cove, held in the
solemn quiet of the encircling mountains, might typify peace itself. Yet
here the blue sky could be seen through the black skeleton rafters of
the once pleasant homes; and there were other significant skeletons in
the absolute solitude,--the great ribs of dead chargers, together with
broken bits and bridles, and remnants of exploded hand-grenades, and a
burst gun-barrel, all lying on the bank of a lovely mountain stream at
the point where he crossed it, as it flowed, crystal clear, through this
sequestered bosky nook. Something of a job this transit was, for with the spring freshets the
water was high and the current strong, and he was compelled to use only
one hand for swimming, the other holding high out of the water's reach
his powder horn. For, despite any treaties of peace, this was no country
for a man to traverse unarmed, and an encounter with an inimical
wandering Indian might serve to make for his comrades' curiosity
concerning his fate, when they should chance to have leisure to feel it,
a perpetual conundrum. He had never, however, made so lonely a journey. Not one human being did
he meet--neither red man nor white--in all the long miles of the endless
wilderness; naught astir save the sparse vernal shadows in the budding
woods and the gentle spring zephyr swinging past and singing as it went. Now and again he noted how the sun slowly dropped down the skies that
were so fine, so fair, so blue that it seemed loath to go and leave the
majestic peace of the zenith. The stars scintillated in the dark night
as if a thousand bivouac fires were kindled in those far spaces of the
heavens responsive to the fire which he kept aglow to cook the supper
that his rifle fetched him and to ward off the approach of wolf or
panther while he slept. He was doubtless in jeopardy often enough, but
chance befriended him and he encountered naught inimical till the fourth
day when he came in at the gate of the station and met the partners of
the hunt, themselves not long since arrived. They waited for no reproaches for their desertion. They were quick to
upbraid. As they hailed him in chorus he was bewildered for a moment,
and stood in the gateway leaning on his rifle, his coonskin cap thrust
back on his brown hair, his bright, steady gray eyes concentrated as he
listened. His tall, lithe figure in his buckskin hunting shirt and
leggings, the habitual garb of the frontiersmen, grew tense and gave an
intimation of gathering all its forces for the defensive as he noted how
the aspect of the station differed from its wonted guise. Every house of
the assemblage of little log cabins stood open; here and there in the
misty air, for there had been a swift, short spring shower, fires could
be seen aglow on the hearths within; the long slant of the red sunset
rays fell athwart the gleaming wet roofs and barbed the pointed tops of
the palisades with sharp glints of light, and a rainbow showed all the
colors of the prism high against the azure mountain beyond, while a
second arch below, a dim duplication, spanned the depths of a valley. The frontiersmen were all in the open spaces of the square excitedly
wrangling--and suddenly he became conscious of a girlish face at the
embrasure for the cannon at the blockhouse, a face with golden brown
hair above it, and a red hood that had evidently been in the rain. "Looking out for me, I wonder?" he asked himself, and as this glow of
agitated speculation swept over him the men who plied him with questions
angrily admonished his silence. "He has seen a wolf! He has seen a wolf! 'Tis plain!" cried old Mivane,
as he stood in his metropolitan costume among the buckskin-clad
pioneers. "One would know that without being told!" "You shot the wolf and stampeded the cattle, and the herders at the
cow-pens on the Keowee River can't round them up again!" cried one of
the settlers. "The cattle have run to the Congarees by this time!" declared another
pessimistically. "And it was _you_ that shot the wolf!" cried "X" rancorously. "The herders are holding _us_ responsible and have sent an ambassador,"
explained John Ronackstone, anxiously knitting his brows, "to inform us
that not a horse of the pack-train from Blue Lick Station shall pass
down to Charlestown till we indemnify them for the loss of the cattle." "Gadso! they can't _all_ be lost!" exclaimed old Mivane floutingly. "No, no! the herders go too far for damages--too far! They are putting
their coulter _too_ deep!" said a farmer fresh from the field. He had
still a bag of seed-grain around his neck, and now and again he thrust
in his hand and fingered the kernels. "They declare they'll seize our skins," cried another
ambiguously,--then, conscious of this, he sought to amend the
matter,--"Not the hides we wear,"--this was no better, for they were all
arrayed in hides, save Richard Mivane. "Not the hides that we were born
in, but our deerhides, our peltry,--they'll seize the pack-train from
Blue Lick, and they declare they'll call on the commandant of Fort
Prince George to oppose its passing with the king's troops." An appalled silence fell on the quadrangle,--save for the fresh notes of
a mockingbird, perching in jaunty guise on the tower of the blockhouse,
above which the rainbow glowed in the radiant splendors of a misty amber
sky. "The king's troops? Would the commandant respond?" anxiously speculated
one of the settlers. The little handful of pioneers, with their main possessions in the fate
of the pack-train, looked at one another in dismay. "And tell me, friend Feather-pate, why did it seem good to you to shoot
a wolf in the midst of a herd of cattle?" demanded Richard Mivane. Ralph Emsden, bewildered by the results of this untoward chance, and the
further catastrophe shadowed forth in the threatened seizure of the
train, rallied with all his faculties at the note of scorn from this
quarter. "Sir, I did not shoot the wolf among the cattle. There was not a horn
nor a hoof to be seen when I fired." Mivane turned to "X" with both hands outstretched as much as to say,
"Take _that_ for your quietus!" and shouldering his stick, which had an
ivory head and a sword within, strode off after his jaunty fashion as if
there were no more to be said. It was now Alexander Anxley's turn to sustain the questioning clamor. "I
will not deny"--"That is, I said"--"I meant to say,"--but these
qualifications were lost in the stress of Emsden's voice, once more
rising stridently. "Not a horn nor a hoof to be seen till after I had fired. I didn't know
there were any cow-pens about--didn't use to be till after you had
crossed the Keowee. But if there _had_ been, is a man to see a wolf pull
down a yearling, say, and not fire a rifle because Madam Cow will take
the high-strikes or Cap'n Bull will go on the rampage? Must I wait till
I can make a leg,"--he paused to execute an exaggerated obeisance,
graceful enough despite its mockery,--"'Under your favor, Cap'n Bull,'
and 'With your ladyship's permission,' before I kill the ravening brute,
big enough to pull down a yearling? Don't talk to me! Don't talk to me!" He held out the palms of his hands toward them in interdiction, and made
as if to go--yet went not! For a reactionary sentiment toward him had set in, and there were those
fair-minded enough, although with their little all at stake, to admit
that he had acted with reasonable prudence, and that it was only an
unlucky chance which had sent the panic through the herds with such
disastrous effect. "The herders should not stop the pack-train, if I had my will," declared
one of the settlers with a belligerent note. "No, no," proclaimed another; "not if it takes all the men at Blue Lick
Station to escort it!" "Those blistered redcoats at Fort Prince George are a deal too handy to
be called on by such make-bates as the herders on the Keowee River." "Fudge! The commandant would never let a bayonet stir." "Gad! I'd send an ambassador for an ambassador. Tit for tat," declared
Emsden. "I'd ask 'em what's gone with all our horses,--last seen in
those desolated cow-pens,--that the voice of mourning is now lifted
about!" There was a chuckle of sheer joy, so abrupt and unexpected that it rose
with a clatter and a cackle of delight, and culminated in a yell of
pleasurable derision. Now everybody knew that the horses bought in that wild country would,
unless restrained, return every spring to "their old grass," as it was
called,--to the places where they had formerly lived. When this annual
hegira took place in large numbers, some permanent losses were sure to
ensue. The settlers at Blue Lick had experienced this disaster, and had
accepted it as partly the result of their own lack of precaution during
the homing fancy of the horses. But since the herders manifested so
little of the suavity that graces commercial intercourse, and as some of
the horses had been seen in their cow-pens, it was a happy thought to
feather the arrow with this taunt. "And who do you suppose will promise to carry such a message to those
desperate, misguided men, riding hither an' thither, searching this wild
and woeful wilderness for hundreds o' head o' cattle lost like needles
in a hayrick, and eat by wolves an' painters by this time?" demanded "X"
derisively. "I promise, I promise!--and with hearty good will, too!" declared
Emsden. "And I'll tell 'em that we are coming down soon armed to the
teeth to guard our pack-train, and fight our way through any resistance
to its passage through the country on the open trading-path. And I'll
acquaint the commandant of Fort Prince George of the threats of the
herders against the Blue Lick Stationers, and warn him how he attempts
to interfere with the liberties of the king's loyal subjects in their
peaceful vocations." Thus Emsden gayly volunteered for the mission. The next morning old Richard Mivane, thinking of it, shook his head over
the fire,--and not only once, but shook it again, which was a great deal
of trouble for him to take. Having thus exerted his altruistic interest
to the utmost, Richard Mivane relapsed into his normal placidity. He
leaned back in his arm-chair, the only one at the station, fingering his
gold-lined silver snuffbox, with its chain and ladle, his eyes dwelling
calmly on the fire, and his thoughts busy with far away and long ago. He was old enough now to enter into the past as a sort of heritage, a
promised land which memory had glozed with a glamour that can never
shine upon the uncertain aspects of the future. The burning sense of
regret, the anguish of nostalgia, the relinquishment of an accustomed
sphere, its prospects and ideals, the revolt against the uncouth and
rude conditions of the new status, the gradual reluctant naturalization
to a new world,--these were forgotten save as the picturesque elements
of sorrow and despair that balanced the joys, the interest, the
devil-may-care joviality, the adventure, the strange wild
companionship,--all that made the tale worth rehearsing in the flare and
the flicker of the fireside glow. The rains had come. The dark slate-tinted clouds hung low over the
station, but every log house, freshly dight with whitewash of the marly
clay, after the Indian method, still shone in the shadow as if the sun
were upon it. The turf was green, despite the passing of many feet, and
where a slight depression held water, a few ducks, Carolina bred, were
quacking and paddling about; now and then these were counted with great
interest, for they had a trick of taking to the woods with others of
their kind, and relapsing to savagery,--truly distressing to the
domestic poultry prospects of the station. The doors of the Mivane cabin
were all ajar,--the one at the rear opening into a shed-room, unfloored,
which gave a vista into more sheds, merely roofed spaces, inclosed at
either end. A loom was in the shed-room, and at it was seated on the
bench in front, as a lady sits at an organ, the mistress of the house,
fair but faded, in a cap and a short gown and red quilted petticoat,
giving some instruction, touching an intricate weave, to a negro woman,
neatly arrayed in homespun, with a gayly turbaned head, evidently an
expert herself, from the bland and smiling manner and many
self-sufficient and capable nods with which she perceived and
appropriated the knotty points of the discourse. In the outer shed, Caesar, clad like the Indians and the pioneers in
buckskin, was mending the plough-gear, and talking with great loquacity
to another negro, of the type known then and later as "the new nigger,"
the target of the plantation jokes, because of his "greenness," being of
a fresh importation. He possibly remembered much of Africa, but he
accepted without demur and with admiring and submissive meekness stories
of the great sights that Caesar protested he had seen there,--Vauxhall
Gardens and Temple Bar (which last Caesar thought in his simplicity was
a bar for the refreshment of the inner man) and a certain resort
indisputably for that purpose called White's Chocolate House,--all
represented as pleasantly and salubriously situated in the interior of
Guinea. But after all, if a story is well told, why carp at slight
anachorisms? Richard Mivane's attention had been diverted from the thread of his own
reminiscences by the fact that the little flax-wheel of Peninnah
Penelope Anne had ceased to whirl, and the low musical monody of its
whir that was wont to bear a pleasant accompaniment to the burden of his
thoughts was suddenly silent. He lifted his eyes and saw that she was
gazing dreamily into the flare of the great fire, the spinning-wheel
still, the end of the thread motionless in her hand. The burnished waves
of her golden brown hair were pushed a bit awry, and her face was so wan
and thoughtful that even her dress of crimson wool did not lessen its
pallor. The voices of the three children on the floor grated on the old
man's mood as they were busied in defending a settler's fort, insecurely
constructed of stones and sticks, and altogether roofless, garrisoned by
a number of pebbles, while a poke full of wily Indian kernels of corn
swarmed to the attack. "Why is my pretty pet so idle?" he asked, for while the wheel should
whirl he could dream. She made no answer, only turned her troubled, soft hazel eyes upon him. "And have you seen a wolf, too, that you have lost your tongue?" At the word "wolf" she burst into tears. And then, discarding all
caution in the breaking down of her reserve, she sprang up, overturning
the wheel and rushing to his chair. Now Richard Mivane had never encouraged his grandchildren to clamber
over his chair. He protested great fear of the sticky fingers of the
more youthful in contact with his preternaturally fine clothes; he
declared they reminded him of squirrels, which he detested; he was not
sure they did not look like rats. All this was of great effect; for his
many contemptuous whimsical prejudices were earnestly respected. For instance, whenever 'possum was served at the pioneer board they who
partook carried their plates for the purpose to a side table. "The look
of the animal's tail is enough for me--it curls," he would say. "So does a pig's tail curl," his son used to remonstrate sensibly. "Not having kept a straight course so long,--then twirling up
deceitfully like a second thought. This fellow is a monstrosity,--and
his wife has a pocket for a cradle,--and I don't know who they are nor
where they came from,--they were left over from before the Flood,
perhaps,--they look somehow prehistoric to me. I am not acquainted with
the family." And turning his head aside he would wave away the dainty, the delight of
the pioneer epicure time out of mind. The diplomatic reason, however, that Richard Mivane was wont to shove
off his grandchildren from the arm of that stately chair was that here
they got on his blind side,--his simple, grandfatherly, affectionate
predilection. The touch of them, their scrambling, floundering, little
bodies, their soft pink cheeks laid against his, their golden hair in
his clever eyes, their bright glances at close range,--he was then like
other men and could deny them nothing! His selfishness, his vanity, his
idleness, his frippery were annulled in the instant. He was resolved
into the simple constituent elements of a grandfather, one part doting
folly, one part loving pride, and the rest leniency, and he was as wax
in their hands. None of them had so definitely realized this, accurately discriminating
cause and effect, as Peninnah Penelope Anne. She felt safe the moment
that she was perched on the arm of her grandfather's chair, her soft
clasp about his stiff old neck, her tears flowing over her cheeks, all
pink anew, escaping upon his wrinkled, bloodless, pale visage and taking
all the starch out of his old-fashioned steinkirk. He struggled futilely
once or twice, but she only hugged him the closer. "Oh, don't let him go! Oh, don't let him go!" she cried. "The wolf that we were talking about? By no means! Lovely creature that
he is! We'll preserve, if you like, wolves instead of pheasants! I
remember a gentleman's estate in Northumberland--a little beyond the
river"--

"Oh, grandfather, don't let him go!" she sobbingly interrupted. "It was
he who shot the wolf and stampeded the herds, and the cow-drivers will
quarrel with him when they would not have angry words with another
ambassador. They will kill him! They will kill him!" "What for? Poaching?--shooting their wolf?" "Any one else would be safe, grandfather--except poor Ralph!" "Go yourself then. May-day!" "I would, grandfather! I would not be afraid!" She put her soft little
hand on his cheek to turn his head to look into her confident eyes. "An able and worshipful ambassador!" he said banteringly. "Oh, grandfather, this is no time to risk quarrels among the settlers,
and bloodshed. Oh, the herders would kill him! And the Injuns all so
unfriendly--they might take the chance to get on the war-path again when
the settlers are busy killing each other--and oh, the cow-drivers will
kill Ralph Emsden!" All this persuasion was of necessity in a distinct loud voice;
unnoticed, however, for a crisis had supervened in the play of the
children by the chimney-place settle, and the sanguinary struggles and
scalping in the storming of the fort were blood-curdling to behold to
any one with enough imagination to discern a full-armed and fierce
savage in a kernel of corn, and a stanch and patriotic Carolinian in a
pebble. But when Peninnah Penelope Anne, all attuned to this high key,
burst out weeping with commensurate resonance, all the vocations of the
household came to a standstill, and her mother appeared, surprised and
reproving, in the doorway. "Peninnah Penelope Anne," she said with her peculiar exact deliberation
and gift of circumlocution, "it is better to go and sew your sampler
than to tease your grandfather." "She does not tease me--I have not shed a tear! That was not the sound
of my weeping!" he declared facetiously, one arm protectingly about the
little sobbing figure. "He does not like his grandchildren to climb about him like squirrels
and wild cattle," the lady continued. Then irrelevantly, "Long stitches
were always avoided in our family. The work you last did in your sampler
has been taken out, child, and you can sew it again and to better
advantage." "And earn your name of Penelope," said Richard Mivane. But he was putting on his hat and evidently had some effort in prospect,
for how could he resist,--she looked so childish and appealing as she
sat before the fire, weeping those large tears, and absently preparing
to sew her sampler anew. While Richard Mivane, by virtue of his early culture, the scanty remains
of his property, his fine-gentleman habits and traditions, and the
anomaly of his situation, was the figure of most mark at the station,
its ruling spirit was of far alien character. This was John Ronackstone,
a stanch Indian fighter; a far-seeing frontier politician; a man of
excellent native faculties, all sharpened by active use and frequent
emergencies; skilled and experienced in devious pioneer craft; and
withal infinitely stubborn, glorying in the fact of the unchangeableness
of his opinions and his immutable abiding by his first statements. After
one glance at his square countenance, his steady noncommittal black
eyes, the upward bulldog cant of a somewhat massive nose, the firm
compression of his long thin lips, one would no more expect him to
depart from the conditions of a conclusion than that a signpost would
enter into argument and in view of the fatigue of a traveler mitigate
and recant its announcement. Nevertheless Richard Mivane expected "some sense," as he phrased it,
from this adamantine pioneer. Such a man naturally arrogated and
obtained great weight among his fellows, and perhaps his lack of
vacillation furthered this preeminence. He was a good man in the main as
well as forceful, but an early and a very apt expression of the
demagogue. And as he tolerated amongst his mental furniture no illusions
and fostered no follies, his home life harbored no fripperies. His
domicile was a contrast to the better ordered homes of the station, but
here one might have meat and shelter, and what more should mortal ask of
a house! He often boasted that not an atom of iron entered into its
structure more than into an Indian's wigwam. Even the clapboards were
fastened on to the rafters with wooden pegs in lieu of nails, although
nails were not difficult to procure. He had that antagonism to the mere
conventions of civilization often manifested by those who have been
irked by such fetters before finally casting them off. It was a
wholesome life and a free, and if the inmates of the house did not mind
the scent of the drying deerskins hanging from the beams, which made the
nose of Richard Mivane very coy, the visitor saw no reason why they
should not please themselves. The stone-flagged hearth extended half
across the room, and sprawling upon it in frowsy disorder was a bevy of
children of all ages, as fat as pigs and as happy-go-lucky. He had
hardly seated himself, having stepped about carefully among their chubby
fingers and toes lest a crushing disaster supervene, than he regretted
his choice of a confidant. He had his own, unsuspected sensitiveness,
which was suddenly jarred when the wife in the corner, rocking the
cradle with one foot while she turned a hoe-cake baking on the hearth
with a dextrous flip of a knife, and feeling secure in his deafness,
cast a witty fling at his fastidious apparel. With that frequent yet
unexplained phenomenon of acoustics, her voice was so strung that its
vibrations reached his numb perceptions as duly as if intended for his
ears. He made no sign, in his pride and politeness, both indigenous. But
he said to himself, "I don't laugh at her gown,--it is what she likes
and what she is accustomed to wear. And why can't she let me dress in
peace as I was early trained to do? God knows I feel myself better than
nobody." And he was sensible of his age, his infirmity, his isolation, and his
jauntiness was eclipsed. Thus he entered the race with a handicap, and John Ronackstone would
hear none of his reasons with grace. He could not and he would not
consent to the nomination of an ambassador in the stead of Emsden, who
had volunteered for the service, which was the more appropriate since it
was he who had shot the wolf and brought the stampede and its attendant
difficulties upon the herders of the Keowee River, and this threat of
retaliation upon the Blue Lick Stationers. If there were danger at hand,
let a volunteer encounter it! In vain Mivane argued that there was
danger to no one else. John Ronackstone, who found an added liberty of
disputation in the emphasis imposed by the necessity of roaring out his
immutable opinions in an exceeding loud voice, retorted that so far as
he was informed the "cow-drivers" on the Keowee were not certain who it
was that had committed this atrocity, unless perhaps their messenger
during his sojourn at Blue Lick Station had learned the name from "X." But this uncertainty, Mivane argued, was the very point of difficulty. It was the maddest folly to dispatch to angry men, smarting under a
grievous injury, messages of taunt and defiance by the one person who in
their opinion, perhaps, had carelessly or willfully wrought this wrong. His life would pay the forfeit of the folly of his fellow-stationers. Mivane noted suddenly that the woman rocking the cradle was laughing
with an ostentatious affectation of covert slyness, and a responsive
twinkle gleamed in the eyes of John Ronackstone. As he caught the grave
and surprised glance of his visitor he made a point of dropping the air
of a comment aside, which he, as well as she, had insistently brought to
notice, and Mivane was aware that here was something which sought an
opportunity of being revealed as if by necessity. "Well, sir," Ronackstone began in a tone of a quasi-apology, "we were
just saying--that is, I sez to X, who was in here a while ago,--I sez,
'I'll tell you what is goin' to happen,'--I sez, 'old Gentleman
Rick,'--excuse the freedom, sir,--'he'll be wantin' to send somebody
else in Ralph Emsden's place.' X, he see the p'int, just as you see it. He sez, 'Somebody that won't be missed--somebody not genteel enough to
play loo with him after supper,' sez X. 'Or too religious,' sez I. 'Or
can't sing a good song or tell a rousing tale,' sez X. 'Or listen an'
laugh in the right places at the gentleman's old cracks about the great
world,' sez I. 'He'll never let Ralph Emsden go,' sez X. 'Jus' some poor
body will do,' sez I. 'Jus' man enough to be scalped by the Injuns if
the red sticks take after him,' sez X. 'Or have his throat cut if the
cow-drivers feel rough yet,' sez I. 'Jus' such a one ez me,' sez X. 'Or
me,' sez I." "Sir," said old Mivane, rising, and the impressive dignity of his port
was such that the cradle stopped rocking as if a spell were upon it, and
every child paused in its play, sprawling where it lay, "I am obliged to
you for your polite expression of opinion of me, which I have never done
aught to justify. I have nothing more to urge upon the question of the
details which brought me hither, but of one thing be certain,--if Emsden
does not go upon this mission _I_ shall be the ambassador. I apprehend
no danger whatever to myself, and I wish you a very good day." And he stepped forth with his wonted jaunty alacrity, leaving the man
and his wife staring at each other with as much surprise as if the roof
had fallen in. A greater surprise awaited Mivane without. The rain was falling anew. In
vast transparent tissues it swept with the gusty wind over the nearest
mountains of the Great Smoky Range, whose farther reaches were lost in
fog. The slanting lines, vaguely discerned in the downpour, almost
obliterated the presence of the encompassing forests about the stockade. He noted how wildly the great trees were yet swaying, and he realized,
for he could not have heard the blast, that a sudden severe wind-storm
had passed over the settlement while he was within doors. The
blockhouse, the tallest of the buildings, loomed up darkly amidst the
gathering gray vapor, and through the great gates of the stockade, which
opened on the blank cloud, were coming at the moment several men bearing
a rude litter, evidently hastily constructed. On this was stretched the
insensible form of Ralph Emsden, who had been stricken down in the woods
with a dislocated shoulder and a broken arm by the falling of a branch
of a great tree uprooted by the violence of the gusts. He had almost
miraculously escaped being crushed, and was not fatally hurt, but
examination disclosed that he was absolutely and hopelessly disabled for
the time being, and Richard Mivane realized that he himself was the duly
accredited ambassador to the herders on the Keowee River. He went home in a pettish fume. No sooner was he within and the door
fast shut, that none might behold save only those of his own household,
who were accustomed to the aberrations of his temper and who regarded
them with blended awe and respect, than he reft his cocked hat from his
head and flung it upon the floor. Peninnah Penelope Anne sprang up so
precipitately at the dread sight that she overturned her stool and drew
a stitch awry in her sampler, longer than the women of her family were
accustomed to take. The children gazed spellbound. The weavers at the
loom were petrified; even the creak of the treadle and the noisy
thumping of the batten--those perennial sounds of a pioneer home--sunk
into silence. The two negroes at the end of the vista beyond the
shed-room, with the ox-yoke and plough-gear which they were mending
between them, opened wide mouths and became immovable save for the
whites of astonished rolling eyes. Then, and this exceeded all
precedent, Richard Mivane clutched his valued peruke and, with an inward
plaintive deprecation of the extremity of this act of desperation, he
cast it upon the hat, and looked around, bald, despairing, furious, and
piteous. It was, however, past the fortitude of woman to behold without protest
this desecration of decoration. Peninnah Penelope Anne sprang forward,
snatched the glossy locks from the puncheons, and with a tender hand
righted the structure, while the powder flew about in light puffs at her
touch, readjusting a curl here and a cleverly wrought wave there. The
valet's pious aspiration from the doorway, "Bress de Lord!" betokened
the acuteness of the danger over-past. "Why, grandfather!" the girl admonished Mivane; "your beautiful
peruke!--sure, sir, the loveliest curls in the world! And sets you like
your own hair,--only that nobody _could really_ have such very genteel
curls to grow--Oh--oh--grandfather!" She did not offer to return it, but stood with it poised on one hand,
well out of harm's way, while she surveyed Mivane reproachfully yet with
expectant sympathy. Perhaps he himself was glad that he could wreak no further damage which
he would later regret, and contented himself with furiously pounding his
cane upon the puncheon floor, a sturdy structure and well calculated to
bear the brunt of such expressions of pettish rage. "Dolt, ass, fool, that I am!" he cried. "That I should so far forget
myself as to offer to go as an ambassador to the herders on the Keowee!" And once more he banged the floor after a fashion that discounted the
thumping of the batten, and the room resounded with the thwacks. An old dog, a favorite of yore, lying asleep on the hearth, only opened
his eyes and wrinkled his brows to make sure, it would seem, who had the
stick; then closing his lids peacefully snoozed away again, presently
snoring in the fullness of his sense of security. But a late
acquisition, a gaunt deerhound, after an earnest observation of his
comrade's attitude, as if referring the crisis to his longer experience,
scrutinized severally the faces of the members of the family, and,
wincing at each resounding whack, finally gathered himself together
apprehensively, as doubtful whose turn might come next, and discreetly
slunk out unobserved by the back door. Peninnah Penelope Anne rushed to the rescue. "And why should you not be an ambassador, sir?" she demanded. "Why--why--because, girl, I am deafer than the devil's dam! I cannot
fetch and carry messages of import. I could only give occasion for
ridicule and scorn in even offering to assume such an office." Peninnah Penelope Anne had flushed with the keen sensitiveness of her
pride. She instantly appreciated the irking of the dilemma into which he
had thrust himself forgetting his infirmity, and she could have smitten
with hearty enmity and a heavy stick any lips which had dared to smile. She responded, however, with something of her mother's indirection. "Under your favor, sir, you don't know how deaf the devil's dam may
be--and it is not your wont to speak in that strain. I'm sure it reminds
me of that man they call 'X,'--a sort of churl person,--who talks of the
devil and blue blazes and brimstone and hell as if--as if he were a
native." This was a turning of the sword of the pious "X" upon himself with a
vengeance, for he was prone in his spiritual disquisitions to detail
much of the discomfort of the future state that awaited his careless
friends. The allusion so far pleased old Mivane, who resented a suspected
relegation of himself to a warm station in the schemes of "X," that,
although his head was still bald and shining like a billiard ball, he
suffered himself to drop into his chair, his stick resting motionless on
the long-suffering puncheon floor. "If I could only hear for a day I'd forgive twenty soundless years!" he
declared piteously, for he so deprecated the enforced withdrawal from
the enterprise that he had heedlessly undertaken, and felt so keenly the
reflections upon his sentiments and sincerity surreptitiously canvassed
between Ronackstone and "X," and then cavalierly rehearsed in his
presence. "You are only deaf to certain whanging voices in queer keys," his
granddaughter declared. "And how do I know in what sort of key the herders on the Keowee talk? They may 'moo' like the cow, or 'mew' like the cat! I should be in
danger of losing half that was said. And that is what these varlets here
in the station know right well. It must seem but a mere bit of bombast
on my part. It could never be seriously countenanced--unless I had an
interpreter. Stop me! but if you were a grandson instead of a
granddaughter, I would not mind taking you with me to interpret for me,
though, Gadzooks, I'd be like a heathen red Injun with a linguister!" "And why am I not as good as any grandson?" demanded Peninnah Penelope
Anne, with a spirited flash of her bright hazel eyes and great temerity
of speculation; for be it remembered the days of the theories of woman's
equality with man had not yet dawned. "Sure, sir, I can speak when I am
spoken to. I understand the English language; and"--her voice rising
into a liquid crescendo of delight--"I can wear my gray sergedusoy sack
made over my carnation taffeta bodice and cashmere petticoat, all
pranked out with bows of black velvet, most genteel, and my hat of
quilled primrose sarcenet, grandfather. I'd take them in a bundle, for
if we should have rain I would rather be in my old red hood and blue
serge riding-coat on the way, grandfather." And thus it was settled before she had fairly readjusted the peruke on
his head as he sat in his great chair and she clambered on its arm. She had not heard of the disaster that had befallen Ralph Emsden, and
she turned rather pale and wistful when the news was communicated to
her. Then realizing how opportune was the accident, how slight was its
ultimate danger in comparison with the jeopardy of the mission from
which he was rescued, she fairly gloated upon the chance which had
conferred it upon her grandfather, and made her an instrument in its
execution. It was a queerly assorted embassy that rode out of the gates of the
stockade, the ambassador and his linguister. Richard Mivane was mounted
upon a strong, sprightly horse, with Peninnah Penelope Anne behind him
upon a pillion. Following them at a little distance came his
body-servant, Caesar, more fitted by temperament than either to enjoy
the change, the spirit of adventure, and reveling in a sense of
importance which was scarcely diminished by the fact that it was
vicarious. He rode a sturdy nag and had charge of a led horse, that bore
a pack-saddle with a store of changes of raiment, of edible provisions,
and tents to fend off the chances of inclement weather. They were to
travel under the protection of a trader's pack-train, from a
reestablished trading-house in the Overhill Towns of the Cherokees on
the Tennessee River; and so accurately did they time their departure and
the stages of their journey that they met this caravan just at the hour
and place designated, and risked naught from the unsettled state of the
country or an encounter with some ignorant or inimical savage, prone to
wreak upon inoffensive units vengeance for wrongs, real or fancied,
wrought by a nation. The trader, being a man habituated by frequent sojourns in Charlestown
to metropolitan customs and a worldly trend of thought, instantly
recognized the quality of Mivane and his granddaughter, despite the old
red hood and blue serge riding-coat and their residence here so far from
all the graces that appertain to civilization; though, to be sure,
Richard Mivane, in his trim "Joseph," his head cowled in an appropriate
"trotcozy," and his jaunty self-possession quite restored by the cutting
of the Gordian knot of his dilemma, demonstrating his capacity to duly
perform all his undertakings, bore himself in a manner calculated to
enhance even the high estimation of his fellow-traveler. After the
custom of a gentleman, however, he was most augustly free from
unwarrantable self-assertion, but he could not have failed to be
flattered by the phrase of the trader, could he have heard it, in
delivering over his charge to the herders on the Keowee River. "Gadzooks, neighbors, but I shouldn't be a whit surprised if that old
party is a duke in disguise!" But the cow-drivers heard him not! They hardly heeded the coming and the
going of the pack-train and their gossips the packmen! They cared naught
for the news the caravan brought of the country-side far above, nor the
commissions they were wont to give for the various settlements and the
metropolis far below! For so featly came riding in to the humble prosaic
precincts of the cow-pens and into their hearts the vernal beauty of
Spring herself, the living Bloom of charm and love, all arrayed in
delicate gray sergedusoy opening upon carnation taffeta, and crowned
with sheer quillings of primrose sarcenet, with a cheek that repeated
these roseate tints and a glint of golden brown tresses curling softly
against a nape of pearl, that the ranchmen were bewitched and dazed, and
knew no more of good common-sense. Their equilibrium thus shaken, some
busied themselves in what might be called "housewifely cares," that the
dainty visitant might be acceptably lodged and fed, and afterward they
cursed their industry and hospitality that thus left her conversation
and charming aspect to the shirks and drones, who languished about her,
and affected to seek her comfort and minister to her entertainment. For
the cow-drivers, like the other pioneer settlers of that region and day,
represented various states of society and degrees of refinement, and to
those to whom she was not as a blissful reminiscence of long ago, she
appeared as a revelation, new and straight from heaven, a fancy, a
dream! It seemed meet to them that she arrived in the illusory sunset of
a sweet spring day, like some lovely forecast of the visions of the
night. With their artless bucolic ideals of entertainment they invited her out
to show her the new calves. One of these little creatures, being
exquisitely white and eminently pleasing to look upon, was straightway
named, with her gracious permission, "Peninnah Penelope Anne," and she
was assured that because of this name its owner, a slim, sentimental,
red-haired youth, would never part from it. And it may be presumed that
he was sincere, and that at the time of this fervent asseveration he had
not realized the incongruity of living his life out in the constant heed
of the well-being and companionship of a large white cow of the name of
"Peninnah Penelope Anne." A more interesting denizen of the pen was a
fawn, a waif found there one morning, having prudently adopted as a
mother a large red cow, and a heavy brindled calf as a foster-brother. The instant Peninnah admired this incongruous estray, bleating its queer
alien note in resonant duet with the calf in the plea for supper, a cord
was slipped about its neck and it was presented in due form. In order
that she might not be harassed by its tendance, a gigantic Scotch
herder, six feet six inches high and twenty-five years of age, showed
how far involuntary inanity can coexist with presumptive sanity as he
led it about, the creature holding back heavily at every step and now
and again tangling itself, its cord, and its disconcerted bleats about
its conductor's long and stalwart legs. Another of the herders,--all of
whom were hunters and explorers as well,--whose mind was of a
topographical cast, introduced her to much fine and high company in the
various mountain peaks, gathered in solemn symposium dark and purple in
the faintly tinted and opaline twilight. He repeated their Cherokee
names and gave an English translation, and called her attention to marks
of difference in their configuration which rendered them distinguishable
at a distance; and when she lent some heed to this and noted on the
horizon contours of the mountains about her home, faint and far in an
elusive amethystine apotheosis against the red and flaming west, and
called out her glad recognition in a voice as sweet as a thrush, his
comrades waxed jealous, and contravened his statements and argued and
wrangled upon landmarks to which they had never before given a second
thought in all their mountaineering experience, so keenly they competed
for her favor. It was her little day of triumph, and right royally she
reigned in it and was wont to tell of it for forty years thereafter! At last the dusk was slipping down; the mountains grew a shadowy gray
far away and a looming black close at hand; a star palpitated in the
colorless crystal-clear concave of the fading skies; the vernal stretch
of the savannas, whose intense green was somehow asserted till the
latest glimmer of light, ceased to resound with the voices of the herds;
only here and there a keen metallic note of a bell clanked forth and was
silent, and again the sound came from a farther pen like a belated echo;
the fire flaring out from the open door of the nearest hut of the
ranchmen's little hamlet gave a pleasant sense of hospitality and homely
hearth-side cheer, for it requires only a few nights under a tent or the
open canopy of heaven to make a woman, always the most artificially
disposed of all creatures, exceedingly respectful to a roof. To be sure the interior of this roof was well garnished with cobwebs,
and Peninnah Penelope Anne's mother was so notable a housekeeper and had
inculcated such horror of these untoward drapings and festoons that the
girl was compelled to look sedulously away from them to avoid staring in
amazement at their morbid development and proportions. The
superintendent of the ranch--being an establishment of magnitude it had
several sub-agents also--was so occupied in putting the best foot of his
menage foremost, not being prepared for such company that, like many a
modern housekeeper, he let the opportunity for pleasure slip. When he
proffered tea--he had sent a negro servant all the way to Fort Prince
George for the luxury, where it could be found among the hospital
stores, for tea was too mild a tipple for the pioneer cow-drivers--he
suffered the egregious mortification of pouring out plain hot water,
having forgotten to put in the tea leaves to steep. He looked very hot
and ruefully distressed as he repaired his error, and would not, could
not meet the laughing eyes of his comrades, nor yet the polite glances
of his guests resolutely seeing naught amiss. He was oppressed with a
sense of the number and prominence of his dogs about the wide hearth of
his cabin; when the animals were therefore vigorously kicked out to make
more space, instead of retiring with the usual plaintive yelp of protest
appropriate to such occasions they took advantage of the presence of
guests of distinction and made the rafters ring and resound with their
ear-splitting shrieks, and it was even necessary to chase them about the
room before they could be ejected. Indeed, several with super-canine
strategy succeeded in countermarching their tormentors and remained in
the group about the fire, wearing that curiously attentive look peculiar
to an intelligent animal when animated conversation is in progress. The blazing fire in the great chimney-place, that stretched almost half
across one end of the herder's cabin, illumined the walls and showed the
medley of articles suspended upon them,--horns, whips, branding-irons,
skins, cattle-bells, lariats, and such-like appurtenances of the ranch. The little lady was seated in the centre of the group of ranchmen ranged
in a wide semicircle about the hearth of flagstones; the ethereal tints
of her shimmering attire showed all their highlights; her face and
golden brown hair seemed particularly soft and delicate in contrast with
the rough tousled heads and bearded countenances about her; here and
there the muzzle of a great animal, the flash of fangs and red glow of
formidable jaws, were half discriminated amidst the alternate flare of
the flames and flicker of the shadows,--all might have suggested the
"mystick Crew of Comus" to Richard Mivane, being the only person present
who had ever heard of that motley company, had not his thoughts been
otherwise engrossed. He meditatively cleared his throat, took a sip of
brandy and water, for he had long ago lost his genteel affiliations with
tea, and hopefully opened the subject of his mission. A change fell upon the scene, instant, definite, complete. In the mere
broaching of business it might seem that beauty and charm are but
tenuous at best, and powerless to subdue the fiercer nature of man when
his acquisitive and aggressive commercial instincts are aroused. One of
the most devout admirers of Peninnah Penelope Anne tossed his head with
a very bellicose and bovine obduracy when he intimated an incredulity of
the statement that the herd had been stampeded without an ulterior
motive of malice or nefarious profit. The gentle soul who had assumed
the tendance and protection of the fawn held down as he listened a
shaggy intent head, like that of a bull about to charge, at the mere
mention of the shooting of the wolf. In fact, the suggestion of shadowy
monsters which the dusky flicker and evanescent flare of the fire
fostered and which was intensified by the proximity of open jaws, sharp
fangs, heavy muzzles, and standing bristles amongst them, owed much of
its effect to the unanimous expression of truculent challenge and averse
disfavor. There were frequent confirmatory emphatic nods of great
disheveled heads, the scarlet flushing of angry faces, already florid,
and now and again a violent descriptive gesture of a long brawny arm
with a clenched fist at its extremity. Richard Mivane's well-rounded
periods and gentlemanly phrasings were like the educated thrusts and
feints of an expert fencer who opposes his single rapier to the
bludgeons and missiles of a furious mob. He saw in less than five
minutes that the scheme of extenuation and conciliation was futile, that
retort and retaliation would be returned in kind, that the stoppage of
the pack-train from Blue Lick on the way to Charlestown was inevitable,
and that the redcoats, invoked by both parties, would doubtless become
embroiled with one or the other,--in short, bloodshed was a foregone
conclusion. Much as this was to be deprecated in any event, it was suicidal amongst
these infant settlements by reason of the vicinage and antagonism of the
fierce and only half-subdued Cherokees, sullenly nourishing schemes of
revenge for their recent defeat and many woes. But when he urged this
upon the attention of the herders, the retort came quick and pointed:
"We ain't talkin' 'bout no Injuns!--the Cherokees never meddled with our
cattle! We'll settle about the stampede first, an' 'tend to the
Cherokees in good time--all in good time!" Richard Mivane was not possessed of much affinity with the ruder
primitive qualities, the stalwart candor and uncultured forces of the
natural man; and never had these inherent elements appeared to less
advantage in his mind than when he was brought into disastrous conflict
with them. He only held his ground for form's sake, and often his voice
was overborne by the clamors of many responsive tones, all blaring and
arguing together. Much that was said he could not hear, and refrained
from speaking when he perceived from the loud contending faces that he
was denied for the nonce a rejoinder. But ever and anon the silver
vibrations of the little linguister's voice rose into the big bass
tumult as she rehearsed what had been said for her grandfather's
benefit, and the angry rush of sound stopped with an abrupt recoil for a
moment, then surged on as before. She looked very mild and petite among them, quite like a sedate child,
her cheeks pinker than any of the rose tints of her apparel that were
her pride, her lips red and breathlessly parted, her eyes bright and
very watchful, her golden brown hair all red gold in the flicker of the
fire. There was one wild taunting threat that she did not repeat, as if
she thought it of no consequence,--the threat of personal violence
against Ralph Emsden. They had found out his name patly enough from
their own messenger to Blue Lick Station. They would take out their
grudge against him on his hide, they averred,--if they had to go all the
way to Blue Lick to get it! Now and again they sufficiently remembered that indeterminate quantum of
courtesy which they called their "manners" to interpolate "No offense to
_you_, sir," or "Begging the lady's pardon." Throughout she preserved a
cool, almost uncomprehending, passive manner; and it was in one of the
moments of a heady tumult of words, in which they sometimes involved
themselves beyond all interpretation or distinguishment, that she
observed with a sort of childish inconsequence that they could get Ralph
Emsden easily enough if they would go to Blue Lick Station,--he was
there now, and his arm and shoulder were so hurt that he would not be
able to make off,--they could get him easily enough, that is, if the
French did not raze Blue Lick Station before the herders could reach
there. If a bomb had exploded in the midst of the hearthstone, the astonishment
that ensued upon this simple statement could not have been greater. A
sudden blank silence supervened. A dozen excited infuriated faces, the
angry contortions of the previous moment still stark upon their
features, were bent upon her while their eyes stared only limitless
amazement. "The French!" the herders cried at last in chorus. "Blue Lick Station!" "It was razed once," she said statistically, "to the ground. The
Cherokees did it that time!" Her grandfather, always averse to admit that he did not hear, noted the
influx of excitement, and was fain to lean forward. He even placed his
hand behind his ear. "The French!" bellowed out one of the cow-drivers in a voice that might
have graced the king of the herds. "The French! Threatening Blue Lick
Station!" The elderly gentleman drew back from, the painful surcharged vibrations
of sound and the unseemly aspect of this interpreter, who was in good
sooth like a bull in disguise. "To be sure--the French," Richard Mivane
said in response, repeating the only words which he had heard. "Our
nearest white neighbors--the dangerous Alabama garrison!" A tumult of questions assailed the little linguister. "Be they mightily troubled at Blue Lick Station?" asked one
sympathetically. The little flower-like head was nodded with meaning, deep and serious. "Oh, sure!" she cried. "And having the Cow-pens against them too--'tis
sad!" "Zooks!" cried the bull in disguise, with a snort. "The Cow-pens ain't
against 'em--when the French are coming!" "Why haven't they sent word to the soldiers?" demanded another of the
cow-drivers suspiciously. "The soldiers?" she exclaimed incredulously. "Why--the Cow-pens sent
word that the soldiers were against Blue Lick too, and were going to
stop the station's pack-train. Maybe the stationers were afraid of the
soldiers." To a torrent of questions as to how the news had first come, how the
menace lowered, what disposition for defense the stationers could make,
the little girl seemed bewildered. She only answered definitely and very
indifferently that they could easily get Ralph Emsden if they would go
now to Blue Lick, and take his hide,--that is, if the French and their
Choctaw Indians had not already possessed themselves of that valuable
integument,--as if this were their primal object. "Why, God-a-mercy, child," cried the superintendent of the ranch, "this
news settles all scores; when it comes to a foreign foe the colonists
are brothers." "And besides," admitted one of the most truculent of the cow-drivers,
"the cattle are all pretty well rounded in again; I doubt if more are
lost than the wolves would have pulled down anyhow." "And the Blue Lick Stationers' horses can be herded easy enough,--they
are all on their old grass,--and be driven up to the settlement." A courier had been sent off full tilt to the commandant at Fort Prince
George, and night though it was, a detail of mounted soldiers appeared
presently with orders to escort the ambassador and his linguister into
the presence of that officer. For this intelligence was esteemed serious indeed. Although hostilities
had now practically ceased in America, the Seven Years' War being near
its end, and peace negotiations actually in progress, still the treaty
had not been concluded. So far on the frontier were such isolated
garrisons as this of Fort Prince George, so imperfect and infrequent
were their means of communicating with the outside world, that they were
necessarily in ignorance of much that took place elsewhere, and a
renewal of the conflict might have supervened long before their regular
advices from headquarters could reach them. Even a chance rumor might
bring them their first intimation of a matter of such great import to
them. Therefore the commandant attached much significance to this
account of an alarm at Blue Lick Station, because of a menace from the
nearest French at Fort Toulouse, often called in that day, by reason of
this propinquity, "the dangerous Alabama garrison." For this reason, also, the hospitable hosts made no protest against the
removal of the guests to Fort Prince George, although it might seem that
the age of the one and the tender youth of the other ill fitted them to
encounter this sudden transition from the cosy fireside to the raw
vernal air on a misty midnight jaunt of a dozen miles through a primeval
wilderness. And in truth the little lady seemed loath to leave the
hearth; she visibly hesitated as she stood beside her chair with her
hand on its back, and looked out at the black night, and the vague vista
which the ruddy flare, from the wide door, revealed amidst the dense
darkness; at the vanishing point of this perspective stood a group of
mounted soldiers, "in column of twos" with two led horses, the scarlet
uniforms and burnished accoutrements appearing and disappearing
elusively as the flames rose and fell. The sounds of the champing of
bits and the pawing of hoofs and the jingle of spurs were keenly clear
on the chill rare air and seemed somehow consonant with the frosty
glitter of the stars, very high in the black concave of the moonless
sky. The smell of the rich mould, permeated with its vernal growths; the
cool, distinct, rarefied perfume of some early flower already abloom;
the antiphonal chant of frogs roused in the marsh or stream hard by, so
imbued her senses with the realization of the hour and season that she
never afterward thought of the spring without a vivid renewal of these
impressions. Her grandfather also seemed vaguely to hold back, even while he slowly
mounted his horse; yet aware that naught is so imperative as military
authority, it was only his inner consciousness that protested. Outwardly
he professed alacrity, although in great surprise declaring that he
could not imagine what the commandant could want with him. The little
linguister, for her part, had no doubts. She was well aware indeed of
the cause of the summons, and so dismayed by the prospect was even her
doughty heart that the swift ride through the black forest was less
terrible to her than the thought of the ordeal of the arrival. But the
march was not without its peculiar trials. She shrank in instinctive
affright from the unaccustomed escort of a dragoon on either side of
her, looming up in the darkness like some phantom of the midnight. Even
her volition seemed wrested from her by reason of the military training
of the troop-horse which she rode;--he whirled about at the command
"right-wheel!" ringing out in the darkness in the crisp peremptory tones
of the non-commissioned officer, and plunged forward at the words "trot,
march!" and adjusted his muscles instantaneously to the acceleration
implied in "gallop!" and came to an abrupt and immovable pause at
"halt!" --all with no more regard to her grasp on the reins than if she
had been a fly on the saddle. As they went the wind beset her with cool,
damp buffets on chin and cheek; the overhanging budding boughs, all
unseen, drenched her with perfumed dew as she was whisked through their
midst; the pace was adopted rather with reference to military custom and
the expectation of the waiting commandant than her convenience; at every
sudden whirl responsive to the word of command she was in momentary fear
of being flung beneath the swiftly trampling hoofs of the horses on
either side of her, and despite her recoil from the bigness and
bluffness and presumable bloody-mindedness of the two troopers beside
her she was sensible of their sympathy as they took heed of the
instability with which she bounced about, perched up side-wise on a
military saddle. Indeed, one was moved to ask her if she would not
prefer to be strapped on with a girth, and to offer his belt for the
purpose; and the other took the opportunity to gird at the forgetfulness
of the cow-drivers to furnish her with her own pillion. Nevertheless she dreaded the journey's end; and as they came out of the
forests on the banks of the Keowee River, and beheld the vague glimmers
of the gray day slowly dawning, albeit night was yet in the woods, and
the outline of the military works of Fort Prince George taking symmetry
and wonted proportions against the dappled eastern sky, all of blended
roseate tints and thin nebulous grays, her heart so sank, she felt so
tremulously guilty that had all the sixteen guns from the four bastions
opened fire upon her at once she would not have been surprised. No such welcome, however, did the party encounter. The officer
commanding it stopped the ambassador and the linguister and let the
soldiers go on at a round trot toward the great gate, which stood open,
the bayonet on the musket of the sentry shining with an errant gleam of
light like the sword of fire at the entrance of Paradise. For now the
sun was up, the radiance suffusing the blue and misty mountains and the
seas of fog in the valleys. Albeit its dazzling focus was hardly visible
above the eastern heights, it sent a red glow all along the parapet of
the covered way and the slope beyond to the river bank, where only two
years before Captain Coytmore, then the commandant, had been murdered at
a conference by the treacherous Cherokees. The senior officer, Captain
Howard, being absent on leave, the present commandant, a jaunty
lieutenant, smart enough although in an undress uniform, was standing at
the sally-port now, all bland and smiling, to receive the ambassador and
his linguister. He perceived at once that the old gentleman was deaf
beyond any save adroit and accustomed communication. He looked puzzled
for a moment, then spoke to the sergeant. "And who is this pretty little girl?" he asked. The sergeant, who had heard of her prowess in the havoc of hearts among
the herders at the ranch, looked bewildered, then desperate, saluted
mechanically, and was circumspectly silent. "I am not a little girl," said Peninnah Penelope Anne Mivane with adult
dignity. "Ah, indeed," said the embarrassed and discomfited officer. Then,
turning to lead the way, he added civilly, "Beg pardon, I'm sure!" If the sight of the sixteen guns on the four bastions of Fort Prince
George had caused Peninnah Penelope Anne to shrink from her normal
proportions, not too expansive at best, she dwindled visibly and
continually when conducted within the palisaded parapets, across the
parade, past the barracks, built for a hundred men but now somewhat
lacking their complement, and into the officers' quarters, where in a
large mess-hall there sat all the commissioned officers at a table, near
the foot of which the two strangers were accommodated with chairs. It
had so much the air of a court-martial, despite their bland and
reassuring suavity, that Peninnah Penelope Anne, albeit a free lance and
serving under no banner but her own whim, had much ado to keep up her
courage to face them. Naturally she was disposed to lean upon her
grandfather, but he utterly failed her. She had never known him so deaf! He could neither hear the officers nor her familiar voice. He would not
even tell his name, although she had so often heard him voice it
sonorously and in great pride, "Richard Mivane Huntley Mivane, youngest
son of the late Sir Alexander Mivane Huntley Mivane, of Mivane Hall,
Fenshire, Northumberland." Now he merely waved his hand to deputize her. In truth he shrank from rehearsing to these young men the reason of his
flight from home, his duel and its fatal result, although his pride
forbade him to suppress it. He had come to think the cause of quarrel a
trifle, and the challenge a wicked folly. It was a bitter and remorseful
recollection as his age came on, and its details were edifying in no
sense. Hence, as Peninnah Penelope Anne knew naught of the story she
could not tell it, and he escaped the distasteful pose of a merciless
duelist. She gave his name with much pride, noting the respect with which the
officers heard it. She accounted for the incongruities of his presence
here as the result of a trip from England to the province, where, as she
said, "he was detained by the snare of matrimony." It was his own
phrase, for as a snare he regarded the holy estate; but the younger of
the officers were pleased to find it funny, and ventured to laugh;
whereat she grew red and silent, and they perforce became grave again
that they might hear of the French. Here she was vague and discursive,
and prone to detail at great length the feud between the Blue Lick
Stationers and the "cow-drivers" on the Keowee, evidently hoping that it
might lie within the latitude of the commandant's military authority to
take some order with the herder gentry,--for which they would not have
thanked her in the least! But the officers of the garrison of Fort
Prince George had thought for naught but the French, and now and again
conferred dubiously together on the unsatisfactory points of her
evidence. "Do you suppose she really knows anything about it?" the commandant said
aside to one of his advisers. Suddenly, however, her grandfather's hearing improved, and they were
able to elicit from him the reports which he had had at second hand from
the cow-drivers themselves, in retailing which he honestly conceived
that he was repeating genuine news, never dreaming that the information
had blossomed forth from his own mission. While less circumstantial and satisfactory than the commandant could
have wished, the details were too significant and serious of import to
be ignored, and therefore he acted upon his information as far as it was
developed. He ordered out a scouting party of ten men, and, that he might utilize
Blue Lick Station as an outpost in some sort where they might find
refuge and aid, he dispatched to the settlement a present of gunpowder
to serve in the defense of the station, in case of attack by the French,
and two of the small coehorns of that day, each of which could be
carried between two men, to assist the little piece already at the
station. In return for the prospective courtesy and shelter to his
troops, he wrote a very polite letter urging the settlers to hold out if
practicable, relying on his succor with men, ammunition, and provisions;
but if compelled to give way, assuring the stationers of a welcome at
Fort Prince George. The herders at the cow-pens on the Keowee had also determined to
reinforce Blue Lick Station, and with a number of the runaway horses of
the settlers, rounded up and driven in strings, several of them set
forth with the British soldiers from the fort. In this company Richard
Mivane and his grand daughter also took their way to Blue Lick Station
in lieu of waiting for a pack-train with provisions from Charlestown, as
they had anticipated. It was a merry camping party as they fared along through the wilderness,
and she had occasion to make many sage observations on the inconsistency
and the unwisdom of man! That the prospect of killing some Frenchman, or
being themselves cruelly killed, in a national quarrel which neither
faction, the cow-drivers nor the Blue Lick Stationers, half understood,
should so endear men to each other was a sentiment into which she could
not enter. It was better, after all, to be a woman, she said to herself,
and sit soberly at home and sew the rational sampler, and let the world
wag on as it would and the cutthroats work their wild will on each
other. The least suggestion that brought the thought of the French to
their minds was received with eyes alight, and nerves aquiver, and blood
all in a rush. The favorite of the whole camp was a young fellow who had
achieved that enviable station by virtue of an inane yet inconceivably
droll intonation of the phrase, "Bong chure" _(Bon jour_), delivered at
all manner of unconformable times and in inappropriate connections, and
invariably greeted with shouts of laughter. And when at last the party
reached the vicinity of Blue Lick and the stationers swarmed out to meet
them, taking the news of the French invasion at second hand, each
repeating it to the other, and variously recounting it back again, never
dreaming that it was supposed to have originally issued from the
station, she meditated much upon this temperamental savagery in man, and
the difficulty it occasioned in conforming him to those sagacious
schemes for his benefit which she nourished in her inventive little
pate. The antagonisms of the Blue Lick Stationers and the cow-drivers
from the Keowee vanished like mist. On the one hand the stationers were
assured that the stampede of the cattle was now regarded as inadvertent,
and although it had occasioned an immense deal of vexatious trouble to
the ranchmen, all were now well rounded up and restored to the cow-pens
as of yore. And the ranchmen in turn received a thousand thanks for
their neighborly kindness in the restoration of the horses of the Blue
Lick Stationers, who knew that the animals had not been decoyed off by
the herders, as a malicious report sought to represent, but had merely
returned to their "old grass," according to their homing propensities. And both parties loved the British soldiers, who had reinforced them,
and intended to go a-scouting with the military expedition; and the
soldiers earnestly reciprocated by assisting in the preparations for the
defense of the station. Especially active and efficient was the only
artilleryman among them, and the paradisaic peace amidst all the
preparations for war was so complete that his acrid scorn of that pride
of the settlement, the little swivel gun, and of the stationers' methods
of handling it, occasioned not even a murmur of resentment. Peninnah Penelope Anne, although restored to private life and the
maternal domicile, having retired from statecraft and the functions of
linguister to the embassy, did not altogether escape public utility in
these bellicose preparations. The young gunner, who had had the
opportunity of observing her during the march hither, shortly applied to
her for assistance in his professional devoir. He wanted a deft-handed
young person to construct the cartridge-bags for the ammunition which he
was fixing for the little piece and the two coehorns. And thus it
chanced that she found herself in the blockhouse, cheek by jowl with the
little cannon, its grisly muzzle now looking out of the embrasure where
she herself had once been fond of taking observations of the stockade
entrance; the men came and went and speculated upon the chances of the
scouting quest, now about to set forth, while spurs clanking, ramrods
rattling down into gun-barrels, voices lifted in argument or joyous
resonance, made the whitewashed walls ring anew. The gunner, seated at a
table carefully and accurately measuring out the powder, now and again
urged strict cautions against the lighting of pipes or striking of
sparks from gun-flints. When he applied himself briskly to the cutting
out of more bags from flannel for his cartridges, he looked very
harmless and domestic in his solicitude to follow his wooden pattern, or
"pathron" as he called it, for the creature was Irish. He gave minute
and scrupulous directions to Peninnah Penelope Anne to sew the cylinder
with no more than twelve stitches to the inch, and to baste down the
seams, "now, moind ye that!--ivery wan!--that no powther might slip
through beyant!" In the pride of the expert he was chary of commendation and eyed
critically the circular bottom of every bag before he filled it with
powder. "See that, now," he said, snipping briskly with the scissors; "that
string of woolen yarn that yez left there, a-burnin' away outside, might
burst the whole gun, an' ivery sowl in the blockhouse would be kilt
intirely,--moind ye that, now!--an they would n't be the Frenchies,
nayther!" He gave her a keen warning glance at rather close range, then
once more renewed his labors. The mockingbirds were singing in the woods outside. The sun was in the
trees. The leafage had progressed beyond the bourgeoning period and the
branches flung broad green splendors of verdure to the breeze. The Great
Smoky Mountains were hardly less blue than the sky as the distant
summits deployed against the fair horizon; only the nearest, close at
hand, were sombre, and showed dark luxuriant foliage and massive craggy
steeps, and their austere, silent, magnificent domes looked over the
scene with solemn uplifting meanings. Oh, life! life was so sweet, and
love and friendship were so easy to come by and so hard to part withal,
and glad, oh, glad was she that no men of the French nation or any other
were on their march hitherward to be torn in cruel lacerations by those
wicked cartridges, so cleverly and artfully and cheerfully
constructed,--men with homes, wives, mothers, sisters, children, every
soldier representing to some anxious, tender heart a whole world, a
microcosm of affection, all illuminated with hope and joy or to be
clouded with grief and terror and loss and despair,--oh, glad, glad was
she that the French invasion was but a figment,--a tissue of
misconceptions and vague innuendoes and groundless assumptions. And yet she was sad and sorry and ashamed, because of the futile bustle
and bluster and cheerful courageous activity about her. Not a cheek had
blenched; not a hand had trembled; not a voice had been lifted to
protest or counsel surrender, despite their meagre capacities for
defense and their number, but a handful. What would these men say to her
if they knew that their patriotism and their valor were expended in
vain,--above all, their mutual cause of quarrel wasted!--as pretty a bit
of neighborhood spite as ever stopped a bullet--all foolishly and
needlessly reconciled without a blow! She had saved them from a bloody
feud, the chances of which were terrifying to her for their own sakes. But what would they say when discovery should come! Still, it might never come. And yet, should they patrol the woods in
vain and at last disperse and return each to his own home, she had no
placidity in prospect,--she was troubled and sad and her sorry heart was
heavy. Her scheme had succeeded beyond her wildest hopes. Her beneficent
artifice had fully worked its mission. And now, since there was no more
to be done, she had time to repent her varied deceits. Was it right? she
asked herself in conscientious alarm, not the less sincere because
belated. Ought she to have interfered, with what forces it was possible
for her limited capacity to wield? Had they an inalienable right to cut
each other's throats? Should she have so presumed? And now--

"Howly Moses!" a voice in shrill agitation broke in upon her
preoccupation. "An' is it sheddin' tears ye are upon the blessed
gunpowther? Sure the colleen's crazed! Millia Murther! the beautiful
ca'tridges is ruint intoirely! Any man moight be proud an' plazed to be
kilt by the loikes o' them! How many o' them big wathery tears have yez
been after sheddin' into aich o' them lovely ca'tridges?" He had risen; one hand was laid protectingly upon the completed pile of
fixed ammunition as if to ward off the damping influences of her woe,
while he ruefully contemplated the suspected cartridge bags, all plump
and tidy and workmanlike, save for their possible charge of tears. She
made no answer, but sat quite motionless upon her low stool, a cartridge
bag unfinished in her lap, her golden brown curls against the cannon,
still weeping her large tears and looking very small. His clamors brought half the force to the scene of the disturbance. A
keen question here, an inference heedfully taken there, and the
situation was plain! In the abrupt pause in this headlong career it was difficult to sustain
one's poise. Now and again, indeed, sheepish conscious glances were
interchanged; for since the grievance of the cow-drivers had been
publicly annulled and the horses of the Blue Lick Stationers had been
restored in pure neighborly good-will, a resumption of the quarrel on
the old invalid scores was impossible. Perhaps some token of their
displeasure might have been visited upon her who had inaugurated so bold
and extensive a wild goose chase, but she looked so small as she sat by
the cannon weeping her large tears that she disarmed retaliation. So small she looked, indeed, that certain of the young blades, who filed
in to gaze upon her and filed out again, would not believe that she
could have invented so large a French invasion, and for several days
they futilely scouted the woods in search of some errant "parlez-vous,"
all of whom, however, were very discreetly tucked away within the strong
defenses of Fort Toulouse. The young gunner alone was implacable. He was the first of the returning
force to reach Fort Prince George, and he carried with him all the
powder that had been sent under mistake to the Blue Lick Station,
together with the tear-shotted cartridges, whose problematic interior
damage he explained to the amazed, chagrined, and nonplussed commandant. "Oh, sor," the gunner said in conclusion, solemnly shaking his head,
"that gurl, sor!--she is a wily one! An' I should n't be surprised, sor,
if she is a dale taller than she looks!" The Blue Lick Station in time recovered its equilibrium, and was
afterward prone to protest that of all frontier communities it bore the
palm for the efficiency of its "linguister." A VICTOR AT CHUNGKE


At Tennessee Town, on the Tennessee River, there used to be a great
chungke-yard. It was laid off in a wide rectangular area nine hundred
feet long, two feet lower than the surface of the ground, level as a
floor, and covered with fine white sand. The ancient, curiously shaped
chungke-stones, fashioned with much labor from the hardest rock, perfect
despite immemorial use, kept with the strictest care, exempt by law from
burial with the effects of the dead, were the property of this Cherokee
town, and no more to be removed thence than the council-house,--the
great rotunda at one side of the "beloved square," built upon a mound in
the centre of the village. Surely no spot could seem more felicitously chosen for the favorite
Indian game. The ground rose about the chungke-yard like the walls of an
amphitheatre, on every side save the slope toward the "beloved square"
and the river, furnishing an ideal position of vantage for spectators
were they even more numerous than the hundreds of Cherokees of all ages
that had gathered on the steep acclivities to overlook the game--some
ranged on the terrace or turfy ridge around the chungke-yard, formed by
the earth thrown out when the depressed area was delved down long ago,
others disposed beneath the spreading trees, others still, precariously
perched on clifty promontories beetling out from the sharp ascent. Above
all, Chilhowee Mountain, aflare with the scarlet glow of its autumnal
woods, touched the blue sky. The river, of a kindred blue, with a
transient steely change under the shadow of a cloud, showed flashes of
white foam, for the winds were rushing down from the Great Smoky
Mountains, which were revealed for an instant in a clear hard azure
against the pearl-tinted horizon--then again only a mirage, an illusion,
a dream of stupendous ranges in the shimmering mist. In the idle, sylvan, tribal life of that date, one hundred and fifty
years ago, it might seem that there was scant duty recognized, imposing
serious occupation, to debar the population of Tennessee Town from
witnessing the long-drawn game, which was continued sometimes half the
day by the same hardy young warriors, indefatigable despite the hot sun
and the tense exercise, straining every muscle. A few old women, their
minds intent upon the preparation of dinner, a few of the very young
children, relishing their own pottering devices as of a finer flavor of
sport, a few old men, like other old men elsewhere, with thoughts of the
past so vivid that the present could show but a pallid aspect--these
were absent, and were not missed. For the most part, however, the little
dwellings were vacant. The usual groups of loungers had deserted the
public buildings, which consisted of a bark-and-log house of three
rooms, or divisions, at each angle of the "beloved square," and in which
were transacted the business affairs of the town;--one, painted red, was
the "war-cabin," whence arms, ammunition, etc., were distributed, the
divisions implying distinctions as to rank among the warriors; another,
painted white, was devoted to the priestcraft of the "beloved men"--head
men of note, conjurers, and prophets; the cabin of the aged councilors
faced the setting sun, as an intimation that their wars were ended and
their day done; and in the fourth cabin met the "second men," as the
traders called the subordinate authorities who conducted municipal
affairs, so to speak--the community labor of raising houses, and laying
off and planting with maize and pompions the common fields to be tilled
by the women, "who fret at the very shadow of a crow," writes an old
trader. All these cabins were now still and silent in the sun. The
dome-shaped town-house, of a different style of architecture, plastered
within and without with red clay, placed high on the artificial mound,
and reached by an ascent of stairs which were cut in regular gradations
in the earth, lacked its strange religious ceremonies; its secret
colloguing council of chiefs with the two princes of the town; its
visitors of distinction, ambassadors from other towns or Indian nations;
its wreaths of tobacco sent forth from diplomatically smoked pipes; its
strategic "talks;" its exchange of symbolic belts and strings of wampum
and of swans' wings--white, or painted red and black, as peace hovered
or war impended--and other paraphernalia of the savage government. Even
the trading-house showed a closed door, and the English trader, his pipe
in his mouth, smoked with no latent significance, but merely to garner
its nicotian solace, sat with a group of the elder braves and watched
the barbaric sport with an interest as keen as if he had been born and
bred an Indian instead of native to the far-away dales of Devonshire. Nay, he bet on the chances of the game with as reckless a nerve as a
Cherokee,--always the perfect presentment of the gambler,--despite the
thrift which characterized his transactions at the trading-house, where
he was wont to drive a close bargain, and look with the discerning
scrupulousness of an expert into the values of the dressing of a
deerskin offered in barter. But the one pursuit was pleasure, and the
other business. The deerskins which he was wearing were of phenomenal
softness and beauty of finish, for the spare, dapper man was arrayed
like the Indians, in fringed buckskin shirt and leggings; but he was
experiencing a vague sentiment of contempt for his attire. He had been
recently wearing a garb of good camlet-cloth and hose and a bravely
cocked hat, for he was just returned from a journey to Charlestown, five
hundred miles distant, where he had made a considerable stay, and his
muscles and attitude were still adjusted to the pride of preferment and
the consciousness of being unwontedly smart. Indeed, his pack-train,
laden with powder and firearms, beads and cloth, cutlery and paints, for
his traffic with the Indians under the license which he held from the
British government, had but come in the previous day, and he had still
the pulses of civilization beating in his veins. For this reason, perhaps, as he sat, one elbow on his knee, his chin in
his hand, his sharp, commercially keen face softened by a thought not
akin to trade, his eyes were darkened, while he gazed at one of the
contestants, with a doubt that had little connection with the odds which
he had offered. He was troubled by a vague regret, a speculation of
restless futility, for it concerned a future so unusual that no detail
could be predicted from the resources of the present. And yet this
sentiment was without the poignancy of personal grief--it was only a
vicarious interest that animated him. For himself, despite the
flattering, smooth reminiscence of the camlet-cloth yet lingering in the
nerves of his finger-tips, the recent relapse into English speech, the
interval spent once more among the stir of streets and shops, splendid
indeed to an unwonted gaze, the commercial validities, which he so
heartily appreciated, of the warehouses, and crowded wharves, and laden
merchantmen swinging at anchor in the great harbor, he was satisfied. He
was possessed by that extraordinary renunciation of civilization which
now and again was manifested by white men thrown among the Cherokee
tribe--sometimes, as in his instance, a trader, advanced in years, "his
pile made," to use the phrase of to-day, the world before him where to
choose a home; sometimes a deserter from the British or French military
forces, according to the faction which the shifting Cherokees affected
at the time; more than once a captive, spared for some whim, set at
liberty, free to go where he would--all deliberately and of choice cast
their lot among the Cherokees; lived and died with the treacherous race. Whether the wild sylvan life had some peculiarly irresistible
attraction; whether the world beyond held for them responsibilities and
laborious vocations and irksome ties which they would fain evade;
whether they fell under the bewitchment of "Herbert's Spring," named
from an early commissioner of Indian affairs, after drinking whereof one
could not quit the region of the Great Smoky Mountains, but remained in
that enchanted country for seven years, fascinated, lapsed in perfect
content--it is impossible to say. There is a tradition that when the
attraction of the world would begin to reassert its subtle reminiscent
forces, these renegades of civilization were wont to repair anew to this
fountain to quaff again of the ancient delirium and to revive its potent
spell. Abram Varney had no such necessity in his own case; he only
doubted the values of his choice as fitted for another. Apart from this reflection, it was natural that his eyes should follow
the contestant whom he had backed for a winner to the tune of more
silver bangles, and "ear-bobs," and strings of "roanoke," and gunpowder,
and red and white paint, than he was minded to lightly lose. He had laid
his wagers with a keen calculation of the relative endowments of the
players, their dexterity, their experience, their endurance. He was not
influenced by any pride of race in the fact that his champion was also a
white man, who, indeed, carried a good share of the favor of the
spectators. A strange object was this champion, at once pathetic and splendid. No
muscular development could have been finer, no athletic grace more
pronounced than his physique displayed. The wild life and training of
the woods and the savage wars had brought out all the constitutional
endurance and strength inherited from his stanch English father and his
hardy Scotch mother. Both had been murdered by the Cherokees in a
frontier massacre, and as a boy of ten years of age, his life spared in
some freak of the moment, he had been conveyed hither, exhorted to
forget, adopted into the tribe, brought up with their peculiar kindness
in the rearing of children, taught all the sylvan arts, and trained to
the stern duties of war by the noted chief Colannah Gigagei, himself,
the Great Red Raven of Tennessee Town (sometimes called Quorinnah, the
name being a favorite war-title specially coveted). The youth had had
his baptism of fire in the ceaseless wars which the Cherokees waged
against the other Indian tribes. He had already won the "warrior's
crown" and his "war-name," a title conferred only upon the bravest of
the brave. He was now Otasite, the "Man-killer" of Tennessee Town. He
was just twenty years of age, and Abram Varney, gazing at him, wondered
what the people in Charlestown would think of him could they see him. For a few days, a week, perhaps, the trader would refer all his thoughts
to this civilized standard. Tall, alert as an Indian, supple too, but heavier and more muscular,
Otasite was instantly to be distinguished by his build from among the
other young men, although, like the Indians, he wore a garb of dressed
deerskin. His face, albeit no stranger to the use of their pigments and
unguents, still showed fair and freckled. His hair bore no resemblance
to their lank black locks; of an auburn hue and resolutely curling, it
defied the tonsure to which it had been for years subjected, coming out
crisp and ringleted close to his head where he was designed to be bald,
and on the top, where the "war-lock" was permitted to grow, it floated
backward in two long tangled red curls that gave the lie direct to the
Indian similitude affected by the two surmounting tips of eagle
feathers. He was arrayed in much splendor, according to aboriginal
standards; the fringed seams of his hunting shirt and leggings,
fashioned of fine white dressed doeskin, as pliable as "Canton silk
crape," were hung with fawns' trotters; his moccasins were white and
streaked with parti-colored paint; he had a curious prickly belt of
wolves' teeth, which intimated his moral courage as well as sylvan
prowess, for the slaying of these beasts was esteemed unlucky, and
shooting at them calculated to spoil the aim of a gun; many glancing,
glittering strings of "roanoke" swung around his neck. Nothing could have been finer, athletically considered, than his
attitude at this moment of the trader's speculative observation. The
discoidal quartz chungke-stone[2] had been hurled with a tremendous
fling along the smooth sandy stretch of the yard, its flat edge, two
inches wide, and the curiously exact equipoise of its fashioning causing
it to bowl swiftly along a great distance, to fall only when the
original impetus should fail; his competitor, Wyejah, a sinewy, powerful
young brave, his buckskin garb steeped in some red dye that gave him the
look when at full speed of the first flying leaf of the falling season,
his ears split and barbarically distended on wire hoops[3] and hung with
silver rings, his moccasins scarlet, his black hair decorated with
cardinal wings, had just sent his heavy lance, twelve feet long,
skimming through the air; then Otasite, running swiftly but lightly
abreast with him, launched his own long lance with such force and nicety
of aim that its point struck the end of Wyejah's spear, still in flight
in mid-air, deflecting its direction, and sending it far afield from the
chungke-stone which it was designed in falling to touch. This fine cast
counted one point in the game, which is of eleven points, and the Indian
braves among the spectators howled like civilized young men at a
horse-race. The sport was very keen, the contest being exceedingly close, for Wyejah
had long needed only one additional point to make him a winner, and when
Otasite had failed to score he had also failed. The swift motion, the
graceful agility, the smiling face of Otasite,--for it was a matter of
the extremest exaction in the Indian games that however strenuous the
exertion and tense the strain upon the nerves and grievous the
mischances of the sport, the utmost placidity of manner and temper must
be preserved throughout,--all appealed freshly to the trader, although
it was a long-accustomed sight. "Many a man in Charlestown--a well-to-do man" (applying the commercial
standard of value)--"would be proud to have such a son," he muttered, a
trifle dismayed by the perverse incongruities of fate. "He would have
sent the boy to school. If there was money enough he would have sent him
to England to be educated--and none too good for him!" The shadows of the two players, all foreshortened by the approach of
noontide, bobbed about in dwarfish caricature along the smooth sandy
stretch. The great chungke-pole, an obelisk forty feet high planted on a
low mound in the centre of the chungke-yard, and with a target at its
summit used for trials of skill in marksmanship, cast a diminished
simulacrum on the ground at its base scarcely larger than the
chungke-lances. Now and again these heavy projectiles flew through the
air, impelled with an incredible force and a skill so accurate that it
seemed impossible that both contestants should not excel. There was a
moment, however, when Otasite might have made the decisive point to
score eleven had not the chungke-stone slipped from the hand of Wyejah
as he cast it, falling only a few yards distant. Otasite's lance, flung
instantly, shot far beyond that missile, for which, had the stone been
properly thrown, he should have aimed. Wyejah, disconcerted and shaken
by the mischance, launching his lance at haphazard, almost mechanically,
struck by obvious accident the flying lance of his adversary, deflecting
its course--the decisive cast, for which he had striven so long in vain,
and which was now merely fortuitous. The crowds of Indian gamblers, with much money and goods at hazard upon
the event, some, indeed, having staked the clothes upon their backs, the
rifles and powder for their winter hunt that should furnish them with
food, were at once in a clamor of discussion as to the fair adjustment
of the throw in the score. The backers of Wyejah claimed the accidental
hit as genuine and closing the game. The backers of Otasite protested
that it could not be thus held, since Wyejah's defective cast of the
chungke-stone debarred their champion from the possibility of first
scoring the eleventh point, which chance was his by right, it being his
turn to play; they met the argument caviling at Otasite's lack of aim by
the counter-argument that one does not aim at a moving object where it
is at the moment, but with an intuitive calculation of distance and
speed where it will be when reached by the projectile hurled after it,
illustrating cleverly by the example of shooting with bow and arrow at a
bird on the wing. Otasite and Wyejah both, preserved an appearance of joyous indifference. With their lances poised high in the right hand they were together
running swiftly up the long alley again to the starting-point, Otasite
commenting on the evident lack of intention in Wyejah's lucky cast with
a loud, jocosely satiric cry, "_Hala! Hala_!" (signifying, "You are too
many for me!") "Lord! how the boy does yell!" Abram Varney exclaimed, a smile pervading
the wrinkles wrought about his eyes by much pondering on the problems of
the Indian trade, feeling incongruously a sort of elation in the youth's
noisy shouts, which echoed blatantly from the rocky banks of the
Tennessee River, and with reduced arrogance and in softer tones from the
cliffs of towering Chilhowee. A sympathetic sentiment glowed in the dark eyes of an Indian chief on
the slope hard by, the great Colannah Gigagei. He was fast aging now;
the difficulties of diplomacy constantly increasing in view of
individual aggressions and encroachments of the Carolina colonists on
the east, and the ever specious wiles and suave allurements of the
French on the west, to win the Cherokees from their British alliance;
the impossibility, in the gentle patriarchal methods of the Cherokee
government, to control the wild young men of the tribe, who, as the
half-king, Atta-Kulla-Kulla said, "often acted like madmen rather than
people of sense" (and it is respectfully submitted that this peculiarity
has been observed in other young men elsewhere); the prophetic vision,
doubtless, of the eventual crushing of his people in the collisions of
the great international struggle of the Europeans for the possession of
this country,--all fostered tokens of time in the face of Colannah, and
bowed his straight back, and set an unwonted quiver in the nerves of his
old hand that had been firm in his heyday, and strong and crafty and
cruelly bloody. But his face now was softened with pleasure, and the
pride it expressed was almost tender. "When a few years ago the Governor of South Carolina," he said
majestically, speaking in the Cherokee tongue but for the English names
(he pronounced the title "Goweno"), "offered to take some Cherokee
youths to train in his schools and make _scholars_ of them, I thanked
him with affection, for his thought was kind. But I told him that if he
would send some South Carolina youths to the Cherokee nation to be
trained, we would make _men_ of them!" His blanket, curiously woven of feathers and wild hemp, requiring years
of labor in its intricate manufacture, fell away from one gaunt arm as
he lifted it to point with a kingly gesture at the young white man as
the illustration of his training. Every muscle of strength was on parade
in the splendid pose of hurling the great chungke-spear through the air,
as Otasite thus passed the interval while waiting the decision of the
umpire of the game. Then, with a laugh, oddly blent of affection and
pride, Colannah took his way down the slope and toward the
council-house: the council sat there much in these days of 1753, clouded
with smoke and perplexity. Judging by this specimen of his athletic training to feats of prowess,
Colannah Gigagei might boast to the "Goweno" of South Carolina. It was
not, however, merely in muscle that the young captive excelled. As Abram
Varney thought of certain sterling manly traits of the highest type
which this poor waif had developed here in this incongruous environment,
one might suppose from the sheer force of heredity, he shook his head
silently, and his eyes clouded, the pulses of Charlestown still beating
in his veins. For he was wont to leave for months the treasures of his
trading-house, not merely a matter of trinkets and beads, but powder,
lead, and firearms, sufficient for accoutring an expedition for the
"war-path," and great store of cloths, cutlery, paints, in the charge of
this valiant gamester of chungke, stanch alike against friend and foe,
as safely as if its wealth were beneath his own eye. So insecure had
become the Cherokee allegiance to the government that it was impossible
now under its uncertain protection to retain white men from the colonies
here in his employ as agents and under-traders, or, indeed, those whose
interest and profits amounted to an ownership in a share of the stock. The earlier traders in neighboring towns one by one had gone, affecting
a base several hundred miles nearer the white settlements. Some had
shifted altogether from the tribe, and secured a post among the
Chickasaws, who were indubitably loyal to the British. While their
withdrawal added to Varney's profits,--for each trader was allowed to
hold at this time a license only for two Indian towns, it being before
the date of the issuance of general licenses, and the custom which they
had relinquished, the barter with the Cherokees for deerskins, now came
from long distances, drawn as by a magnet to his trading-house at
Tennessee Town,--it had resulted in his isolation, and for years he had
been almost the only British subject west of the Great Smoky Mountains. He had no fear of the Cherokees, however--not even should the political
sky, always somewhat overcast, become yet more lowering. He had long
been accustomed to these Indians, and he felt that he had fast friends
among them. His sane mercantile judgment appraised and appreciated the
added opportunities of his peculiar position, which he would not lightly
throw away, and the development of Otasite's incongruous commercial
values not only removed the possibility of loss during his absence, but
added to his facilities in enabling him to secure the fidelity of
Indians as packmen, hitherto impracticable, but now rendered to Otasite
as one of the tribe. He had recognized with satisfaction, mingled with
amusement, national traits in the boy, who, despite his Indian training,
would not, like them, barter strings of wampum measuring "from elbow to
wrist" without regard to the relative length of arm. Yet he had none of
the Indian deceit and treachery. He was blunt, sincere, and bold. His
alertness in computation gave Varney genuine pleasure, although they
wrangled much as to his method, for he used the Cherokee numeration, and
it set the trader's mercantile teeth on edge to hear twenty called
"_tahre skoeh_"--two tens. "And why not?" Otasite would demand, full of faith in his own education. "The Chickasaw will say '_pokoole toogalo_'--ten twos"--and he would
smile superior. This was his world, and these his standards--the
Cherokees and the Chickasaws! He was not to be easily influenced or turned save by some spontaneous
acquiescence of his own mind, and Varney found himself counting "_skoeh
chooke kaiere_" (the old one's hundred) before he ever induced Otasite
to say instead "one thousand." The boy even ventured on censorship in his turn. "You say 'Cherokee_s_'
and 'Chickasaw_s_' when you speak of the Tsullakee and the Chickasaw;
why don't you then say the English-_es_ and the French-_es_?" For the
plural designation of these tribes was a colonial invention. His bulldog tenacity, his orderly instincts, his providence, so contrary
to the methods of the wasteful Indian, his cheerful industry, his
indomitable energy and perseverance,--all were so national that in days
gone past Varney used now and again to clap him on the shoulder with a
loud, careless vaunt, "British to the marrow!" A fact, doubtless--and all of a sudden it had begun to seem a very
serious fact. So very serious, indeed, that the old trader did not
notice the crisis in the chungke-yard, the increasing excitement in the
crowds of spectators, the clamors presently when the game was declared a
draw and the bets off, the stir of the departing groups. It was silence
at last that smote upon his senses with the effect of interruption which
the continuance of sound had not been able to compass. He drew himself
up with a perplexed sigh, and looked drearily over the expanse of the
river. Its long glittering reaches were vacant, a rare circumstance, for
the Cherokees of that date were almost amphibious in habit, reveling in
the many lovely streams of their mountain country; on the banks their
towns were situated, and this fact doubtless contributed to the neatness
of their habitations and personal cleanliness, to which the travelers of
those times bear a surprised testimony. The light upon the water was
aslant now from a westering sun, and glittering on the snowy breasts of
a cluster of swans drifting, dreaming perhaps, on the current. The
scarlet boughs on the summit of Chilhowee were motionless against the
azure zenith. Not even the vaguest tissue of mist now lingered about the
majestic domes of the Great Smoky Mountains, painted clearly and
accurately in fine and minute detail in soft dense velvet blues against
the hard polished mineral blue of the horizon. The atmosphere was so
exquisitely luminous and pellucid that it might have seemed a fit medium
to dispel uncertainty in other than merely material subjects of
contemplation. Nevertheless he did not see his way clearly, and when he
came within view of his trading-house he paused as abruptly as if he had
found his path blocked by an obstacle. There, seated on the step of the closed door which boasted the only lock
and key in Tennessee Town, or for the matter of that in all the stretch
of the Cherokee country west of the Great Smoky Range, was Otasite, the
incongruity of his auburn curls and his Indian headdress seeming a
trifle more pronounced than usual, since it had been for a time an
unfamiliar sight. He was awaiting the coming of the trader, and was
singing meanwhile in a loud and cheerful voice, "Drink with me a cup of
wine," a ditty which he had heard in his half-forgotten childhood. The
robust full tones gave no token of the draught made upon his endurance
by the heavy exercise of the day, but he seemed a bit languid from the
heat, and his doeskin shirt was thrown open at the throat, showing his
broad white chest, and in its centre the barbarous blue discolorations
of the "warrior's marks." These disfigurements, made by the puncturing
of the flesh with gars' teeth and inserting in the wound paint and
pitch, indelible testimonials to his deeds of courage and prowess,
Otasite valued as he did naught else on earth, and he would have parted
with his right hand as readily. The first had been bestowed upon him
after he had gone, a mighty gun-man, against the Muscogees. The others
he had won in the course of a long, furious, and stubborn contest of the
tribe with the Chickasaws, who, always impolitic, headlong, and brave,
were now reduced by their own valor in their many wars from ten thousand
fighting men to a few hundred. He had attained the "warrior's crown"
when he had shown their kindred Choctaws a mettle as fierce and a craft
as keen as their own. And now he was looking at Abram Varney with kindly
English eyes and an expression about the brow, heavily freckled, that
almost smote the tears from the elder man. The trader knew from long
experience what was coming, but suddenly he had begun to regard it
differently. Always upon the end of each journey from Charlestown he had
been met here within a day or two by Otasite on the same mission. The
long years as they passed had wrought only external changes since, as a
slender wistful boy of eleven years, heart-sick, homeless, forlorn,
friendless, save for his Indian captors, likely, indeed, to forget all
language but theirs, he had first come with his question, always in
English, always with a faltering eyelash and a deprecatory lowered
voice, "Did you hear anything in Charlestown of any people named
'Queetlee'?" This was the distorted version of his father's name that Colannah had
preserved. As to the child himself, his memory had perhaps been shaken
by the events of that terrible night of massacre, which he only realized
as a frightful awakening from sleep to smoke, flames, screams, the
ear-splitting crack of rifle-shots at close quarters, the shock of a
sudden hurt--and then, after an interval of unconsciousness, a
transition to a new world of strange habitudes that grew speedily
familiar, and of unexpected kindness that became dear to a frank,
affectionate heart. Perhaps in the isolations of the frontier life he
had never heard his father addressed by his surname by a stranger; he
was called "Jan" by his wife, and her name was "Eelin," and this Otasite
knew, and this was all he knew, save that he himself also had been
called "Jan."

"They don't want you, my buck, or they would have been after you," the
trader used to reply, being harder, perhaps when he was younger. Besides, he honestly thought the cadaverous brat, all legs, like a
growing colt, and skinny arms, was better off here in the free woodland
life which he himself considered no hardship, and affected long after
necessity or interest had dictated his environment. The little lad was
safe in the care of the powerful chief Colannah Gigagei of Tennessee
Town, who had adopted him, and who was a man of great force and
influence. Why should the child seek a home among his own people,
unwelcome doubtless, to eat the meagre crust of charity, or serve as an
overworked drudge somewhere on the precarious frontier? The trader did
not greatly deplore the lack of religious training, for in the remote
settlements this was often still an unaccustomed luxury, albeit some
thirty years had now gone by since Sir Francis Nicholson, then the
Governor, declared that no colony could flourish without a wider
diffusion of the gospel and education, and forthwith ordered spiritual
drill, so to speak, in the way of preaching and schooling. Although
himself described as "a profane, passionate, headstrong man, bred a
soldier," as if the last fact were an excuse for the former, he
contributed largely to the furtherance of these pious objects, "spending
liberally all his salary and perquisites of office," for which generous
trait of character an early and strait-laced historian is obviously of
the opinion that General Nicholson should have been suffered to swear in
peace and, as it were, in the odor of sanctity. More than once, when in Charlestown, Varney, notwithstanding his
persuasions on the subject, had been minded to inquire concerning the
"Queetlees," who he understood from Colannah had come originally from
Cumberland in England. With his mercantile cronies he had canvassed the
question whether the queer, evidently distorted name could have been
"Peatley" or "Patey" or "Petrie,"--for the Cherokees always substituted
"Q" for "P," as the latter letter they could not pronounce,--and after
this transient consideration the matter would drop. As the child, running about the Indian town with his new-found
playmates, grew robust and merry-hearted, and happiness, confidence, and
strength brought their embellishing influence to the expression of his
large dark gray eyes and straightened the nervous droop from his thin
little shoulders, the trader noticed casually once or twice how comely
the brat had become, and he experienced a fleeting, half-ridiculing pity
for his mother--how the woman would have resented and resisted the
persistent shearing and shaving of those silken, loosely twining red
curls! Then he thought of her no more. But when the child had come to
man's estate, when he was encased in a network of muscle like elastic
steel wires, when stature and strength had made him alike formidable and
splendid, when the development of his temperament illustrated virtues so
stanch that they seemed the complement of his physical endowment and a
part of his resolute personality, the old trader thought of the boy's
father, and thought of him daily--how the sturdy Cumbrian yeoman would
have rejoiced in so stalwart a son! Thus, with this vague bond of
sympathy with a man whom he had never seen, never known, so long ago, so
cruelly dead, this intuitive divination of his paternal sentiment,
Varney's fatherly attitude grew more definite daily and became
accustomed, and he was jealous of the influence of Colannah, who in turn
was jealous of his influence. Now as Varney stood in the dusky trading-house among the kegs and bags
and bales of goods, the high peak of the interior of the roof lost in
the lofty shadows, he felt that he had been much in default in long-past
years, and he experienced a very definite pang of conscience as Otasite
swung abruptly around a stack of arms, a new rifle in his hand, the
flint and pan of which he had been keenly examining. He lifted his eyes suddenly with that long-lashed dreary look of his
childhood. "Did you hear of any Queetlees in Charlestown?" he asked. "It is _you_ who should seek your kindred, Jan Queetlee!" Varney said
impulsively, calling him by his unaccustomed English name. "It is _you_
who should go to Charlestown to find the Queetlees!" Otasite's face showed suddenly the unwonted expression of fear. He
recoiled abruptly, and Abram Varney was sensible of a deep depression. It was as he had thought. The wish for restoration to those of his name
and his kindred which had animated the boy's earlier years had now
dwindled to a mere abstract sentiment of loyalty as of clanship, but was
devoid of expectation, of intention. All the members of his immediate
family had perished in the massacre, and he had been trained to regard
this as the fortunes of war, cherishing no personal antagonism, as
elsewhere among civilized people reconciliations are frequent between
the victors and the friends of the slain in battle. Moreover, he was not
brought close to it. The participators in the affray were of the distant
Ayrate settlements of the tribe, southeast of the mountains, and not
individualized. The Indians of Tennessee Town, which was then one of the
most remote of the Cherokee villages of the Ottare division, and this
perhaps was the reason it was selected as his home, were not concerned
in the foray, nor were any others of the Overhill towns. Thus he had
grown up without the thirst for vengeance, which showed how little the
methods of his Cherokee environment had influenced his heart. And truly
the far-away Queetlees, if any such were cognizant of his existence, had
troubled themselves nothing about it, and had infinitely less claim on
his gratitude and filial affection than Colannah. They had left him to
be as a waif, a slave. He had been reared as a son, nursed and tended,
fed and fostered, bedecked in splendor, armed in costly and formidable
wise, given command and station, carefully trained in all that the
Indian knew. "Colannah would never consent!" he said at last. Abram Varney afterward wondered why he should then have had a
vision--oh, so futile, so fleeting, so fantastic!--of the twenty, the
forty, nay, the sixty years that this man, so munificently endowed by
nature, might pass here among the grotesque, uncouth barbarities of the
savage Cherokee, while his heritage--his religion, the religion into
which he was born of Christian parents, his name and nation, his tongue
and station, his opportunity--doubtless some fair, valid, valuable
future--all lay there to the eastward but scant five hundred miles away
on the Carolina coast. He said as much, and the retort came succinctly,
"You live here!" Otasite's English speech was as simple as a child's, but he thought as
diplomatically as Colannah himself, whom he esteemed the greatest man in
all the world, and he could argue in the strategic Cherokee method. Nevertheless, to give him full sway, that everything possible might be
said in contravention of the proposition, the old trader lapsed into the
Indian speech, that was indeed from long usage like a mother tongue to
them both. He stayed here, he said, from choice, it was true, but for
the sake of the trade that gave him wealth, and with wealth he could
return to the colonies at any time, and go whither he would in all the
world. But Otasite was restricted; he had no goods for trade, no
adequate capital to invest; he could only return to the colonies while
young, to work, to make a way, to secure betimes a place appropriate to
his riper years. Even this could not be done without great
difficulty,--witness how many settlers came empty-handed to barely exist
on the frontier and wrest a reluctant living from the wilderness,--and
it could not be done at all without friends. Now he, Abram Varney, was
prepared to stand his friend; Otasite could take a place in the service
of the company, in the main depot of the trade at Charlestown. His
knowledge of the details of the business of which Abram Varney's long
absences had given him experience; of the needs of the Cherokee nation;
of the ever-continued efforts of the French traders, by means of the
access to the Overhill towns afforded by the Cherokee and Tennessee
rivers, despite the great distance from their settlements on the
Mississippi, to insinuate their supplies at lower prices, in the teeth
of the Cherokee treaty with the British monopolizing such traffic, and
bring down profits--all would have a special and recognized value and be
appreciated by his mercantile associates, who would further the young
man's advancement. Thence he could at his leisure make inquiries
concerning his father's family, and doubtless in the course of time be
restored to his kindred. Otasite listened throughout with the courteous air of deliberation which
his Indian training required him to accord to any discourse, without
interruption, however unwelcome or trivial it might be esteemed. Then,
smiling slowly, he shook his head. "You cannot be serious," he said. "It would break old Colannah's heart,
who has been like a father to me." Abram Varney too had the British bulldog tenacity. "What will you do,
then," he asked slowly and significantly, "when Colannah takes up arms
against the British government? Will you fight men of your own blood?" He was reinforced in this argument by the habit of thought of the
Indians--the absolute absence of tribal dissensions, of internecine
strife, so marked among the Cherokees: here no man's hand was lifted
against his brother. Jan Queetlee palpably winced. Come what might, he could never fight for
the Cherokees against the British--his father's people, his mother's
people--no more than he could fight for the British against his adopted
tribe--the Cherokee--and he the "Man-killer!" "They will fight each other," said Varney weightily, "and the day is not
far--the day is not far!" For in 1753 the cumulative discontents of the tribe were near the
crisis, earnestly fostered by the French on the western boundaries, that
vast domain then known as Louisiana, toward whose siren voice the
Cherokees had ever lent a willing ear. The building by the British
government, two or three years later, of those great defensive works,
Fort Prince George and Fort Loudon, situated respectively at the eastern
and western extremities of the Cherokee territory, mounted with cannon
and garrisoned by British forces, served to hold them in check and
quieted them for a time, but only for a time. Jan Queetlee, by reason of
his close association with the chiefs, knew far more than Varney dreamed
of the bitterness roused in the hearts of the Indians by friction with
the government, the aggressions of the individual colonist, the
infringements of their privileges in the treaty, and in opposition the
influence of the ever seductive suavity of the French. As with a sudden hurt, Jan Queetlee cried out with a poignant voice
against the government and its patent unfaith, striking his clinched
fist so heavily on the head of a keg of powder that the stout fibres of
the wood burst beneath the passionate blow, and in a moment he was
covered with the flying particles of the black dust. Realizing the
possibility of an explosion should a candle or a pipe be lighted here,
Varney did not wait for the return of one of the brawny packmen to
remove the keg to a cave beneath the trading-house, which he utilized
for storage as a cellar, but addressed himself to the job. Jan Queetlee
silently assisted, his face darker, more lowering with the thought in
his mind than with the smears of the powder. Varney remembered this afterward, and that he himself, diverted by the
accident from the trend of his argument, had launched out in a tirade
against the government as they worked together, the young Briton's
energy, industry, and persistence so at variance with the aspect of his
tufted topknot of feathers on his auburn curls, and the big blue
warrior's marks on his broad white chest. For Varney too had his
grievances against the powers that were; but his woes were personal. He
vehemently condemned the reconciliation which the government had
effected between the Muscogees and the Cherokees, for although there
were more deerskins to be had for export when the Indian hunters were at
pacific leisure, Varney had considered the recent war between these
tribes an admirable vent for gunpowder and its profitable sale; and
since the savages must always be killing, it was manifestly best for all
concerned that they should kill each other. He could not sufficiently
deride the happy illustration which Governor Glen had given them (in his
fatuity, Varney thought) of the values of peace and concord. In the
presence of the two delegations the mediating Governor had taken an
arrow and shown them with what ease it could be broken; then how
impossible he found it to break a quiverful of arrows, thus
demonstrating the strength in union. Varney argued that the Indians
would readily perceive a further application of the principle and turn
it to account, combining against the colonists. In the same spirit he
animadverted upon a monopoly from which he was excluded in common with
the traders in general, and which had been granted to a mercantile
company seeking to establish posts among the Choctaws. The enterprise,
although favored by the government, obviously because, undertaken on a
scale of phenomenal magnitude, it promised to dislodge the French and
their long-established trade among the Choctaws, and bring that powerful
tribe to a British allegiance, had finally proved a failure; and with a
bitter joy in this fact he alternately contemned and pitied the
government, because it could not wrest this valuable opportunity from
the iron grasp of the "Mississippi Louisianians." He had, too, a
censorious word for the French commercially--called them "peddlers,"
celebrated their deceitful wiles, underrated the quality of their
cloths, and inconsistently berated them for their low prices, finding a
logical parity in all these matters in the tenets of their religion,
which they had so vainly and so zealously sought to instill into the
unreceptive hearts of the unimpressionable Choctaw. [4]

With the plethora of interest involved in these subjects, Varney grew
oblivious of the theme that had earlier occupied his mind. It recurred
no more to his thoughts until several days had passed. He then chanced
to be occupied with his new goods in his cavern. It was illumined only
from above; there was a trap-door in the floor of the trading-house, and
thence a pale tempered light drifted down, scarcely convenient, but
sufficient for his purposes. Once he noticed that a shadow flickered
across it. He experienced a momentary surprise, for he had left no one
in the building, and the outer door being locked, he imagined it could
not be forced without noise enough to rouse him. Again the shadow
flickered across the trap-door; then ensued a complete eclipse of the
scant glimmer of light. There was a step upon the ladder which served as
stairway--a man was descending. Varney felt a sudden constriction about his throat. He realized an
impending crisis; the door above had been closed; by the sound he knew
that the ladder was now removed and laid upon the ground. He had an
idea--he could see naught--that the unknown invisible man had seated
himself on the ladder on the ground, where he remained motionless,
silent, in anger, in grief, or some strange savage whim hardly possible
for a civilized creature to divine. The time that passed in this black nullity--he never could compute
it--moments, doubtless, but it seemed hours, tried to the utmost the
nerve of the entrapped trader, albeit inured by twenty years' experience
to the capricious temper of the Cherokee Indians. He felt he could
better endure the suspense could he only see his antagonist, identify
him, and thus guess his purpose, and shape his own course from his
knowledge of character. But with some acquired savage instinct he, too,
remained silent, null, passive; one might have thought him absent. Perhaps his quiescence, indeed, fostered some doubt of his presence
here, for suddenly there sounded the rasping of flint on steel, the
spunk was aglow, and then in the timorous flame of the kindling candle,
taken from his own stores above, Varney recognized the face and figure
of the stately and imperious old chief Colannah. The next moment he
remembered something far more pertinent. He called out in an agitated
voice to the Indian to beware of the powder with which the place was
largely stocked. "I came for that," said Colannah in Cherokee, with unaccustomed fingers
snuffing the wick as he had seen Varney perform the process, for the
Indians used torches and fires of split cane for purposes of
illumination. "For God's sake, what have I done?" cried the trader in an agony of
terror, desirous to bring his accusation to the point as early as might
be and compass his release, thus forestalling the violent end of an
explosion. "What do the English always?--you have robbed me!" said Colannah, the
light strong on his fierce indignant features, his garb of fringed
buckskin, his many rich strings of the ivory-like roanoke about his
neck, his gayly bedecked and feathered head, and in shadowy wise
revealing the rough walls of the cave, the boxes and bales of goods, the
reserve stock, as it were, the stands of arms, and the kegs and bags of
powder. As Varney, half crouching on the ground, noted the latter in the dusk,
he cried out precipitately, "Robbed you of what? My God! let us go
upstairs. I'll give it back, whatever it is, twice over, fourfold! Don't
swing the candle around that way, Colannah! the powder will blow us and
the whole trading-house into the Tennessee River." Colannah nodded acquiescence, the stately feathers on his head gleaming
fitfully in the clare-obscure of the cavern. "That is why I came! Then
the British government could demand no satisfaction for the life of the
British subject--an accident--the old chief of Tennessee Town killed
with him. And I should be avenged." "For what? My God!" Varney had not before called upon the Lord for
twenty years. To hold a diplomatic conversation with an enraged wild
Indian, flourishing a lighted candle in a powder magazine, is calculated
to bring even the most self-sufficient and forgetful sinner to a sense
of his dependence and helplessness. The lighted candle was a more
subjugating weapon than a drawn sword. He had contemplated springing
upon the stanch old warrior, although, despite the difference in age, he
was no match for the Indian, in order to seek to extinguish it. He
reflected, however, that in the struggle a flaring spark might cause the
ignition of scattered particles of the powder about the floor, and thus
precipitate the explosion which he shuddered to imagine. "For what,
Colannah?" he asked again, in a soothing smooth cadence, "for what, my
comrade, my benefactor for years, my best-beloved friend--avenged on me
for what? Let's go upstairs!" The flicker of the wavering candle showed a smile of contempt on the
face of the angry Indian for a moment, and admonished Varney that in
view of the Cherokees' relish of the torture his manifestations of
anxiety but prolonged his jeopardy. It brought, too, a fuller
realization of the gravity of the situation in that the Indian should so
valiantly risk himself. He evidently intended to take the trader's life,
but in such wise that no vengeance for his death should fall upon the
Cherokee nation. Abram Varney summoned all his courage, which was not
inconsiderable, and had been cultivated by the wild and uncertain
conditions of his life. Assured that he could do naught to hasten his
release, he awaited the event in a sort of stoical patience, dreading,
however, every motion, every sound, the least stir setting his expectant
nerves aquiver. Silence, quiescence, brought the disclosure earlier than
he had feared. "When I took the boy Jan Queetlee--why do I call him thus, instead of by
the name he has earned for himself, the noble Otasite of Tennessee
Town?" --the old chief began as deliberately, as disregardfully of the
surroundings as if seated under the boughs of one of the giant oaks on
the safe slopes of Chilhowee yonder--"when I took him away from the
braves who had overcome the South Carolina stationers, I owed him no
duty. He was puny and ill and white and despised! You British say the
Indian has no pity. A man's son or brother or father or mother has
claims upon him. Otasite was naught to me, a mere _eeankke_!" (a
captive). "I owed the child no duty. My love was voluntary. I gave it a
free gift; no duty! And he was little, and drooping, and meagre, and ill
all the time! But he grew; soon no such boy in the Cherokee nation, soon
hardly such a warrior in all the land--not even Otasite of Watauga, nor
yet Otasite of Eupharsee; perhaps at his age Oconostota excelled"
(Oconostota always was preeminently known as the "Great Warrior"). He
paused to shake his head and meditate on difficult comparisons and
instances of prowess. After an interval which, long enough, seemed to
the trembling trader illimitable, he recommenced abruptly: "Says the
Goweno long time ago to me, 'Is not there a white youth among you?' I
say, 'He is content; he has no white friends, it seems.' Says the Goweno
to me, 'Ah, ah, we must look into this!' and says no more." Colannah flung back his head and laughed so long and so loud that every
echo of the sarcastic guttural tones, striking back from the stone walls
of the cavern, smote Varney with as definite a shock as a blow. "And now," the Cherokee resumed, with a changed aspect and a pathetic
cadence, "I am an old man, and I lean upon Otasite. My sons are all
dead--one in the wars with the Muscogee and two slain by the Chickasaw. And the last he said to me, with his lingering latest breath, loath to
go and leave me desolate, 'But you have an adopted son, you have the
noble Otasite.' And now," his voice was firm again, "if I have him not,
I go too, and you go. We go together." "I will not advise him to quit the nation--never again!" cried Varney,
suddenly enlightened, fervently repudiating his interference. "Since you
disapprove, he shall not return to Carolina. He _cannot_ go without
me--my help; he could not find a place--a home. Bold and fine as he is
here, he would be strange there; he knows naught of the ways of the
colonists. He would be poor, despised, while here he has been like the
first, the best. His pride could never stoop to a life like a slave's;
his pride would break his heart. Let me undo the mischief I have
wrought; let me unsay the unthinking, foolish words I have spoken." It was perhaps with the faith that the artful trader could best turn the
young fellow's mind back to its wonted content, as his crafty arguments
had already so potently aroused this wild, new dissatisfaction, that
Colannah at last consented to liberate Varney for this essay, not
without a cogent reminder that he would be held responsible for its
failure. And indeed in recanting his former urgency, when he sought out
Otasite, Varney exerted himself to the utmost. "You are satisfied here. You know the life. Like me, you love it. If I,
who can choose, prefer it, why not you?" But Otasite shook his head. "When I talk to you of the colonies I speak as a man does of a dream,"
Varney continued. "It is something true and something false. I add here
and I let slip there to make out the connection, and give the symmetry
of truth to the picture. But did I ever tell you how they love money in
the colonies, how they cheat and strive and slave their lives away to
add to their store; how they reverence and worship the wealth of others
till it seems that a rich man can do no wrong--if he is rich enough? Did
I ever tell you this? The poor, they are despised for being poor, and
they are let to suffer. Here poverty is not permitted. If a man lose his
dwelling by fire, the town builds him another house. You know this. If a
man fail in his winter hunt, the others give of their abundance. Here
one is rated by his personal worth. Here the deed is held to be fine,
not the mere thing. Here you are valued as the great Otasite, and all
men give you honor for your courage. There you are Jan Queetlee, a
penniless clod, and all men despise you and pass you by. "[5]

But again Otasite shook his head. It was no spurious flare of ambition, ineffectual, illusory; no
discontented yearning for a different, a wider life that the trader's
ill-advised words had roused. That sentiment of loyalty to the British
government, which had never sought to claim Jan Queetlee as a subject,
seemed bred in his bone and born in his blood. Perhaps it was the stuff
of which long afterward the Tories of the Revolution were made. He could
not lift his hand against this aloof, indifferent fetich. And yet take
part against the Cherokees, whom he loved as they loved him! For with
his facilities for understanding the trend of the politics of the day he
could no longer blind himself to the approach of the war of the tribe
with the British government, which, indeed, came within the decade. The
sons of Colannah, slain in the cruel wars with other Indians, had been
to him like brothers, and in their loss he had felt his full and bitter
share of the grief of a common household. Even yet he and Colannah were
wont to sadly talk of them with that painful elimination of their names,
a mark of Indian reverence to the dead, substituting the euphemism "the
one who is gone," and linger for hours over the fire at night or on the
shady river-bank in sunlit afternoons, rehearsing their deeds and
recalling their traits, and repeating their sayings with that blending
of affectionate pride and sorrow that is the consolation of bereavement
when time has somewhat softened its pangs and made memory so dear. And
Colannah had been like a father--it seemed to Jan Queetlee as if he had
had no other father. He could not leave Colannah, old, desolate, and
alone. Yet the war was surely coming apace, as they both knew, a war
which already tore his heart in sunder, in which he could evade taking
part against his own--his own of both factions--only by going at once
and going far. He could decide no such weighty matter. At last he determined he would leave it to fate, to chance, showing how
truly a gambler his Indian training had made him. He would stake the
crisis on a game at chungke; if he won, as he told Varney, he would go
to Carolina, and take sides with neither faction; if he lost, he would
cast his future with the Cherokee nation. Varney, thoroughly uneasy, had come to feel a personal interest
involved. If Otasite quitted the country, he felt his life would hardly
be safe here, since the craft of Colannah had drawn from the
unsuspecting young fellow the details of the plan of removal to
Charlestown which he had proposed. And yet Varney himself was averse to
any change, unless it was indeed necessary. When put to the test he felt
he would rather live in the Cherokee nation than anywhere else in all
the world, and he valued his commerce with the tribe and his license
from the government, under duly approved bond and security, to conduct
that traffic in Tennessee Town and Tellico as naught else on earth. He
manifested so earnest and genuine a desire to repair the damage of his
ill-starred suggestion that Colannah, showing his age in his haste and
his tremulousness and excitement, disclosed to him in a flutter of
triumphant glee that he had a spell to work which naught could
withstand--a draught from Herbert's Spring to offer to Otasite. Thither
some fifty miles he had dispatched a runner for a jar of the magic
water, and after drinking of it Otasite could not quit for seven years
the Cherokee nation even if he would. It was in the council-house that the mystic beverage was quaffed. There
had been guests--head men from Great Tellico and Citico--during the
afternoon, received in secret conclave, and now that their deliberations
were concluded and they were gone, Otasite, not admitted to the council,
being one of those warriors who did the fighting of the battles devised
by the "beloved men," strolled into the deserted, dome-like place. Its
walls, plastered with red clay, were yet more ruddy for a cast of the
westering sun. The building was large enough to accommodate several
hundred people, and around the walls were cane seats, deftly constructed
and artificially whitened, making, according to an old writer, "very
genteel settees or couches." Tired with the stress of mental depression
and anxiety as physical effort could not tame him, and vaguely prescient
of evil, Otasite had flung himself down on one of these, which was
spread with dressed panther-skins, his hands clasped under his head, his
scalp-lock of two auburn curls dangling over them. Through the tall narrow doorway the autumnal landscape was visible,
blazing with all the fervors of summer; the mountains, however, were
more softly blue, the sunlight of a richer glister; the river, now
steel, now silver, now amber, reflected the atmosphere as a sensitive
soul reflects the moods of those most dear; the forests, splendid with
color, showed the lavish predominance of the rich reds characteristic of
the Chilhowee woods; a dreamlike haze over all added a vague ideality
that made the scene like some fondest memory or a glamourous forecast. "_Akoo-e-a!_" (summer yet!) said Colannah, his eyes too on the scene, as
he sat on a buffalo-rug in the centre of the floor drawing in the last
sweet fragrant breaths from his long-stemmed pipe, curiously wrought of
stone, for in the manufacture of these pipes the Cherokees of that day
were said to excel all other Indians. The young Briton experienced no
mawkish pang to note that it was ornamented at one end by a dangling
scalp, greatly treasured, the interior of the skin painted red for its
preservation. He had, in fact, a pipe of his own with a scalp much like
it. Indeed, his trophy was a fine specimen, and it had been a feat to
take it, for it had once covered a hot Chickasaw head. "_Akoo-e-a!_ the day is warm!" remarked Colannah. He lifted his storied
pipe, and with its long stem silently motioned to a young Indian woman,
indicating a great jar of water. She quickly filled one of those quaint
bowls, or cups, of the Cherokee manufacture, and advanced with it to
Otasite; but the proffer was in the nature of an interruption of his
troubled thoughts, and he irritably waved her away. "I am displeased with you," said Colannah sternly, lifting his dark,
deeply sunken eyes to where the "Man-killer" lay at full length on the
cane settee. "You set me aside. You have no thoughts for me--no words. Yet you can talk when you go to the trading-house. You have words and to
spare for the trader. You can drink with him. You can sing, 'Drink with
me a cup of wine.'" He lifted his raucous old voice in ludicrous
travesty of the favorite catch, for sometimes the two Britons, so
incongruous in point of age, education, sentiment, and occupation,
cemented their bond as compatriots by carousing together in a mild way. But this ebullition of temper had naught of the ludicrous in Jan
Queetlee's estimation. He was pierced to the heart. "_Aketohta! "_ (Father!) he cried reproachfully. He had sprung to his
feet, and stood looking down at the old chief, who would not look at
him, but kept his eyes on the landscape without, now and then drawing a
long, lingering whiff from his pipe. "_Aketohta_! I have no thought for _you_!--who alone have taken thought
for me! I have words for the trader and silence for _you_! You say keen
things, and you know they are not true! You know that I had rather drink
water with you than wine with him. I am not thirsty; but since it is you
who offer it"--His expression changed; he broke into sudden pleasant
laughter, and with a rollicking stave of the song, "Drink with me a cup
of wine," he caught the bowl from the girl's hand and drained it at a
draught. "_Seohsta-quo_!" 