

E-text prepared by Lionel Sear



NOUGHTS AND CROSSES

Stories, Studies and Sketches

by

ARTHUR THOMAS QUILLER-COUCH (Q)







Two of the following stories were first published in _Longman's
Magazine_; the rest are selected from a number contributed to _The
Speaker_. For permission to reprint them I must sincerely thank the
two Editors. Q. TO MY WIFE. CONTENTS. The Omnibus. Fortunio. The Outlandish Ladies. Statement of Gabriel Foot, Highwayman. The Return of Joanna. Psyche. The Countess of Bellarmine. A Cottage in Troy--

     I. A. Happy Voyage. II. These-An'-That's Wife. III. "Doubles" and Quits. IV. The Boy by the Beach. Old Aeson. Stories of Bleakirk--

     I. The Affair of Bleakirk-on-Sands. II. The Constant Post-Boy. A Dark Mirror. The Small People. The Mayor of Gantick. The Doctor's Foundling. The Gifts of Feodor Himkoff. Yorkshire Dick. The Carol. The Paradise of Choice. Beside the Bee Hives. The Magic Shadow. NOUGHTS AND CROSSES. THE OMNIBUS. It was not so much a day as a burning, fiery furnace. The roar of
London's traffic reverberated under a sky of coppery blue; the
pavements threw out waves of heat, thickened with the reek of
restaurants and perfumery shops; and dust became cinders, and the
wearing of flesh a weariness. Streams of sweat ran from the bellies
of 'bus-horses when they halted. Men went up and down with
unbuttoned waistcoats, turned into drinking-bars, and were no sooner
inside than they longed to be out again, and baking in an ampler
oven. Other men, who had given up drinking because of the expense,
hung about the fountains in Trafalgar Square and listened to the
splash of running water. It was the time when London is supposed to
be empty; and when those who remain in town feel there is not room
for a soul more. We were eleven inside the omnibus when it pulled up at Charing Cross,
so that legally there was room for just one more. I had travelled
enough in omnibuses to know my fellow-passengers by heart--
a governess with some sheets of music in her satchel; a minor actress
going to rehearsal; a woman carrying her incurable complaint for the
hundredth time to the hospital; three middle-aged city clerks; a
couple of reporters with weak eyes and low collars; an old
loose-cheeked woman exhaling patchouli; a bald-headed man with hairy
hands, a violent breast-pin, and the indescribable air of a
matrimonial agent. Not a word passed. We were all failures in life,
and could not trouble to dissemble it, in that heat. Moreover, we
were used to each other, as types if not as persons, and had lost
curiosity. So we sat listless, dispirited, drawing difficult breath
and staring vacuously. The hope we shared in common--that nobody
would claim the vacant seat--was too obvious to be discussed. But at Charing Cross the twelfth passenger got in--a boy with a
stick, and a bundle in a blue handkerchief. He was about thirteen;
bound for the docks, we could tell at a glance, to sail on his first
voyage; and, by the way he looked about, we could tell as easily that
in stepping outside Charing Cross Station he had set foot on London
stones for the first time. When we pulled up, he was standing on the
opposite pavement with dazed eyes like a hare's, wondering at the new
world--the hansoms, the yelling news-boys, the flower-women, the
crowd pushing him this way and that, the ugly shop-fronts, the hurry
and stink and din of it all. Then, hailing our 'bus, he started to
run across--faltered--almost dropped his bundle--was snatched by our
conductor out of the path of a running hansom, and hauled on board. His eyelids were pink and swollen; but he was not crying, though he
wanted to. Instead, he took a great gulp, as he pushed between our
knees to his seat, and tried to look brave as a lion. The passengers turned an incurious, half-resentful stare upon him,
and then repented. I think that more than one of us wanted to speak,
but dared not. It was not so much the little chap's look. But to the knot of his
sea-kit there was tied a bunch of cottage-flowers--sweet williams,
boy's love, love-lies-bleeding, a few common striped carnations, and
a rose or two--and the sight and smell of them in that frowsy 'bus
were like tears on thirsty eyelids. We had ceased to pity what we
were, but the heart is far withered that cannot pity what it has
been; and it made us shudder to look on the young face set towards
the road along which we had travelled so far. Only the minor actress
dropped a tear; but she was used to expressing emotion, and half-way
down the Strand the 'bus stopped and she left us. The woman with an incurable complaint touched me on the knee. "Speak to him," she whispered. But the whisper did not reach, for I was two hundred miles away, and
occupied in starting off to school for the first time. I had two
shillings in my pocket; and at the first town where the coach baited
I was to exchange these for a coco-nut and a clasp-knife. Also, I
was to break the knife in opening the nut, and the nut, when opened,
would be sour. A sense of coming evil, therefore, possessed me. "Why don't you speak to him?" The boy glanced up, not catching her words, but suspicious: then
frowned and looked defiant. "Ah," she went on in the same whisper, "it's only the young that I
pity. Sometimes, sir--for my illness keeps me much awake--I lie at
night in my lodgings and listen, and the whole of London seems filled
with the sound of children's feet running. Even by day I can hear
them, at the back of the uproar--"

The matrimonial agent grunted and rose, as we halted at the top of
Essex Street. I saw him slip a couple of half-crowns into the
conductor's hand: and he whispered something, jerking his head back
towards the interior of the 'bus. The boy was brushing his eyes,
under pretence of putting his cap forward; and by the time he stole a
look around to see if anyone had observed, we had started again. I pretended to stare out of the window, but marked the wet smear on
his hand as he laid it on his lap. In less than a minute it was my turn to alight. Unlike the
matrimonial agent, I had not two half-crowns to spare; but, catching
the sick woman's eye, forced up courage to nod and say--

"Good luck, my boy." "Good day, sir." A moment after I was in the hot crowd, whose roar rolled east and
west for miles. And at the back of it, as the woman had said, in
street and side-lane and blind-alley, I heard the footfall of a
multitude more terrible than an army with banners, the ceaseless
pelting feet of children--of Whittingtons turning and turning again. FORTUNIO. At Tregarrick Fair they cook a goose in twenty-two different ways;
and as no one who comes to the fair would dream of eating any other
food, you may fancy what a reek of cooking fills the narrow grey
street soon after mid-day. As a boy, I was always given a holiday to go to the goose-fair; and
it was on my way thither across the moors, that I first made
Fortunio's acquaintance. I wore a new pair of corduroys, that smelt
outrageously--and squeaked, too, as I trotted briskly along the bleak
high road; for I had a bright shilling to spend, and it burnt a hole
in my pocket. I was planning my purchases, when I noticed, on a
windy eminence of the road ahead, a man's figure sharply defined
against the sky. He was driving a flock of geese, so slowly that I soon caught him up;
and such a man or such geese I had never seen. To begin with, his
rags were worse than a scarecrow's. In one hand he carried a long
staff; the other held a small book close under his nose, and his lean
shoulders bent over as he read in it. It was clear, from the man's
undecided gait, that all his eyes were for this book. Only he would
look up when one of his birds strayed too far on the turf that lined
the highway, and would guide it back to the stones again with his
staff. As for the geese, they were utterly draggle-tailed and
stained with travel, and waddled, every one, with so woe-begone a
limp that I had to laugh as I passed. The man glanced up, set his forefinger between the pages of his book,
and turned on me a long sallow face and a pair of the most beautiful
brown eyes in the world. "Little boy," he said, in a quick foreign way--"rosy little boy. You laugh at my geese, eh?" No doubt I stared at him like a ninny, for he went on--

"Little wide-mouthed Cupidon, how you gaze! Also, by the way, how
you smell!" "It's my corduroys," said I. "Then I discommend your corduroys. But I approve your laugh. Laugh again--only at the right matter: laugh at this--"

And, opening his book again, he read a long passage as I walked
beside him; but I could make neither head nor tail of it. "That is from the 'Sentimental Journey,' by Laurence Sterne, the most
beautiful of your English wits. Ah, he is more than French! Laugh at it." It was rather hard to laugh thus to order; but suddenly he set me the
example, showing two rows of very white teeth, and fetching from his
hollow chest a sound of mirth so incongruous with the whole aspect of
the man, that I began to grin too. "That's right; but be louder. Make the sounds that you made just
now--"

He broke off sharply, being seized with an ugly fit of coughing, that
forced him to halt and lean on his staff for a while. When he
recovered we walked on together after the geese, he talking all the
way in high-flown sentences that were Greek to me, and I stealing a
look every now and then at his olive face, and half inclined to take
to my heels and run. We came at length to the ridge where the road dives suddenly into
Tregarrick. The town lies along a narrow vale, and looking down, we
saw flags waving along the street and much smoke curling from the
chimneys, and heard the church-bells, the big drum, and the confused
mutterings and hubbub of the fair. The sun--for the morning was
still fresh--did not yet pierce to the bottom of the valley, but fell
on the hillside opposite, where cottage-gardens in parallel strips
climbed up from the town to the moorland beyond. "What is that?" asked the goose-driver, touching my arm and pointing
to a dazzling spot on the slope opposite. "That's the sun on the windows of Gardener Tonken's glass-house." "Eh?--does he live there?" "He's dead, and the garden's 'to let;' you can just see the board
from here. But he didn't live there, of course. People don't live
in glass-houses; only plants." "That's a pity, little boy, for their souls' sakes. It reminds me of
a story--by the way, do you know Latin? No? Well, listen to this:--
if I can sell my geese to-day, perhaps I will hire that glass-house,
and you shall come there on half holidays, and learn Latin. Now run
ahead and spend your money." I was glad to escape, and in the bustle of the fair quickly forgot my
friend. But late in the afternoon, as I had my eyes glued to a
peep-show, I heard a voice behind me cry "Little boy!" and turning,
saw him again. He was without his geese. "I have sold them," he said, "for 5 pounds; and I have taken the
glass-house. The rent is only 3 pounds a year, and I shan't live
longer, so that leaves me money to buy books. I shall feed on the
snails in the garden, making soup of them, for there is a beautiful
stove in the glass-house. When is your next half-holiday?" "On Saturday." "Very well. I am going away to buy books; but I shall be back by
Saturday, and then you are to come and learn Latin." It may have been fear or curiosity, certainly it was no desire for
learning, that took me to Gardener Tonken's glass-house next Saturday
afternoon. The goose-driver was there to welcome me. "Ah, wide-mouth," he cried; "I knew you would be here. Come and see
my library." He showed me a pile of dusty, tattered volumes, arranged on an old
flower-stand. "See," said he, "no sorrowful books, only Aristophanes and Lucian,
Horace, Rabelais, Moliere, Voltaire's novels, 'Gil Blas,'
'Don Quixote,' Fielding, a play or two of Shakespeare, a volume or so
of Swift, Prior's Poems, and Sterne--that divine Sterne! And a Latin
Grammar and Virgil for you, little boy. First, eat some snails." But this I would not. So he pulled out two three-legged stools, and
very soon I was trying to fix my wandering wits and decline _mensa_. After this I came on every half-holiday for nearly a year. Of course
the tenant of the glass-house was a nine days' wonder in the town. A crowd of boys and even many grown men and women would assemble and
stare into the glass-house while we worked; but Fortunio (he gave no
other name) seemed rather to like it than not. Only when some
wiseacres approached my parents with hints that my studies with a
ragged man who lived on snails and garden-stuff were uncommonly like
traffic with the devil, Fortunio, hearing the matter, walked over one
morning to our home and had an interview with my mother. I don't
know what was said; but I know that afterwards no resistance was made
to my visits to the glass-house. They came to an end in the saddest and most natural way. One September afternoon I sat construing to Fortunio out of the first
book of Virgil's "Aeneid"--so far was I advanced; and coming to the
passage--

     "Tum breviter Dido, vultum demissa, profatur". . . I had just rendered _vultum demissa_ "with downcast eyes," when the
book was snatched from me and hurled to the far end of the
glass-house. Looking up, I saw Fortunio in a transport of passion. "Fool--little fool! Will you be like all the commentators? Will you
forget what Virgil has said and put your own nonsense into his golden
mouth?" He stepped across, picked up the book, found the passage, and then
turning back a page or so, read out--

     "Saepta armis _solioque alte subnixa_ resedit." "_Alte! Alte!_" he screamed: "Dido sat on high: Aeneas stood at the
foot of her throne. Listen to this:--'Then Dido, bending down her
gaze . . . '" He went on translating. A rapture took him, and the sun beat in
through the glass roof, and lit up his eyes. He was transfigured;
his voice swelled and sank with passion, swelled again, and then, at
the words--

                  "Quae te tam laeta tulerunt
     Saecula? Qui tanti talem genuere parentes?" It broke, the Virgil dropped from his hand, and sinking down on his
stool he broke into a wild fit of sobbing. "Oh, why did I read it? Why did I read this sorrowful book?" And then checking his sobs, he put a handkerchief to his mouth, took
it away, and looked up at me with dry eyes. "Go away, little one, Don't come again: I am going to die very soon
now." I stole out, awed and silent, and went home. But the picture of him
kept me awake that night, and early in the morning I dressed and ran
off to the glass-house. He was still sitting as I had left him. "Why have you come?" he asked, harshly. "I have been coughing. I am going to die." "Then I'll fetch a doctor." "No." "A clergyman?" "No." But I ran for the doctor. Fortunio lived on for a week after this, and at length consented to
see a clergyman. I brought the vicar, and was told to leave them
alone together and come back in an hour's time. When I returned, Fortunio was stretched quietly on the rough bed we
had found for him, and the Vicar, who knelt beside it, was speaking
softly in his ear. As I entered on tiptoe, I heard--

". . . in that kingdom shall be no weeping--"

"Oh, Parson," interrupted Fortunio, "that's bad. I'm so bored with
laughing that the good God might surely allow a few tears." The parish buried him, and his books went to pay for the funeral. But I kept the Virgil; and this, with the few memories that I impart
to you, is all that remains to me of Fortunio. THE OUTLANDISH LADIES. A mile beyond the fishing village, as you follow the road that climbs
inland towards Tregarrick, the two tall hills to right and left of
the coombe diverge to make room for a third, set like a wedge in the
throat of the vale. Here the road branches into two, with a
sign-post at the angle; and between the sign-post and the grey scarp
of the hill there lies an acre of waste ground that the streams have
turned into a marsh. This is Loose-heels. Long before I learnt the
name's meaning, in the days when I trod the lower road with slate and
satchel, this spot was a favourite of mine--but chiefly in July, when
the monkey-flower was out, and the marsh aflame with it. There was a spell in that yellow blossom with the wicked blood-red
spots, that held me its mere slave. Also the finest grew in
desperate places. So that, day after day, when July came round, my
mother would cry shame on my small-clothes, and my father take
exercise upon them; and all the month I went tingling. They were
pledged to "break me of it"; but they never did. Now they are dead,
and the flowers--the flowers last always, as Victor Hugo says. When, after many years, I revisited the valley, the stream had
carried the seeds half a mile below Loose-heels, and painted its
banks with monkey-blossoms all the way. But the finest, I was glad
to see, still inhabited the marsh. Now, it is rare to find this plant growing wild; for, in fact, it is
a garden flower. And its history here is connected with a bit of mud
wall, ruined and covered with mosses and ragwort, that still pushed
up from the swampy ground when I knew it, and had once been part of a
cottage. How a cottage came here, and how its inhabitants entered
and went out, are questions past guessing; for the marsh hemmed it in
on three sides, and the fourth is a slope of hill fit to break your
neck. But there was the wall, and here is the story. One morning, near the close of the last century, a small child came
running down to the village with news that the cottage, which for ten
years had stood empty, was let; there was smoke coming out at the
chimney, and an outlandish lady walking in the garden. Being
catechised, he added that the lady wore bassomy bows in her cap, and
had accosted him in a heathen tongue that caused him to flee, fearing
worse things. This being told, two women, rulers of their homes,
sent their husbands up the valley to spy, who found the boy had
spoken truth. Smoke was curling from the chimney, and in the garden the lady was
still moving about--a small yellow creature, with a wrinkled but
pleasant face, white curls, and piercing black eyes. She wore a
black gown, cut low in the neck, a white kerchief, and bassomy (or
purplish) bows in her cap as the child had stated. Just at present
she was busy with a spade, and showed an ankle passing neat for her
age, as she turned up the neglected mould. When the men plucked up
gallantry enough to offer their services, she smiled and thanked them
in broken English, but said that her small forces would serve. So they went back to their wives; and their wives, recollecting that
the cottage formed part of the glebe, went off to inquire of Parson
Morth, "than whom," as the tablet to his memory relates, "none was
better to castigate the manners of the age." He was a burly,
hard-riding ruffian, and the tale of his great fight with Gipsy Ben
in Launceston streets is yet told on the countryside. Parson Morth wanted to know if he couldn't let his cottage to an
invalid lady and her sister without consulting every wash-mouth in
the parish. "Aw, so there's two!" said one of them, nodding her head. "But tell
us, Parson dear, ef 'tes fitty for two unmated women to come
trapesing down in a po'shay at dead o' night, when all modest flesh
be in their bed-gowns?" Upon this the Parson's language became grossly indelicate, after the
fashion of those days. He closed his peroration by slamming the
front door on his visitors; and they went down the hill "blushing"
(as they said) "all over, at his intimate words." So nothing more was known of the strangers. But it was noticed that
Parson Morth, when he passed the cottage on his way to meet or
market, would pull up his mare, and, if the outlandish lady were
working in the garden, would doff his hat respectfully. "_Bon jour, Mamzelle Henriette_"--this was all the French the Parson
knew. And the lady would smile back and answer in English. "Good-morning, Parson Morth." "And Mamzelle Lucille?" "Ah, just the same, my God! All the day stare--stare. If you had
known her before!--so be-eautiful, so gifted, _si bien elevee!_
It is an affliction: but I think she loves the flowers." And the Parson rode on with a lump in his throat. So two years passed, during which Mademoiselle Henriette tilled her
garden and turned it into a paradise. There were white roses on the
south wall, and in the beds mignonette and boy's-love, pansies,
carnations, gillyflowers, sweet-williams, and flaming great
hollyhocks; above all, the yellow monkey-blossoms that throve so well
in the marshy soil. And all that while no one had caught so much as
a glimpse of her sister, Lucille. Also how they lived was a marvel. The outlandish lady bought neither fish, nor butcher's meat, nor
bread. To be sure, the Parson sent down a pint of milk every morning
from his dairy; the can was left at the garden-gate and fetched at
noon, when it was always found neatly scrubbed, with the price of the
milk inside. Besides, there was a plenty of vegetables in the
garden. But this was not enough to avert the whisper of witchcraft. And one
day, when Parson Morth had ridden off to the wrestling matches at
Exeter, the blow fell. Farmer Anthony of Carne--great-grandfather of the present farmer--had
been losing sheep. Now, not a man in the neighbourhood would own to
having stolen them; so what so easy to suspect as witchcraft? Who so
fatally open to suspicion as the two outlandish sisters? Men, wives,
and children formed a procession. The month was July; and Mademoiselle Henriette was out in the garden,
a bunch of monkey-flowers in her hand, when they arrived. She turned
all white, and began to tremble like a leaf. But when the spokesman
stated the charge, there was another tale. "It was an infamy. Steal! She would have them know that she and her
sister were of good West Indian family--_tres bien elevees._"
Then followed a torrent of epithets. They were _laches-poltrons_. Why were they not fighting Bonaparte, instead of sending their wives
up to the cliffs, dressed in red cloaks, to scare him away, while
they bullied weak women? They pushed past her. The cottage held two rooms on the ground
floor. In the kitchen, which they searched first, they found only
some garden-stuff and a few snails salted in a pan. There was a door
leading to the inner room, and the foremost had his hand on it, when
Mademoiselle Henriette rushed before him, and flung herself at his
feet. The yellow monkey-blossoms were scattered and trampled on the
floor. "_Ah--non, non, messieurs! Je vous prie--Elle est si--si horrible!_"

They flung her down, and pushed on. The invalid sister lay in an arm-chair with her back to the doorway,
a bunch of monkey-flowers beside her. As they burst in, she started,
laid both hands on the arms of her chair, and turned her face slowly
upon them. She was a leper! They gave one look at that featureless face, with the white scales
shining upon it, and ran back with their arms lifted before their
eyes. One woman screamed. Then a dead stillness fell on the place,
and the cottage was empty. On the following Saturday Parson Morth walked down to the inn, just
ten minutes after stalling his mare. He strode into the tap-room in
his muddy boots, took two men by the neck, knocked their skulls
together, and then demanded to hear the truth. "Very well," he said, on hearing the tale; "to-morrow I march every
man Jack of you up to the valley, if it's by the scruff of your
necks, and in the presence of both of those ladies--of _both_, mark
you--you shall kneel down and ask them to come to church. I don't
care if I empty the building. Your fathers (who were men, not curs)
built the south transept for those same poor souls, and cut a slice
in the chancel arch through which they might see the Host lifted. That's where _you_ sit, Jim Trestrail, churchwarden; and by the Lord
Harry, they shall have your pew." He marched them up the very next morning. He knocked, but no one
answered. After waiting a while, he put his shoulder against the
door, and forced it in. There was no one in the kitchen. In the inner room one sister sat in
the arm-chair. It was Mademoiselle Henriette, cold and stiff. Her dead hands were stained with earth. At the back of the cottage they came on a freshly-formed mound, and
stuck on the top of it a piece of slate, such as children erect over
a thrush's grave. On it was scratched--

                            Ci-Git
                           Lucille,
                        Jadis si Belle;
          Dont dix-neuf Jeunes Hommes, Planteurs de
                        Saint Domingue. ont demande la Main. Mais La Petite ne Voulait Pas. R.I.P. This is the story of Loose-heels, otherwise Lucille's. STATEMENT OF GABRIEL FOOT, HIGHWAYMAN. The jury re-entered the court after half an hour's consultation. It all comes back to me as vividly as though I stood in the dock at
this very moment. The dense fog that hung over the well of the
court; the barristers' wigs that bobbed up through it, and were
drowned again in that seething cauldron; the rays of the guttering
candles (for the murder-trial had lasted far into the evening) that
loomed through it and wore a sickly halo; the red robes and red face
of my lord judge opposite that stared through it and outshone the
candles; the black crowd around, seen mistily; the voice of the usher
calling "Silence! "; the shuffling of the jurymen's feet; the pallor
on their faces as I leant forward and tried to read the verdict on
them; the very smell of the place, compounded of fog, gaol-fever, the
close air, and the dinners eaten earlier in the day by the crowd--all
this strikes home upon me as sharply as it then did, after the numb
apathy of waiting. As the jury huddled into their places I stole a look at my counsel. He paused for a moment from his task of trimming a quill, shot a
quick glance at the foreman's face, and then went on cutting as
coolly as ever. "Gentlemen of the jury"--it was the judge's voice--"are you agreed
upon your verdict?" "We are." "Do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty?" "_Not guilty_." It must have been full a minute, as I leant back clutching the rail
in front of me, before I saw anything but the bleared eyes of the
candles, or heard anything but a hoarse murmur from the crowd. But as soon as the court ceased to heave, and I could stare about me,
I looked towards my counsel again. He was still shaping his pen. He made no motion to come forward and
shake hands over my acquittal, for which he had worked untiringly all
day. He did not even offer to speak. He just looked up, nodded
carelessly, and turned to his junior beside him; but in that glance I
had read something which turned my heart cold, then sick, within me,
and from that moment my hatred of the man was as deep as hell. In the fog outside I got clear of the gaping crowd, but the chill of
the night after that heated court pierced my very bones. I had on
the clothes I had been taken in. It was June then, and now it was
late in October. I remember that on the day when they caught me I
wore my coat open for coolness. Four months and a half had gone out
of my life. Well, I had money enough in my pocket to get a
greatcoat; but I must put something warm inside me first, to get out
the chill that cursed lawyer had laid on my heart. I had purposely chosen the by-lanes of the town, but I remembered a
certain tavern--the "Lamb and Flag"--which lay down a side alley. Presently the light from its windows struck across the street, ahead. I pushed open the door and entered. The small bar was full of people newly come from the court, and
discussing the trial in all its bearings. In the babel I heard a
dozen different opinions given in as many seconds, and learnt enough,
too, to make me content with the jury I had had. But the warmth of
the place was pleasant, and I elbowed my way forward to the counter. There was a woman standing by the door as I entered, who looked
curiously at me for a moment, then turned to nudge a man at her side,
and whisper. The whisper grew as I pressed forward, and before I
could reach the counter a hand was laid on my shoulder from behind. I turned. "Well?" said I. It was a heavy-looking drover that had touched me. "Are you the chap that was tried to-day for murder of Jeweller Todd?" he asked. "Well?" said I again, but I could see the crowd falling back, as if I
was a leper, at his question. "Well? 'Taint well then, as I reckon, to be making so free with
respectable folk." There was a murmur of assent from the mouths turned towards me. The landlord came forward from behind the bar. "I was acquitted," I urged defiantly. "Ac-quitted!" said he, with big scorn in the syllables. "Hear im
now--'ac-quitted!' Landlord, is this a respectable house?" The landlord gave his verdict. "H'out yer goes, and damn yer impudence!" I looked round, but their faces were all dead against me. "H'out yer goes!" repeated the landlord. "And think yerself lucky it
aint worse," added the drover. With no further defence I slunk out into the night once more. A small crowd of children (Heaven knows whence or how they gathered)
followed me up the court and out into the street. Their numbers
swelled as I went on, and some began to hoot and pelt me; but when I
gained the top of the hill, and a lonelier district, I turned and
struck among them with my stick. It did my heart good to hear their
screams. After that I was let alone, and tramped forward past the scattered
houses, towards the open country and the moors. Up here there was
scarcely any fog, but I could see it, by the rising moon, hanging
like a shroud over the town below. The next town was near upon
twelve miles off, but I do not remember that I thought of getting so
far. I could not have thought at all, in fact, or I should hardly
have taken the high-road upon which the jeweller had been stopped and
murdered. There was a shrewd wind blowing, and I shivered all over; but the
cold at my heart was worse, and my hate of the man who had set it
there grew with every step. I thought of the four months and more
which parted the two lives of Gabriel Foot, and what I should make of
the new one. I had my chance again--a chance gained for me beyond
hope by that counsel but for whom I should be sleeping to-night in
the condemned cell; a chance, and a good chance, but for that same
cursed lawyer. Ugh! how cold it was, and how I hated _him_ for it! There was a little whitewashed cottage on the edge of the moorland
just after the hedgerows ceased--the last house before the barren
heath began, standing a full three hundred yards from any other
dwelling. Its front faced the road, and at the back an outhouse and
a wretched garden jutted out on the waste land. There was a light in
each of its windows tonight, and as I passed down the road I heard
the dismal music of a flute. Perhaps it was this that jogged my thoughts and woke them up to my
present pass. At any rate, I had not gone more than twenty yards
before I turned and made for the door. The people might give me a
night's lodging in the outhouse; at any rate, they would not refuse a
crust to stay the fast which I had not broken since the morning. I tapped gently with my knuckles on the door, and listened. I waited five minutes, and no one answered. The flute still
continued its melancholy tune; it was evidently in the hands of a
learner, for the air (a dispiriting one enough at the best) kept
breaking off suddenly and repeating itself. But the performer had
patience, and the sound never ceased for more than two seconds at a
time. Besides this, nothing could be heard. The blinds were drawn
in all the windows. The glow of the candles through them was
cheerful enough, but nothing could be seen of the house inside. I knocked a second time, and a third, with the same result. Finally, tired of this, I pushed open the low gate which led into the
garden behind, and stole round to the back of the cottage. Here, too, the window on the ground floor was lit up behind its
blinds, but that of the room above was shuttered. There was a hole
in the shutter, however, where a knot of the wood had fallen out, and
a thin shaft of light stretched across the blackness and buried
itself in a ragged yew-tree at the end of the garden. From the
loudness of the sounds I judged this to be the room where the
flute-playing was going on. The crackling of my footsteps on the
thin soil did not disturb the performer, so I gathered a handful of
earth and pitched it up against the pane. The flute stopped for a
minute or so, but just as I was expecting to see the shutter open,
went on again: this time the air was "Pretty Polly Oliver." I crept back again, and began to hammer more loudly at the door. "Come," said I, "whoever this may be inside, I'll see for myself at
any rate," and with that I lifted the latch and gave the door a heavy
kick. It flew open quite easily (it had not even been locked), and I
found myself in a low kitchen. The room was empty, but the relics of
supper lay on the deal table, and the remains of what must have been
a noble fire were still smouldering on the hearthstone. A crazy,
rusty blunderbuss hung over the fireplace. This, with a couple of
rough chairs, a broken bacon-rack, and a small side-table, completed
the furniture of the place. No; for as I sat down to make a meal off
the remnants of supper, something lying on the lime-ash floor beneath
this side-table caught my eye. I stepped forward and picked it up. It was a barrister's wig. "This is a queer business," thought I; and I laid it on the table
opposite me as I went on with my supper. It was a "gossan" wig, as
we call it in our parts; a wig grown yellow and rusty with age and
wear. It looked so sly and wicked as it lay there, and brought back
the events of the day so sharply that a queer dread took me of being
discovered with it. I pulled out my pistol, loaded it (they had
given me back both the powder and pistol found on me when I was
taken), and laid it beside my plate. This done, I went on with my
supper--it was an excellent cold capon--and all the time the flute
up-stairs kept toot-tootling without stopping, except to change the
tune. It gave me "Hearts of Oak," "Why, Soldiers, why?" "Like Hermit
Poor," and "Come, Lasses and Lads," before I had fairly cleared the
dish. "And now," thought I, "I have had a good supper; but there are still
three things to be done. In the first place I want drink, in the
second I want a bed, and in the third I want to thank this kind
person, whoever he is, for his hospitality. I'm not going to begin
life No. 2 with housebreaking." I rose, slipped the pistol into my tail-pocket, and followed the
sound up the ramshackle stairs. My footsteps made such a racket on
their old timbers as fairly to frighten me, but it never disturbed
the flute-player. He had harked back again to "Like Hermit Poor" by
this time, and the dolefulness of it was fit to make the dead cry
out, but he went whining on until I reached the head of the stairs
and struck a rousing knock on the door. The playing stopped. "Come in," said a cheery voice; but it gave me
no cheerfulness. Instead of that, it sent all the comfort of my
supper clean out of me, as I opened the door and saw _him_ sitting
there. There he was, the man who had saved my neck that day, and whom most I
hated in the world, sitting before a snug fire, with his flute on his
knee, a glass of port wine at his elbow, and looking so comfortable,
with that knowing light in his grey eyes, that I could have killed
him where he sat. "Oh, it's you, is it?" he said, just the very least bit surprised and
no more. "Come in." I stood in the doorway hesitating. "Don't stay letting in that monstrous draught, man; but sit down. You'll find the bottle on the table and a glass on the shelf." I poured out a glassful and drank it off. The stuff was rare (I can
remember its trick on the tongue to this day), but somehow it did not
drive the cold out of my heart. I took another glass, and sat
sipping it and staring from the fire to my companion. He had taken up the flute again, and was blowing a few deep notes out
of it, thoughtfully enough. He was a small, squarely-built man, with
a sharp ruddy face like a frozen pippin, heavy grey eyebrows, and a
mouth like a trap when it was not pursed up for that everlasting
flute. As he sat there with his wig off, the crown of his bald head
was fringed with an obstinate-looking patch of hair, the colour of a
badger's. My amazement at finding him here at this hour, and alone,
was lost in my hatred of the man as I saw the depths of complacent
knowledge in his face. I felt that I must kill him sooner or later,
and the sooner the better. Presently he laid down his flute again and spoke:--

"I scarcely expected you." I grunted something in answer. "But I might have known something was up, if I'd only paid attention
to my flute. It and I are not in harmony to-night. It doesn't like
the secrets I've been blowing into it; it has heard a lot of queer
things in its time, but it's an innocent-minded flute for all that,
and I'm afraid that what I've told it to-night is a point beyond what
it's prepared to go." "I take it, it knows a damned deal too much," growled I. He looked at me sharply for an instant, rose, whistled a bar or two
of "Like Hermit Poor," reached down a couple of clay pipes from the
shelf, filled one for himself, and gravely handed the other with the
tobacco to me. "Beyond what it is prepared to go," he echoed quietly, sinking back
in his chair and puffing at the pipe. "It's a nice point that we
have been discussing together, my flute and I, and I won't say but
that I've got the worst of it. By the way, what do you mean to do
now that you have a fresh start?" Now I had not tasted tobacco for over four months, and its effect
upon my wits was surprising. It seemed to oil my thoughts till they
worked without a hitch, and I saw my plan of action marked out quite
plainly before me. "Do you want to know the first step of all?" I asked. "To be sure; the first step at any rate determines the direction." "Well then," said I, very steadily, and staring into his face,
"the first step of all is that I am going to kill you." "H'm," said he after a bit, and I declare that not so much as an
eyelash of the man shook, "I thought as much. I guessed _that_ when
you came into the room. And what next?" "Time enough then to think of 'what next,'" I answered; for though I
was set upon blowing his brains out, I longed for him to blaze out
into a passion and warm up my blood for the job. "Pardon me," he said, as coolly as might be, "that would be the very
worst time to think of it. For, just consider: in the first place
you will already be committed to your way of life, and secondly, if I
know anything about you, you would be far too much flurried for any
thought worth the name." There was a twinkle of frosty humour in his eye as he said this, and
in the silence which followed I could hear him chuckling to himself,
and tasting the words over again as though they were good wine. I sat fingering my pistol and waiting for him to speak again. When he did so, it was with another dry chuckle and a long puff of
tobacco smoke. "As you say, I know a deal too much. Shall I tell you how much?" "Yes, you may if you'll be quick about it." "Very well, then, I will. Do you mind passing the bottle? Thank you. I probably know not only too much, but a deal more than
you guess. First let us take the case for the Crown. The jeweller is
travelling by coach at night over the moors. He has one postillion
only, Roger Tallis by name, and by character shady. The jeweller has
money (he was a niggardly fool to take only one postillion), and
carries a diamond of great, or rather of an enormous and notable
value (he was a bigger fool to take this). In the dark morning two
horses come galloping back, frightened and streaming with sweat. A search party goes out, finds the coach upset by the Four Holed
Cross, the jeweller lying beside it with a couple of pistol bullets
in him, and the money, the diamond, and Roger Tallis--nowhere. So much for the murdered man. Two or three days after, you, Gabriel
Foot, by character also shady, and known to be a friend of Roger
Tallis, are whispered to have a suspicious amount of money about you,
also blood-stains on your coat. It further leaks out that you were
travelling on the moors afoot on the night in question, and that your
pistols are soiled with powder. Case for the Crown closes. Have I
stated it correctly?" I nodded; he took a sip or two at his wine, laid down his pipe as if
the tobacco spoiled the taste of it, took another sip, and
continued:--

"Case for the defence. That Roger Tallis has decamped, that no
diamond has been found on you (or anywhere), and lastly that the
bullets in the jeweller's body do not fit your pistols, but came from
a larger pair. Not very much of a case, perhaps, but this last is a
strong point." "Well?" I asked, as he paused. "Now then for the facts of the case. Would you oblige me by casting
a look over there in the corner?" "I see nothing but a pickaxe and shovel." "Ha! very good; 'nothing but a pickaxe and shovel.' Well, to resume:
facts of the case--Roger Tallis murders the jeweller, and you murder
Roger Tallis; after that, as you say, 'nothing but a pickaxe and
shovel.'" And with this, as I am a living sinner, the rosy-faced old boy took
up his flute and blew a stave or two of "Come, Lasses and Lads." "Did you dig him up?" I muttered hoarsely; and although deathly cold
I could feel a drop of sweat trickling down my forehead and into my
eye. "What, before the trial? My good sir, you have a fair, a very fair,
aptitude for crime, but believe me, you have much to learn both of
legal etiquette and of a lawyer's conscience." And for the first
time since I came in I saw something like indignation on his ruddy
face. "Now," he continued, "I either know too much or not enough. Obviously I know enough for you to wish, and perhaps wisely, to kill
me. The question is, whether I know enough to make it worth your
while to spare me. I think I do; but that is for you to decide. If I put you to-night, and in half an hour's time, in possession of
property worth ten thousand pounds, will that content you?" "Come, come," I said, "you need not try to fool me, nor think I am
going to let you out of my sight." "You misunderstand. I desire neither; I only wish a bargain. I am ready to pledge you my word to make no attempt to escape before
you are in possession of that property, and to offer no resistance to
your shooting me in case you fail to obtain it, provided on the other
hand you pledge your word to spare my life should you succeed within
half an hour. And, my dear sir, considering the relative value of
your word and mine, I think it must be confessed you have the better
of the bargain." I thought for a moment. "Very well then," said I, "so be it; but if
you fail--"

"I know what happens," replied he. With that he blew a note or two on his flute, took it to pieces, and
carefully bestowed it in the tails of his coat. I put away my pistol
in mine. "Do you mind shouldering that spade and pickaxe, and following me?" he asked. I took them up in silence. He drained his glass and put
on his hat. "Now I think we are ready. Stop a moment." He reached across for the glass which I had emptied, took it up
gingerly between thumb and forefinger, and tossed it with a crash on
to the hearthstone. He then did the same to my pipe, after first
snapping the stem into halves. This done, he blew out one candle,
and with great gravity led the way down the staircase. I shouldered
the tools and followed, while my heart hated him with a fiercer spite
than ever. We passed down the crazy stairs and through the kitchen. The candles
were still burning there. As my companion glanced at the
supper-table, "H'm," he said, "not a bad beginning of a new leaf. My friend, I will allow you exactly twelve months in which to get
hanged." I made no answer, and we stepped out into the night. The moon was
now up, and the high-road stretched like a white ribbon into the
gloom. The cold wind bore up a few heavy clouds from the north-west,
but for the most part we could see easily enough. We trudged side by
side along the road in silence, except that I could hear my companion
every now and then whistling softly to himself. As we drew near to the Four Holed Cross and the scene of the murder I
confess to an uneasy feeling and a desire to get past the place with
all speed. But the lawyer stopped by the very spot where the coach
was overturned, and held up a finger as if to call attention. It was
a favourite trick of his with the jury. "This was where the jeweller lay. Some fifteen yards off there was
another pool of blood. Now the jeweller must have dropped instantly
for he was shot through the heart. Yet no one doubted but that the
other pool of blood was his. Fools!" With this he turned off the road at right angles, and began to strike
rapidly across the moor. At first I thought he was trying to escape
me, but he allowed me to catch him up readily enough, and then I knew
the point for which he was making. I followed doggedly. Clouds began to gather over the moon's face, and every now and then I
stumbled heavily on the uneven ground; but he moved along nimbly
enough, and even cried "Shoo!" in a sprightly voice when a startled
plover flew up before his feet. Presently, after we had gone about
five hundred yards on the heath, the ground broke away into a little
hollow, where a rough track led down to the Lime Kilns and the thinly
wooded stream that washed the valley below. We followed this track
for ten minutes or so, and presently the masonry of the disused kilns
peered out, white in the moonlight, from between the trees. There were three of these kilns standing close together beside the
path; but my companion without hesitation pulled up almost beneath
the very arch of the first, peered about, examined the ground
narrowly, and then motioned to me. "Dig here." "If we both know well enough what is underneath, what is the use of
digging?" "I very much doubt if we do," said he. "You had better dig." I can feel the chill creeping down my back as I write of it; but at
the time, though I well knew the grisly sight which I was to
discover, I dug away steadily enough. The man who had surprised my
secret set himself down on a dark bank of ferns at about ten paces'
distance, and began to whistle softly, though I could see his fingers
fumbling with his coat-tails as though they itched to be at the flute
again. The moon's rays shone fitfully upon the white face of the kiln, and
lit up my work. The little stream rushed noisily below. And so,
with this hateful man watching, I laid bare the lime-burnt remains of
the comrade whom, almost five months before, I had murdered and
buried there. How I had then cursed my luck because forced to hide
his corpse away before I could return and search for the diamond I
had failed to find upon his body! But as I tossed the earth and lime
aside, and discovered my handiwork, the moon's rays were suddenly
caught and reflected from within the pit, and I fell forward with a
short gasp of delight. For there, kindled into quick shafts and points of colour--violet,
green, yellow, and fieriest red--lay the missing diamond among
Roger's bones. As I clutched the gem a black shadow fell between the
moon and me. I looked up. My companion was standing over me, with
the twinkle still in his eye and the flute in his hand. "You were a fool not to guess that he had swallowed it. I hope you
are satisfied with the bargain. As we are not, I trust, likely to
meet again in this world, I will here bid you _Adieu_, though
possibly that is scarcely the word to use. But there is one thing I
wish to tell you. I owe you a debt to-night for having prevented me
from committing a crime. You saw that I had the spade and pickaxe
ready in the cottage. Well, I confess I lusted for that gem. I was
arguing out the case with my flute when you came in." "If," said I, "you wish a share--"

"Another word," he interrupted very gravely, "and I shall be forced
to think that you insult me. As it is, I am grateful to you for
supporting my flute's advice at an opportune moment. I will now
leave you. Two hours ago I was in a fair way of becoming a criminal. I owe it to you, and to my flute, that I am still merely a lawyer. Farewell!" With that he turned on his heel and was gone with a swinging stride
up the path and across the moor. His figure stood out upon the
sky-line for a moment, and then vanished. But I could hear for some
time the tootle-tootle of his flute in the distance, and it struck me
that its note was unusually sprightly and clear. THE RETURN OF JOANNA. High and low, rich and poor, in Troy Town there are seventy-three
maiden ladies. Under this term, of course, I include only those who
may reasonably be supposed to have forsworn matrimony. And of the
seventy-three, the two Misses Lefanu stand first, as well from their
age and extraction (their father was an Admiral of the Blue) as
because of their house, which stands in Fore Street and is faced with
polished Luxulyan granite--the same that was used for the famous Duke
of Wellington's coffin in St. Paul's Cathedral. Miss Susan Lefanu is eighty-five; Miss Charlotte has just passed
seventy-six. They are extremely small, and Miss Bunce looks after
them. That is to say, she dresses them of a morning, arranges their
chestnut "fronts," sets their caps straight, and takes them down to
breakfast. After dinner (which happens in the middle of the day) she
dresses them again and conducts them for a short walk along the
Rope-walk, which they call "the Esplanade." In the evening she
brings out the Bible and sets it the right way up for Miss Susan, who
begins to meditate on her decease; then sits down to a game of ecarte
with Miss Charlotte, who as yet has not turned her thoughts upon
mortality. At ten she puts them to bed. Afterwards, "the good Bunce
"--who is fifty, looks like a grenadier, and wears a large mole on
her chin--takes up a French novel, fastened by a piece of elastic
between the covers of Baxter's "Saint's Rest," and reads for an hour
before retiring. Her pay is fifty-two pounds a year, and her
attachment to the Misses Lefanu a matter of inference rather than
perception. One morning in last May, at nine o'clock, when Miss Bunce had just
arranged the pair in front of their breakfast-plates, and was sitting
down to pour out the tea, two singers came down the street, and their
voices--a man's and a woman's--though not young, accorded very
prettily:--

     "Citizens, toss your pens away! For all the world is mad to-day--
                      Cuckoo--cuckoo! The world is mad to-day." "What unusual words for a pair of street singers!" Miss Bunce
murmured, setting down the tea-pot. But as Miss Charlotte was busy
cracking an egg, and Miss Susan in a sort of coma, dwelling perhaps
on death and its terrors, the remark went unheeded. "Citizens, doff your coats of black,
      And dress to suit the almanack--
                             Cuckoo--"

The voices broke off, and a rat-tat sounded on the front door. "Say that we never give to beggars, under any circumstances,"
murmured Miss Susan, waking out of her lethargy. The servant entered with a scrap of crumpled paper in her hand. "There was a woman at the door who wished to see Miss Lefanu." "Say that we never give--"  Miss Susan began again, fumbling with the
note. "Bunce, I have on my gold-rimmed spectacles, and cannot read
with them, as you know. The black-rimmed pair must be up-stairs, on
the--"

"How d'ye do, my dears?" interrupted a brisk voice. In the doorway
stood a plump middle-aged woman, nodding her head rapidly. She wore
a faded alpaca gown, patched here and there, a shawl of shepherd's
plaid stained with the weather, and a nondescript bonnet. Her face
was red and roughened, as if she lived much out of doors. "How d'ye do?" she repeated   "I'm Joanna." Miss Bunce rose, and going discreetly to the window, pretended to
gaze into the street. Joanna, as she knew, was the name of the old
ladies' only step-sister, who had eloped from home twenty years
before, and (it was whispered) had disgraced the family. As for the
Misses Lefanu, being unused to rise without help, they spread out
their hands as if stretching octaves on the edge of the table, and
feebly stared. "Joanna," began the elder, tremulously, "if you have come to ask
charity--"

"Bless your heart, no! What put that into your head?" She advanced
and took the chair which Miss Bunce had left, and resting her elbows
on the table, regarded her sisters steadily. "What a preposterous
age you both must be, to be sure! My husband's waiting for me
outside." "Your husband?" Miss Charlotte quavered. "Why, of course. Did you suppose, because I ran away to act, that I
wasn't an honest woman?" She stretched out her left hand; and there
was a thin gold ring on her third finger. "He isn't much of an
actor, poor dear. In fact, not to put too fine a point on it, he has
been hissed off two-and-thirty stages in Great Britain alone. Indeed, he's the very worst actor I ever saw, although I don't tell
him. But as a husband he's sublime." "Are there--" Miss Charlotte began, and broke down. "Are there," she
tried again, "are there--any--children?" "Ah, my dear, if there were, I might be tempted to repent." "Don't you?" jerked out Miss Bunce, turning abruptly from the window. There was a certain sharp emotion in the question, but her face was
in the shadow. Joanna regarded her for a moment or two and broke
into a laugh. "My dears, I have been an actress and a mother. I retain the pride
of both,--though my little one died at three months, and no manager
will engage me now, because I refuse to act unless my husband has a
part. Theoretically, he is the first of artists; in practice--
You were asking, however, if I repent. Well, having touched the two
chief prizes within a woman's grasp, I hardly see how it is likely. I perceive that the object of my visit has been misinterpreted. To be frank, I came to gloat over you." "Your step-sisters are at least respectable," Miss Bunce answered. "Let us grant that to be a merit," retorted Joanna: "Do I understand
you to claim the credit of it?" "They are very clean, though," she went on, looking from one to the
other, "and well preserved. Susan, I notice, shows signs of failing;
she has dropped her spectacles into the teacup. But to what end,
Miss--"

"Bunce." "To what end, Miss Bunce, are you preserving them?" "Madam, when you entered the room I was of your way of thinking. Book after book that I read"--Miss Bunce blushed at this point--
"has displayed before me the delights of that quick artistic life
that you glory in following. I have eaten out my heart in longing. But now that I see how it coarsens a women--for it _is_ coarse to
sneer at age, in spite of all you may say about uselessness being no
better for being protracted over much time--"

"You are partly right," Joanna interrupted, "although you mistake the
accident for the essence. I am only coarse when confronted by
respectability. Nevertheless, I am glad if I reconcile you to your
lot." "But the point is," insisted Miss Bunce, "that a lady _never_ forgets
herself." "And you would argue that the being liable to forget myself is only
another development of that very character by virtue of which I
follow Art. Ah, well"--she nodded towards her stepsisters--"I
ask you why they and I should be daughters of one father?" She rose and stepped to the piano in the corner. It was a tall
Collard, shaped, above the key-board, like a cupboard. After
touching the notes softly, to be sure they were in tune, she
drew over a chair, and fell to playing Schumann's "_Warum?_" very
tenderly. It was a tinkling instrument, but perhaps her playing
gained pathos thereby, before such an audience. At the end she
turned round: there were tears in her eyes. "You used to play the 'Osborne Quadrilles' very nicely," observed
Miss Susan, suddenly. "Your playing has become very--very--"

"Disreputable," suggested Joanna. "Well, not exactly. I was going to say 'unintelligible.'" "It's the same thing." She rose, kissed her step-sisters, and walked
out of the room without a look at Miss Bunce. "Poor Joanna!" observed Miss Susan, after a minute's silence. "She has aged very much. I really must begin to think of my end." Outside, in the street, Joanna's husband was waiting for her--a dark,
ragged man, with a five-act expression of face. "Don't talk to me for a while," she begged. "I have been among
ghosts." "Ghosts?" "They were much too dull to be real: and yet--Oh, Jack, I feel glad
for the first time that our child was taken! I might have left him
there." "What shall we sing?" asked the man, turning his face away. "Something pious," Joanna answered with an ugly little laugh, "since
we want our dinner. The public has still enough honesty left to pity
piety." She stepped out into the middle of the street, facing her
sisters' windows, and began, the man's voice chiming in at the third
bar--

     "In the sweet by-and-bye
      We shall meet on that be-yeautiful shore." . . . PSYCHE. "_Among these million Suns how shall the strayed Soul find her way
back to earth?_"

The man was an engine-driver, thick-set and heavy, with a short beard
grizzled at the edge, and eyes perpetually screwed up, because his
life had run for the most part in the teeth of the wind. The lashes,
too, had been scorched off. If you penetrated the mask of oil and
coal-dust that was part of his working suit, you found a
reddish-brown phlegmatic face, and guessed its age at fifty. He brought the last down train into Lewminster station every night at
9.45, took her on five minutes later, and passed through Lewminster
again at noon, on his way back with the Galloper, as the porters
called it. He had reached that point of skill at which a man knows every pound
of metal in a locomotive; seemed to feel just what was in his engine
the moment he took hold of the levers and started up; and was
expecting promotion. While waiting for it, he hit on the idea of
studying a more delicate machine, and married a wife. She was the
daughter of a woman at whose house he lodged, and her age was less
than half of his own. It is to be supposed he loved her. A year after their marriage she fell into low health, and her husband
took her off to Lewminster for fresher air. She was lodging alone at
Lewminster, and the man was passing Lewminster station on his engine,
twice a day, at the time when this tale begins. People--especially those who live in the West of England--remember
the great fire at the Lewminster Theatre; how, in the second Act of
the _Colleen Bawn_, a tongue of light shot from the wings over the
actors' heads; how, even while the actors turned and ran, a sheet of
fire swept out on the auditorium with a roaring wind, and the house
was full of shrieks and blind death; how men and women were turned to
a white ash as they rose from their seats, so fiercely the flames
outstripped the smoke. These things were reported in the papers,
with narratives and ghastly details, and for a week all England
talked of Lewminster. This engine-driver, as the 9.45 train neared Lewminster, saw the red
in the sky. And when he rushed into the station and drew up, he saw
that the country porters who stood about were white as corpses. "What fire is that?" he asked one. "'Tis the theayter! There's a hundred burnt a'ready, and the rest
treadin' each other's lives out while we stand talkin', to get 'pon
the roof and pitch theirselves over!" Now the engine-driver's wife was going to the play that night, and he
knew it. She had met him at the station, and told him so, at midday. But there was nobody to take the train on, if he stepped off the
engine; for his fireman was a young hand, and had been learning his
trade for less than three weeks. So when the five minutes were up--or rather, ten, for the porters
were bewildered that night--this man went on out of the station into
the night. Just beyond the station the theatre was plain to see,
above the hill on his left, and the flames were leaping from the
roof; and he knew that his wife was there. But the train was never
taken down more steadily, nor did a single passenger guess what
manner of man was driving it. At Drakeport, where his run ended, he stepped off the engine, walked
from the railway-sheds to his mother-in-law's, where he still lodged,
and went up-stairs to his bed without alarming a soul. In the morning, at the usual hour, he was down at the station again,
washed and cleanly dressed. His fireman had the Galloper's engine
polished, fired up, and ready to start. "Mornin'," he nodded, and looking into his driver's eyes, dropped the
handful of dirty lint with which he had been polishing. After
shuffling from foot to foot for a minute, he ended by climbing down
on the far side of the engine. "Oldster," he said, "'tis mutiny p'raps; but s'help me, if I ride a
mile longside that new face o' your'n!" "Maybe you're right," his superior answered wearily. "You'd best go
up to the office, and get somebody sent down i' my place. And while
you're there, you might get me a third-class for Lewminster." So this man travelled up to Lewminster as passenger, and found his
young wife's body among the two score stretched in a stable-yard
behind the smoking theatre, waiting to be claimed. And the day after
the funeral he left the railway company's service. He had saved a
bit, enough to rent a small cottage two miles from the cemetery where
his wife lay. Here he settled and tilled a small garden beside the
high-road. Nothing seemed to be wrong with the man until the late summer, when
he stood before the Lewminster magistrates charged with a violent and
curiously wanton assault. It appeared that one dim evening, late in August, a mild gentleman,
with Leghorn hat, spectacles, and a green gauze net, came sauntering
by the garden where the ex-engine-driver was pulling a basketful of
scarlet runners: that the prisoner had suddenly dropped his beans,
dashed out into the road, and catching the mild gentleman by the
throat had wrenched the butterfly net from his hand and belaboured
him with the handle till it broke. There was no defence, nor any attempt at explanation. The mild
gentleman was a stranger to the neighbourhood. The magistrates
marvelled, and gave his assailant two months. At the end of that time the man came out of gaol and went quietly
back to his cottage. Early in the following April he conceived a wish to build a small
greenhouse at the foot of his garden, by the road, and spoke to the
local mason about it. One Saturday afternoon the mason came over to
look at the ground and discuss plans. It was bright weather, and
while the two men talked a white butterfly floated past them--the
first of the year. Immediately the mason broke off his sentence and began to chase the
butterfly round the garden: for in the West country there is a
superstition that if a body neglect to kill the first butterfly he
may see for the season, he will have ill luck throughout the year. So he dashed across the beds, hat in hand. "I'll hat 'en--I'll hat 'en! No, fay! I'll miss 'en, I b'lieve. Shan't be able to kill 'n if hor's wunce beyond th' gaate--stiddy, my
son! Wo-op!" Thus he yelled, waving his soft hat: and the next minute was lying
stunned across a carrot-bed, with eight fingers gripping the back of
his neck and two thumbs squeezing on his windpipe. There was another assault case heard by the Lewminster bench; and
this time the ex-engine-driver received four months. As before, he
offered no defence: and again the magistrates were possessed with
wonder. Now the explanation is quite simple. This man's wits were sound,
save on one point. He believed--why, God alone knows, who enabled
him to drive that horrible journey without a tremor of the hand--that
his wife's soul haunted him in the form of a white butterfly or moth. The superstition that spirits take this shape is not unknown in the
West; and I suppose that as he steered his train out of the station,
this fancy, by some odd freak of memory, leaped into his brain, and
held it, hour after hour, while he and his engine flew forward and
the burning theatre fell further and further behind. The truth was
known a fortnight after his return from prison, which happened about
the time of barley harvest. A harvest-thanksgiving was held in the parish where he lived; and he
went to it, being always a religious man. There were sheaves and
baskets of vegetables in the chancel; fruit and flowers on the
communion-table, with twenty-one tall candles burning above them; a
processional hymn; and a long sermon. During the sermon, as the
weather was hot and close, someone opened the door at the west end. And when the preacher was just making up his mind to close the
discourse, a large white moth fluttered in at the west door. There was much light throughout the church; but the great blaze came,
of course, from the twenty-one candles upon the altar. And towards
this the moth slowly drifted, as if the candles sucked her nearer and
nearer, up between the pillars of the nave, on a level with their
capitals. Few of the congregation noticed her, for the sermon was a
stirring one; only one or two children, perhaps, were interested--and
the man I write of. He saw her pass over his head and float up into
the chancel. He half-rose from his chair. "My brothers," said the preacher, "if two sparrows, that are sold for
a farthing, are not too little for the care of this infinite
Providence--"

A scream rang out and drowned the sentence. It was followed by a
torrent of vile words, shouted by a man who had seen, now for the
second time, the form that clothed his wife's soul shrivelled in
unthinking flames. All that was left of the white moth lay on the
altar-cloth, among the fruit at the base of the tallest candlestick. And because the man saw nothing but cruelty in the Providence of
which the preacher spoke, he screamed and cursed, till they
overpowered him and took him forth by the door. He was wholly mad
from that hour. THE COUNTESS OF BELLARMINE. Few rivers in England are without their "Lovers' Leap"; but the
tradition of this one is singular, I believe. It overhangs a dark
pool, midway down a west country valley--a sheer escarpment of
granite, its lip lying but a stone's throw from the high-road, that
here finds its descent broken by a stiff knoll, over which it rises
and topples again like a wave. I had drawn two shining peel out of the pool, and sat eating my lunch
on the edge of the Leap, with my back to the road. Forty feet
beneath me the water lay black and glossy, behind the dotted foliage
of a birch-tree. My rod stuck upright from the turf at my elbow,
and, whenever I turned my head, neatly bisected the countenance and
upper half of Seth Truscott, an indigenous gentleman of miscellaneous
habits and a predatory past, who had followed me that morning to
carry the landing-net. It was he who, after lunch, imparted the story of the rock on which
we sat; and as it seemed at the time to gain somewhat by the telling,
I will not risk defacing it by meddling with his dialect. "I reckon, sir," he began, with an upward nod at a belt of larches,
the fringe of a great estate, that closed the view at the head of the
vale, "you'm too young to mind th' ould Earl o' Bellarmine, that
owned Castle Cannick, up yonder, in my growin' days. 'Ould Wounds'
he was nick-named--a cribbage-faced, what-the-blazes kind o' varmint,
wi' a gossan wig an' a tongue like oil o' vitriol. He'd a-led the
fore-half o' his life, I b'lieve, in London church-town, by reason
that he an' his father couldn' be left in a room together wi'out
comin' to fisticuffs: an' by all accounts was fashion's favourite in
the naughty city, doin' his duty in that state o' life an' playing
Hamlet's ghost among the Ten Commandments. "The upshot was that he killed a young gentleman over a game o'
whist, an' that was too much even for the Londoners. So he packed up
and sailed for furrin' parts, an' didn' show his face in England till
th' ould man, his father, was took wi' a seizure an' went dead, bein'
palsied down half his face, but workin' away to the end at the most
lift-your-hair wickedness wi' the sound side of his mouth. "Then the new Earl turned up an' settled at Castle Cannick. He was a
wifeless man, an', by the look o't, had given up all wish to coax the
female eye: for he dressed no better'n a jockey, an' all his
diversion was to ride in to Tregarrick Market o' Saturdays, an' hang
round the doorway o' the Pack-Horse Inn, by A. Walters, and glower at
the men an' women passin' up and down the Fore Street, an' stand
drinkin' brandy an' water while the horse-jockeys there my-lord'ed
'en. Two an' twenty glasses, they say, was his quantum' between noon
an' nine o'clock; an' then he'd climb into saddle an' ride home to
his jewelled four-poster, cursin' an' mutterin', but sittin' his mare
like a man of iron. "But one o' these fine market-days he did a thing that filled the
mouths o' the country-side. "He was loafin' by the Pack-Horse door, just as usual, at two
o'clock, rappin' the head o' his crop on the side o' his ridin'
boots, drawin' his brows down an' lookin' out curses from under 'em
across the street to the saddler's opposite, when two drover-chaps
came up the pavement wi' a woman atween 'em. "The woman--or maid, to call her by her proper title--was a
dark-browed slut, wi' eyes like sloes, an' hair dragged over her face
till she looked like an owl in an ivy-bush. As for the gown o' her,
'twas no better'n a sack tied round the middle, wi' a brave piece
torn away by the shoulder, where one o' the men had clawed her. "There was a pretty dido goin' on atween the dree, an' all talkin'
together--the two men mobbin' each other, an' the girl i' the middle
callin' em every name but what they was chris'ened, wi'out
distinction o' persons, as the word goes. "'What's the uproar?' asks Ould Wounds, stoppin' the tap-tap o' his
crop, as they comes up. "'The woman b'longs to me,' says the first. 'I've engaged to make
her my lawful wife; an' I won't go from my word under two gallon o'
fourpenny.' "'You agreed to hand her over for one gallon, first along,' says
t'other,' an' a bargain's a bargain.' "Says the woman, 'You're a pair o' hair-splitting shammicks, the pair
of 'ee. An' how much beer be I to have for my weddin' portion?' (says she)--'for that's all _I_ care about, one way or t'other.' "Now Ould Wounds looked at the woman; an' 'tis to be thought he found
her eyeable, for he axed up sharp--

"'Would 'ee kick over these two, an' marry me, for a bottle o' gin?' "'That would I.' "'An' to be called My Lady--Countess o' Bellarmine?' "'Better an' better.' "'I shall whack 'ee.' "'I don't care.' "'I shall kick an' cuff an' flog 'ee like a span'el dog,' says he:
'by my body! I shall make 'ee repent.' "'Give 'ee leave to try,' says she. "An' that's how th' Earl o' Bellarmine courted his wife. He took her
into the bar an' treated her to a bottle o' gin on the spot. At nine
o'clock that evenin' she tuk hold of his stirrup-leather an' walked
beside 'en, afoot, up to Castle Cannick. Next day, their banns were
axed in church, an' in dree weeks she was My Ladyship. "'Twas a battle-royal that began then. Ould Wounds dressed the woman
up to the nines, an' forced all the bettermost folk i' the county to
pay their calls an' treat her like one o' the blood; and then, when
the proud guests stepped into their chariots an' druv away, he'd fall
to, an' lick her across the shoulders wi' his ridin'-whip, to break
her sperrit. 'Twas the happiest while o' th' ould curmudgeon's life,
I do b'lieve; for he'd found summat he cudn' tame in a hurry. There was a noble pond afore the house, i' those days, wi' urns an'
heathen gods around the brim, an' twice he dragged her through it in
her night-gown, I've heerd, an' always dined wi' a pistol laid by his
plate, alongside the knives an' prongs, to scare her. But not she! "An' next he tried to burn her in her bed: an' that wasn' no good. "An' last of all he fell i' love wi' her: an' that broke her." "One day--the tale goes--she made up her mind an' ordered a shay an'
pair from the Pack-Horse. The postillion was to be waitin' by the
gate o' the deer-park--the only gate that hadn't a lodge to it--at
ten o'clock that night. 'Twas past nine afore dinner was done, an'
she got up from her end o' the table an' walked across to kiss th'
ould fellow. He, 'pon his side, smiled on her, pleased as Punch; for
'twas little inore'n a fortni't since he'd discovered she was the
yapple of his eye. She said 'Good night' an' went up-stairs to pack
a few things in a bag, he openin' the door and shuttin' it upon her. Then he outs wi' his watch, waits a couple o' minutes, an' slips out
o' the house. "At five minutes to ten comes my ladyship, glidin' over the short
turf o' the deer-park, an' glancin' over her shoulder at the
light in his lordship's libery window. 'Twas burnin' in true
watch-an'-fear-nothin' style, an' there, by the gate, was the shay
and horses, and postillion, wrapped up and flapping his arms for
warmth, who touched his cap and put down the steps for her. "'Drive through Tregarrick,' says she, 'an' don't spare whip-cord.' "Slam went the door, up climbed the postillion, an' away they went
like a house afire. There was half-a-moon up an' a hoar frost
gatherin', an' my lady, lean in' back on the cushions, could see the
head and shoulders of the postillion bob-bobbing, till it seemed his
head must work loose and tumble out of his collar. "The road they took, sir, is the same that runs down the valley afore
our very eyes. An' 'pon the brow o't, just when it comes in sight,
the off horse turned restive. In a minute 'twas as much as the
post-boy could ha' done to hold 'en. _But he didn' try_. Instead, he fell to floggin' harder, workin' his arm up an' down like
a steam-engin'. "'What the jiminy are 'ee doin?' calls out her ladyship--or words to
that effec'--clutchin' at the side o' the shay, an' tryin' to stiddy
hersel'. "'I thought I wasn' to spare whip-cord,' calls back the post-boy. "An' with that he turned i' the saddle; an' 'twas the face o' her own
wedded husband, as ghastly white as if 't burned a'ready i' the
underground fires. "Seem' it, her joints were loosed, an' she sat back white as he; an'
down over the hill they swung at a breakneck gallop, shay lurchin'
and stones flyin'. "About thirty yards from where we'm sittin', sir, Ould Wounds caught
the near rein twice round his wrist an lean't back, slowly pullin'
it, till his face was slewed round over his left shoulder an'
grinnin' in my lady's face. "An' that was the last look that passed atween 'em. For now feeling
the wheels on grass and the end near, he loosed the rein and fetched
the horse he rode a cut atween the ears--an' that's how 'twas,"
concluded Seth, lamely. Like most inferior narrators, he shied at the big fence, flinched
before the climax. But as he ended, I flung a short glance downward
at the birches and black water, and took up my rod again with a
shiver. FROM A COTTAGE IN TROY. I.--A HAPPY VOYAGE. The cottage that I have inhabited these six years looks down on the
one quiet creek in a harbour full of business. The vessels that
enter beneath Battery Point move up past the grey walls and green
quay-doors of the port to the jetties where their cargoes lie. All day long I can see them faring up and down past the mouth of my
creek; and all the year round I listen to the sounds of them--the
dropping or lifting of anchors, the _wh-h-ing!_ of a siren-whistle
cutting the air like a twanged bow, the concertina that plays at
night, the rush of the clay cargo shot from the jetty into the lading
ship. But all this is too far remote to vex me. Only one vessel
lies beneath my terrace; and she has lain there for a dozen years. After many voyages she was purchased by the Board of Guardians in our
district, dismasted, and anchored up here to serve as a hospital-ship
in case the cholera visited us. She has never had a sick man on
board from that day to the present. But once upon a time three
people spent a very happy night on her deck, as you shall hear. She is called _The Gleaner_. I think I was never so much annoyed in my life as on the day when
Annie, my only servant, gave me a month's "warning." That was four
years ago; and she gave up cooking for me to marry a young watchmaker
down at the town--a youth of no mark save for a curious distortion of
the left eyebrow (due to much gazing through a circular glass into
the bowels of watches), a frantic assortment of religious
convictions, a habit of playing the fiddle in hours of ease, and an
absurd name--Tubal Cain Bonaday. I noticed that Annie softened it to
"Tubey." Of course I tried to dissuade her, but my arguments were those of a
wifeless man, and very weak. She listened to them with much
patience, and went off to buy her wedding-frock. She was a plain
girl, without a scintilla of humour; and had just that sense of an
omelet that is vouchsafed to one woman in a generation. So she and Tubal Cain were married at the end of the month, and
disappeared on their honeymoon, no one quite knew whither. They went
on the last day of April. At half-past eight in the evening of May 6th I had just finished my
seventh miserable dinner. My windows were open to the evening, and
the scent of the gorse-bushes below the terrace hung heavily
underneath the verandah and stole into the room where I sat before
the white cloth, in the lamp-light. I had taken a cigarette and was
reaching for the match-box when I chanced to look up, and paused to
marvel at a singular beauty in the atmosphere outside. It seemed a final atonement of sky and earth in one sheet of vivid
blue. Of form I could see nothing; the heavens, the waters of the
creek below, the woods on the opposite shore were simply
indistinguishable--blotted out in this one colour. If you can recall
certain advertisements of Mr. Reckitt, and can imagine one of these
transparent, with a soft light glowing behind it, you will be as near
as I can help you to guessing the exact colour. And, but for a
solitary star and the red lamp of a steamer lying off the creek's
mouth, this blue covered the whole firmament and face of the earth. I lit my cigarette and stepped out upon the verandah. In a minute or
so a sound made me return, fetch a cap from the hall, and descend the
terrace softly. My feet trod on bluebells and red-robins, and now and then crushed
the fragrance out of a low-lying spike of gorse. I knew the flowers
were there, though in this curious light I could only see them by
peering closely. At the foot of the terrace I pulled up and leant
over the oak fence that guarded the abrupt drop into the creek. There was a light just underneath. It came from the deck of the
hospital-ship, and showed me two figures standing there--a woman
leaning against the bulwarks, and a man beside her. The man had a
fiddle under his chin, and was playing "Annie Laurie," rather slowly
and with a deal of sweetness. When the melody ceased, I craned still further over the oak fence and
called down, "Tubal Cain!" The pair gave a start, and there was some whispering before the
answer came up to me. "Is that you, sir?" "To be sure," said I. "What are you two about on board _The
Gleaner?_"

Some more whispering followed, and then Tubal Cain spoke again--

"It doesn't matter now, sir. We've lived aboard here for a week, and
to-night's the end of our honeymooning. If 'tis no liberty sir,
Annie's wishful that you should join us." Somehow, the invitation, coming through this mysterious atmosphere,
seemed at once natural and happy. The fiddle began again as I
stepped away from the fence and went down to get my boat out. In three minutes I was afloat, and a stroke or two brought me to the
ship's ladder. Annie and Tubal Cain stood at the top to welcome me. But if I had felt no incongruity in paying this respectful visit to
my ex-cook and her lover, I own that her appearance made me stare. For, if you please, she was dressed out like a lady, in a gown of
pale blue satin trimmed with swansdown--a low-necked gown, too,
though she had flung a white shawl over her shoulders. Imagine this
and the flood of blue light around us, and you will hardly wonder
that, half-way up the ladder, I paused to take breath. Tubal Cain
was dressed as usual, and tucking his fiddle under his arm, led me up
to shake hands with his bride as if she were a queen. I cannot say
if she blushed. Certainly she received me with dignity: and then,
inverting a bucket that lay on the deck, seated herself; while Tubal
Cain and I sat down on the deck facing her, with our backs against
the bulwarks. "It's just this, sir," explained the bridegroom, laying his fiddle
across his lap, and speaking as if in answer to a question: "it's
just this:--by trade you know me for a watchmaker, and for a Plymouth
Brother by conviction. All the week I'm bending over a counter, and
every Sabbath-day I speak in prayer-meeting what I hold, that life's
a dull pilgrimage to a better world. If you ask me, sir, to-night, I
ought to say the same. But a man may break out for once; and when so
well as on his honeymoon? For a week I've been a free heathen: for a
week I've been hiding here, living with the woman I love in the open
air; and night after night for a week Annie here has clothed herself
like a woman of fashion. Oh, my God! it has been a beautiful time--a
happy beautiful time that ends to-night!" He set down the fiddle, crooked up a knee and clasped his hands round
it, looking at Annie. "Annie, girl, what is it that we believe till to-morrow morning? You believe--eh?--that 'tis a rare world, full of delights, and with
no ugliness in it?" Annie nodded. "And you love every soul--the painted woman in the streets no less
than your own mother?" Annie nodded again. "I'd nurse 'em both if they were sick," she
said. "One like the other?" "And there's nothing shames you?" Here he rose and took her hand. "You wouldn't blush to kiss me before master here?" "Why should I?" She gave him a sober kiss, and let her hand rest in
his. I looked at her. She was just as quiet as in the old days when she
used to lay my table. It was like gazing at a play. I should be ashamed to repeat the nonsense that Tubal Cain thereupon
began to talk; for it was mere midsummer madness. But I smoked four
pipes contentedly while the sound of his voice continued, and am
convinced that he never performed so well at prayer-meeting. Down at
the town I heard the church-clock striking midnight, and then one
o'clock; and was only aroused when the youth started up and grasped
his fiddle. "And now, sir, if you would consent to one thing, 'twould make us
very happy. You can't play the violin, worse luck; but you might
take a step or two round the deck with Annie, if I strike up a
waltz-tune for you to move to." It was ridiculous, but as he began to play I moved up to Annie, put
my arm around her, and we began to glide round and round on the deck. Her face was turned away from mine, and looked over my shoulder; if
our eyes had met, I am convinced I must have laughed or wept. It was
half farce, half deadly earnest, and for me as near to hysterics as a
sane man can go. Tubal Cain, that inspired young Plymouth Brother,
was solemn as a judge. As for Annie, I would give a considerable
amount, at this moment, to know what she thought of it. But she
stepped very lightly and easily, and I am not sure I ever enjoyed a
waltz so much. The blue light--that bewitching, intoxicating blue
light--paled on us as we danced. The grey conquered it, and I felt
that when we looked at each other the whole absurdity would strike
us, and I should never be able to face these lovers again without a
furious blush. As the day crept on, I stole a glance at Tubal Cain. He was scraping away desperately--_with his eyes shut_. For us the
dance had become weariness, but we went on and on. We were afraid to
halt. Suddenly a string of the violin snapped. We stopped, and I saw Tubal
Cain's hand pointing eastward. A golden ripple came dancing down the
creek, and, at the head of the combe beyond, the sun's edge was
mounting. "Morning!" said the bridegroom. "It's all done," said Annie, holding out a hand to me, without
looking up. "And thank you, sir." "We danced through the grey," I answered; and that was all I could
find to say, as I stepped towards the ladder. Half an hour later as I looked out of the window before getting into bed
I saw in the sunlight a boat moving down the creek towards the town. Tubal Cain was rowing, and Annie sat in the stern. She had changed
her gown. They have been just an ordinary couple ever since, and attend their
chapel regularly. Sometimes Annie comes over to make me an omelet;
and, as a matter of fact, she is now in the kitchen. But not a word
has ever been spoken between us about her honeymoon. II.--THESE-AN'-THAT'S WIFE. In the matter of These-an'-That himself, public opinion in Troy is
divided. To the great majority he appears scandalously careless of
his honour; while there are just six or seven who fight with a
suspicion that there dwells something divine in the man. To reach the town from my cottage I have to cross the Passage Ferry,
either in the smaller boat which Eli pulls single-handed, or (if a
market-cart or donkey, or drove of cattle be waiting on the slip)
I must hang about till Eli summons his boy to help him with the
horse-boat. Then the gangway is lowered, the beasts are driven on
board, the passengers follow at a convenient distance, and the long
sweeps take us slowly across the tide. It was on such a voyage, a
few weeks after I settled in the neighbourhood, that I first met
These-an'-That. I was leaning back against the chain, with my cap tilted forward to
keep off the dazzle of the June sunshine on the water, and lazily
watching Eli as he pushed his sweep. Suddenly I grew aware that by
frequent winks and jerks of the head he wished to direct my attention
to a passenger on my right--a short, round man in black, with a
basket of eggs on his arm. There was quite a remarkable dearth of feature on this passenger's
face, which was large, soft, and unhealthy in colour: but what
surprised me was to see, as he blinked in the sunlight, a couple of
big tears trickle down his cheeks and splash among the eggs in his
basket. "There's trouble agen, up at Kit's," remarked Eli, finishing his
stroke with a jerk, and speaking for the general benefit, though the
words were particularly addressed to a drover opposite. "Ho?" said the drover: "that woman agen?" The passengers, one and all, bent their eyes on the man in black, who
smeared his face with his cuff, and began weeping afresh, silently. "Beat en blue las' night, an' turned en to doors--the dirty trollop." "Eli, don't 'ee--" put in the poor man, in a low, deprecating voice. "Iss, an' no need to tell what for," exclaimed a red-faced woman who
stood by the drover, with two baskets of poultry at her feet. "She's a low lot; a low trapesin' baggage. If These-an'-That, there,
wasn' but a poor, ha'f-baked shammick, he'd ha' killed that wife o'
his afore this." "Naybours, I'd as lief you didn't mention it," appealed
These-an'-That, huskily. "I'm afeard you'm o' no account, These-an'-That: but sam-sodden, if I
may say so," the drover observed. "Put in wi' the bread, an' took out wi' the cakes," suggested Eli. "Wife!--a pretty loitch, she an' the whole kit, up there!" went on
the market-woman. "If you durstn't lay finger 'pon your wedded wife,
These-an'-That, but let her an' that long-legged gamekeeper turn'ee
to doors, you must be no better'n a worm,--that's all I say." I saw the man's face twitch as she spoke of the gamekeeper. But he
only answered in the same dull way. "I'd as lief you didn' mention it, friends,--if 'tis all the same." His real name was Tom Warne, as I learnt from Eli afterwards; and he
lived at St. Kit's, a small fruit-growing hamlet two miles up the
river, where his misery was the scandal of the place. The very
children knew it, and would follow him in a crowd sometimes, pelting
him with horrible taunts as he slouched along the road to the kitchen
garden out of which he made his living. He never struck one; never
even answered; but avoided the school-house as he would a plague; and
if he saw the Parson coming would turn a mile out of his road. The Parson had called at the cottage a score of times at least: for
the business was quite intolerable. Two evenings out of the six, the
long-legged gamekeeper, who was just a big, drunken bully, would
swagger easily into These-an'-That's kitchen and sit himself down
without so much as "by your leave." "Good evenin', gamekeeper," the
husband would say in his dull, nerveless voice. Mostly he only got a
jeer in reply. The fellow would sit drinking These-an'-That's cider
and laughing with These-an'-That's wife, until the pair, very likely,
took too much, and the woman without any cause broke into a passion,
flew at the little man, and drove him out of doors, with broomstick
or talons, while the gamekeeper hammered on the table and roared at
the sport. His employer was an absentee who hated the Parson, so the
Parson groaned in vain over the scandal. Well, one Fair-day I crossed in Eli's boat with the pair. The
woman--a dark gipsy creature--was tricked out in violet and yellow,
with a sham gold watch-chain and great aluminium earrings: and the
gamekeeper had driven her down in his spring-cart. As Eli pushed
off, I saw a small boat coming down the river across our course. It was These-an'-That, pulling down with vegetables for the fair. I cannot say if the two saw him: but he glanced up for a moment at
the sound of their laughter, then bent his head and rowed past us a
trifle more quickly. The distance was too great to let me see his
face. I was the last to step ashore. As I waited for Eli to change my
sixpence, he nodded after the couple, who by this time had reached
the top of the landing-stage, arm in arm. "A bad day's work for _her_, I reckon." It struck me at the moment as a moral reflection of Eli's, and no
more. Late in the afternoon, however, I was enlightened. In the midst of the Fair, about four o'clock, a din of horns, beaten
kettles, and hideous yelling, broke out in Troy. I met the crowd in
the main street, and for a moment felt afraid of it. They had seized
the woman in the taproom of the "Man-o'-War"--where the gamekeeper
was lying in a drunken sleep--and were hauling her along in a Ram
Riding. There is nothing so cruel as a crowd, and I have seen
nothing in my life like the face of These-an'-That's wife. It was
bleeding; it was framed in tangles of black, dishevelled hair; it was
livid; but, above all, it was possessed with an awful fear--a horror
it turned a man white to look on. Now and then she bit and fought
like a cat: but the men around held her tight, and mostly had to drag
her, her feet trailing, and the horns and kettles dinning in her
wake. There lay a rusty old ducking-cage among the lumber up at the
town-hall; and some fellows had fetched this down, with the poles and
chain, and planted it on the edge of the Town Quay, between the
American Shooting Gallery and the World-Renowned Swing Boats. To this they dragged her, and strapped her fast. There is no heed to describe what followed. Even the virtuous women
who stood and applauded would like to forget it, perhaps. At the
third souse, the rusty pivot of the ducking-pole broke, and the cage,
with the woman in it, plunged under water. They dragged her ashore at the end of the pole in something less than
a minute. They unstrapped and laid her gently down, and began to
feel over her heart, to learn if it were still beating. And then the
crowd parted, and These-an'-That came through it. His face wore no
more expression than usual, but his lips were working in a queer way. He went up to his wife, took off his hat, and producing an old red
handkerchief from the crown, wiped away some froth and green weed
that hung about her mouth. Then he lifted her limp hand, and patting
the back of it gently, turned on the crowd. His lips were still
working. It was evident he was trying to say something. "Naybours," the words came at last, in the old dull tone; "I'd as
lief you hadn' thought o' this." He paused for a moment, gulped down something in his throat, and went
on--

"I wudn' say you didn' mean it for the best, an' thankin' you kindly. But you didn' know her. Roughness, if I may say, was never no good
wi' her. It must ha' been very hard for her to die like this, axin
your parden, for she wasn' one to bear pain." Another long pause. "No, she cudn' bear pain. P'raps _he_ might ha' stood it better--
though o' course you acted for the best, an' thankin' you kindly. I'd as lief take her home now, naybours, if 'tis all the same." He lifted the body in his arms, and carried it pretty steadily down
the quay steps to his market-boat, that was moored below. Two minutes later he had pushed off and was rowing it quietly
homewards. There is no more to say, except that the woman recovered. She had
fainted, I suppose, as they pulled her out. Anyhow, These-an'-That
restored her to life--and she ran away the very next week with the
gamekeeper. III--"DOUBLES" AND QUITS. 