



Produced by Robert Cicconetti, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions
(www.canadiana.org))









                             EARTH'S ENIGMAS

                          A VOLUME OF STORIES BY

                           CHARLES G D ROBERTS




    LAMSON WOLFFE AND COMPANY
    BOSTON AND NEW YORK 1896
    _Copyright, 1895_,

    University Press:
    John Wilson and Son, Cambridge, U.S.A. Author's Note. Most of the stories in this collection have already appeared in the
pages of English, American, or Canadian periodicals. For kind courtesies
in regard to the reprinting of these stories my thanks are due to the
Editors of Harper's Magazine, Longman's Magazine, Scribner's Magazine,
The Cosmopolitan, Lippincott's Magazine, The Independent, The Toronto
Globe, Harper's Bazaar, and The Youth's Companion. C. G. D. R.

Fredericton, N. B. _January, 1896._




Contents. Do Seek their Meat from God

The Perdu

"The Young Ravens that Call upon Him"

Within Sound of the Saws

The Butt of the Camp

In the Accident Ward

The Romance of an Ox-Team

A Tragedy of the Tides

At the Rough-and-Tumble Landing

An Experience of Jabez Batterpole

The Stone Dog

The Barn on the Marsh

Captain Joe and Jamie

Strayed

The Eye of Gluskap




Earth's Enigmas. Do Seek their Meat from God. One side of the ravine was in darkness. The darkness was soft and rich,
suggesting thick foliage. Along the crest of the slope tree-tops came
into view--great pines and hemlocks of the ancient unviolated
forest--revealed against the orange disk of a full moon just rising. The
low rays slanting through the moveless tops lit strangely the upper
portion of the opposite steep,--the western wall of the ravine, barren,
unlike its fellow, bossed with great rocky projections, and harsh with
stunted junipers. Out of the sluggish dark that lay along the ravine as
in a trough, rose the brawl of a swollen, obstructed stream. Out of a shadowy hollow behind a long white rock, on the lower edge of
that part of the steep which lay in the moonlight, came softly a great
panther. In common daylight his coat would have shown a warm fulvous
hue, but in the elvish decolorizing rays of that half hidden moon he
seemed to wear a sort of spectral gray. He lifted his smooth round head
to gaze on the increasing flame, which presently he greeted with a
shrill cry. That terrible cry, at once plaintive and menacing, with an
undertone like the fierce protestations of a saw beneath the file, was a
summons to his mate, telling her that the hour had come when they should
seek their prey. From the lair behind the rock, where the cubs were
being suckled by their dam, came no immediate answer. Only a pair of
crows, that had their nest in a giant fir-tree across the gulf, woke up
and croaked harshly their indignation. These three summers past they had
built in the same spot, and had been nightly awakened to vent the same
rasping complaints. The panther walked restlessly up and down, half a score of paces each
way, along the edge of the shadow, keeping his wide-open green eyes upon
the rising light. His short, muscular tail twitched impatiently, but he
made no sound. Soon the breadth of confused brightness had spread itself
further down the steep, disclosing the foot of the white rock, and the
bones and antlers of a deer which had been dragged thither and devoured. By this time the cubs had made their meal, and their dam was ready for
such enterprise as must be accomplished ere her own hunger, now grown
savage, could hope to be assuaged. She glided supplely forth into the
glimmer, raised her head, and screamed at the moon in a voice as
terrible as her mate's. Again the crows stirred, croaking harshly; and
the two beasts, noiselessly mounting the steep, stole into the shadows
of the forest that clothed the high plateau. The panthers were fierce with hunger. These two days past their hunting
had been well-nigh fruitless. What scant prey they had slain had for the
most part been devoured by the female; for had she not those small blind
cubs at home to nourish, who soon must suffer at any lack of hers? The
settlements of late had been making great inroads on the world of
ancient forest, driving before them the deer and smaller game. Hence the
sharp hunger of the panther parents, and hence it came that on this
night they hunted together. They purposed to steal upon the settlements
in their sleep, and take tribute of the enemies' flocks. Through the dark of the thick woods, here and there pierced by the
moonlight, they moved swiftly and silently. Now and again a dry twig
would snap beneath the discreet and padded footfalls. Now and again, as
they rustled some low tree, a pewee or a nuthatch would give a startled
chirp. For an hour the noiseless journeying continued, and ever and anon
the two gray, sinuous shapes would come for a moment into the view of
the now well-risen moon. Suddenly there fell upon their ears, far off
and faint, but clearly defined against the vast stillness of the
Northern forest, a sound which made those stealthy hunters pause and
lift their heads. It was the voice of a child crying,--crying long and
loud, hopelessly, as if there were no one by to comfort it. The panthers
turned aside from their former course and glided toward the sound. They
were not yet come to the outskirts of the settlement, but they knew of a
solitary cabin lying in the thick of the woods a mile and more from the
nearest neighbor. Thither they bent their way, fired with fierce hope. Soon would they break their bitter fast. Up to noon of the previous day the lonely cabin had been occupied. Then
its owner, a shiftless fellow, who spent his days for the most part at
the corner tavern three miles distant, had suddenly grown disgusted with
a land wherein one must work to live, and had betaken himself with his
seven-year-old boy to seek some more indolent clime. During the long
lonely days when his father was away at the tavern the little boy had
been wont to visit the house of the next neighbor, to play with a child
of some five summers, who had no other playmate. The next neighbor was a
prosperous pioneer, being master of a substantial frame-house in the
midst of a large and well-tilled clearing. At times, though rarely,
because it was forbidden, the younger child would make his way by a
rough wood road to visit his poor little disreputable playmate. At
length it had appeared that the five-year-old was learning unsavory
language from the elder boy, who rarely had an opportunity of hearing
speech more desirable. To the bitter grief of both children, the
companionship had at length been stopped by unalterable decree of the
master of the frame house. Hence it had come to pass that the little boy was unaware of his
comrade's departure. Yielding at last to an eager longing for that
comrade, he had stolen away late in the afternoon, traversed with
endless misgivings the lonely stretch of wood road and reached the cabin
only to find it empty. The door, on its leathern hinges, swung idly
open. The one room had been stripped of its few poor furnishings. After
looking in the rickety shed, whence darted two wild and hawklike
chickens, the child had seated himself on the hacked threshold, and
sobbed passionately with a grief that he did not fully comprehend. Then
seeing the shadows lengthen across the tiny clearing, he had grown
afraid to start for home. As the dusk gathered, he had crept trembling
into the cabin, whose door would not stay shut. When it grew quite dark,
he crouched in the inmost corner of the room, desperate with fear and
loneliness, and lifted up his voice piteously. From time to time his
lamentations would be choked by sobs, or he would grow breathless, and
in the terrifying silence would listen hard to hear if any one or
anything were coming. Then again would the shrill childish wailings
arise, startling the unexpectant night, and piercing the forest depths,
even to the ears of those great beasts which had set forth to seek their
meat from God. The lonely cabin stood some distance, perhaps a quarter of a mile, back
from the highway connecting the settlements. Along this main road a man
was plodding wearily. All day he had been walking, and now as he neared
home his steps began to quicken with anticipation of rest. Over his
shoulder projected a double-barrelled fowling-piece, from which was
slung a bundle of such necessities as he had purchased in town that
morning. It was the prosperous settler, the master of the frame house. His mare being with foal, he had chosen to make the tedious journey on
foot. The settler passed the mouth of the wood road leading to the cabin. He
had gone perhaps a furlong beyond, when his ears were startled by the
sound of a child crying in the woods. He stopped, lowered his burden to
the road, and stood straining ears and eyes in the direction of the
sound. It was just at this time that the two panthers also stopped, and
lifted their heads to listen. Their ears were keener than those of the
man, and the sound had reached them at a greater distance. Presently the settler realized whence the cries were coming. He called
to mind the cabin; but he did not know the cabin's owner had departed. He cherished a hearty contempt for the drunken squatter; and on the
drunken squatter's child he looked with small favor, especially as a
playmate for his own boy. Nevertheless he hesitated before resuming his
journey. "Poor little devil!" he muttered, half in wrath. "I reckon his precious
father's drunk down at 'the Corners,' and him crying for loneliness!" Then he reshouldered his burden and strode on doggedly. But louder, shriller, more hopeless and more appealing, arose the
childish voice, and the settler paused again, irresolute, and with
deepening indignation. In his fancy he saw the steaming supper his wife
would have awaiting him. He loathed the thought of retracing his steps,
and then stumbling a quarter of a mile through the stumps and bog of the
wood road. He was foot-sore as well as hungry, and he cursed the
vagabond squatter with serious emphasis; but in that wailing was a
terror which would not let him go on. He thought of his own little one
left in such a position, and straightway his heart melted. He turned,
dropped his bundle behind some bushes, grasped his gun, and made speed
back for the cabin. "Who knows," he said to himself, "but that drunken idiot has left his
youngster without a bite to eat in the whole miserable shanty? Or maybe
he's locked out, and the poor little beggar's half scared to death. _Sounds_ as if he was scared;" and at this thought the settler quickened
his pace. As the hungry panthers drew near the cabin, and the cries of the lonely
child grew clearer, they hastened their steps, and their eyes opened to
a wider circle, flaming with a greener fire. It would be thoughtless
superstition to say the beasts were cruel. They were simply keen with
hunger, and alive with the eager passion of the chase. They were not
ferocious with any anticipation of battle, for they knew the voice was
the voice of a child, and something in the voice told them the child was
solitary. Theirs was no hideous or unnatural rage, as it is the custom
to describe it. They were but seeking with the strength, the cunning,
the deadly swiftness given them to that end, the food convenient for
them. On their success in accomplishing that for which nature had so
exquisitely designed them depended not only their own, but the lives of
their blind and helpless young, now whimpering in the cave on the slope
of the moon-lit ravine. They crept through a wet alder thicket, bounded
lightly over the ragged brush fence, and paused to reconnoitre on the
edge of the clearing, in the full glare of the moon. At the same moment
the settler emerged from the darkness of the wood-road on the opposite
side of the clearing. He saw the two great beasts, heads down and snouts
thrust forward, gliding toward the open cabin door. For a few moments the child had been silent. Now his voice rose again in
pitiful appeal, a very ecstasy of loneliness and terror. There was a
note in the cry that shook the settler's soul. He had a vision of his
own boy, at home with his mother, safe-guarded from even the thought of
peril. And here was this little one left to the wild beasts! "Thank God! Thank God I came!" murmured the settler, as he dropped on one knee to
take a surer aim. There was a loud report (not like the sharp crack of a
rifle), and the female panther, shot through the loins, fell in a heap,
snarling furiously and striking with her fore-paws. The male walked around her in fierce and anxious amazement. Presently,
as the smoke lifted, he discerned the settler kneeling for a second
shot. With a high screech of fury, the lithe brute sprang upon his
enemy, taking a bullet full in his chest without seeming to know he was
hit. Ere the man could slip in another cartridge the beast was upon him,
bearing him to the ground and fixing keen fangs in his shoulder. Without
a word, the man set his strong fingers desperately into the brute's
throat, wrenched himself partly free, and was struggling to rise, when
the panther's body collapsed upon him all at once, a dead weight which
he easily flung aside. The bullet had done its work just in time. Quivering from the swift and dreadful contest, bleeding profusely from
his mangled shoulder, the settler stepped up to the cabin door and
peered in. He heard sobs in the darkness. "Don't be scared, sonny," he said, in a reassuring voice. "I'm going to
take you home along with me. Poor little lad, _I'll_ look after you if
folks that ought to don't." Out of the dark corner came a shout of delight, in a voice which made
the settler's heart stand still. "_Daddy_, daddy," it said, "I _knew_
you'd come. I was so frightened when it got dark!" And a little figure
launched itself into the settler's arms, and clung to him trembling. The
man sat down on the threshold and strained the child to his breast. He
remembered how near he had been to disregarding the far-off cries, and
great beads of sweat broke out upon his forehead. Not many weeks afterwards the settler was following the fresh trail of a
bear which had killed his sheep. The trail led him at last along the
slope of a deep ravine, from whose bottom came the brawl of a swollen
and obstructed stream. In the ravine he found a shallow cave, behind a
great white rock. The cave was plainly a wild beast's lair, and he
entered circumspectly. There were bones scattered about, and on some dry
herbage in the deepest corner of the den, he found the dead bodies, now
rapidly decaying, of two small panther cubs. The Perdu. To the passing stranger there was nothing mysterious about it except the
eternal mystery of beauty. To the scattered folk, however, who lived
their even lives within its neighborhood, it was an object of dim
significance and dread. At first sight it seemed to be but a narrow, tideless, windless bit of
backwater; and the first impulse of the passing stranger was to ask how
it came to be called the "Perdu." On this point he would get little
information from the folk of the neighborhood, who knew not French. But
if he were to translate the term for their better information, they
would show themselves impressed by a sense of its occult
appropriateness. The whole neighborhood was one wherein the strange and the
not-to-be-understood might feel at home. It was a place where the
unusual was not felt to be impossible. Its peace was the peace of one
entranced. To its expectancy a god might come, or a monster, or nothing
more than the realization of eventless weariness. Only four or five miles away, across the silent, bright meadows and
beyond a softly swelling range of pastured hills, swept the great river,
a busy artery of trade. On the river were all the modern noises, and with its current flowed the
stream of modern ideas. Within sight of the river a mystery, or anything
uninvestigated, or aught unamenable to the spirit of the age, would have
seemed an anachronism. But back here, among the tall wild-parsnip tops
and the never-stirring clumps of orange lilies, life was different, and
dreams seemed likely to come true. The Perdu lay perpetually asleep, along beside a steep bank clothed with
white birches and balsam poplars. Amid the trunks of the trees grew
elder shrubs, and snake-berries, and the elvish trifoliate plants of the
purple and the painted trillium. The steep bank, and the grove, and the
Perdu with them, ran along together for perhaps a quarter of a mile, and
then faded out of existence, absorbed into the bosom of the meadows. The Perdu was but a stone's throw broad, throughout its entire length. The steep with its trunks and leafage formed the northern bound of it;
while its southern shore was the green verge of the meadows. Along this
low rim its whitish opalescent waters mixed smoothly with the roots and
over-hanging blades of the long grasses, with the cloistral arched
frondage of the ferns, and with here and there a strayed spray of purple
wild-pea. Here and there, too, a clump of Indian willow streaked the
green with the vivid crimson of its stems. Everything watched and waited. The meadow was a sea of sun mysteriously
imprisoned in the green meshes of the grass-tops. At wide intervals
arose some lonely alder bushes, thick banked with clematis. Far off, on
the slope of a low, bordering hill, the red doors of a barn glowed
ruby-like in the transfiguring sun. At times, though seldom, a blue
heron winged over the level. At times a huge black-and-yellow bee hummed
past, leaving a trail of faint sound that seemed to linger like a
perfume. At times the landscape, that was so changeless, would seem to
waver a little, to shift confusedly like things seen through running
water. And all the while the meadow scents and the many-colored
butterflies rose straight up on the moveless air, and brooded or dropped
back into their dwellings. Yet in all this stillness there was no invitation to sleep. It was a
stillness rather that summoned the senses to keep watch, half
apprehensively, at the doorways of perception. The wide eye noted
everything, and considered it,--even to the hairy red fly alit on the
fern frond, or the skirring progress of the black water-beetle across
the pale surface of the Perdu. The ear was very attentive--even to the
fluttering down of the blighted leaf, or the thin squeak of the bee in
the straitened calyx, or the faint impish conferrings of the moisture
exuding suddenly from somewhere under the bank. If a common sound, like
the shriek of a steamboat's whistle, now and again soared over across
the hills and fields, it was changed in that refracting atmosphere, and
became a defiance at the gates of waking dream. The lives, thoughts, manners, even the open, credulous eyes of the quiet
folk dwelling about the Perdu, wore in greater or less degree the
complexion of the neighborhood. How this came to be is one of those nice
questions for which we need hardly expect definitive settlement. Whether
the people, in the course of generations, had gradually keyed themselves
to the dominant note of their surroundings, or whether the neighborhood
had been little by little wrought up to its pitch of supersensibility by
the continuous impact of superstitions, and expectations, and
apprehensions, and wonders, and visions, rained upon it from the
personalities of an imaginative and secluded people,--this might be
discussed with more argument than conclusiveness. Of the dwellers about the Perdu none was more saturated with the magic
of the place than Reuben Waugh, a boy of thirteen. Reuben lived in a
small, yellow-ochre-colored cottage, on the hill behind the barn with
the red doors. Whenever Reuben descended to the level, and turned to
look back at the yellow dot of a house set in the vast expanse of pale
blue sky, he associated the picture with a vague but haunting conception
of some infinite forget-me-not flower. The boy had all the chores to do
about the little homestead; but even then there was always time to
dream. Besides, it was not a pushing neighborhood; and whenever he would
he took for himself a half-holiday. At such times he was more than
likely to stray over to the banks of the Perdu. It would have been hard for Reuben to say just why he found the Perdu so
attractive. He might have said it was the fishing; for sometimes, though
not often, he would cast a timorous hook into its depths and tremble
lest he should lure from the pallid waters some portentous and dreadful
prey. He never captured, however, anything more terrifying than catfish;
but these were clad in no small measure of mystery, for the white waters
of the Perdu had bleached their scales to a ghastly pallor, and the
opalescence of their eyes was apt to haunt their captor's reveries. He
might have said, also, that it was his playmate, little Celia
Hansen,--whose hook he would bait whenever she wished to fish, and whose
careless hands, stained with berries, he would fill persistently with
bunches of the hot-hued orange lily. But Reuben knew there was more to say than this. In a boyish way, and
all unrealizing, he loved the child with a sort of love that would one
day flower out as an absorbing passion. For the present, however,
important as she was to him, she was nevertheless distinctly secondary
to the Perdu itself with its nameless spell. If Celia was not there, and
if he did not care to fish, the boy still longed for the Perdu, and was
more than content to lie and watch for he knew not what, amid the rapt
herbage, and the brooding insects, and the gnome-like conspiracies of
the moisture exuding far under the bank. Celia was two years younger than Reuben, and by nature somewhat less
imaginative. For a long time she loved the Perdu primarily for its
associations with the boy who was her playmate, her protector, and her
hero. When she was about seven years old Reuben had rescued her from an
angry turkey-cock, and had displayed a confident firmness which seemed
to her wonderfully fine. Hence had arisen an unformulated but enduring
faith that Reuben could be depended upon in any emergency. From that day
forward she had refused to be content with other playmates. Against this
uncompromising preference Mrs. Hansen was wont to protest rather
plaintively; for there were social grades even here, and Mrs. Hansen,
whose husband's acres were broad (including the Perdu itself), knew well
that "that Waugh boy" was not her Celia's equal. The profound distinction, however, was not one which the children could
appreciate; and on Mrs. Hansen lay the spell of the neighborhood,
impelling her to wait for whatever might see fit to come to pass. For these two children the years that slipped so smoothly over the Perdu
were full of interest. They met often. In the spring, when the Perdu was
sullen and unresponsive, and when the soggy meadows showed but a tinge
of green through the brown ruin of the winter's frosts, there was yet
the grove to visit. Here Reuben would make deep incisions in the bark of
the white birches, and gather tiny cupfuls of the faint-flavored sap,
which, to the children's palates, had all the relish of nectar. A
little later on there were the blossoms of the trillium to be
plucked,--blossoms whose beauty was the more alluring in that they were
supposed to be poisonous. But it was with the deepening of the summer that the spell of the Perdu
deepened to its most enthralling potency. And as the little girl grew in
years and came more and more under her playmate's influence, her
imagination deepened as the summer deepens, her perception quickened and
grew subtle. Then in a quiet fashion, a strange thing came about. Under
the influence of the children's sympathetic expectancy, the Perdu began
to find fuller expression. Every mysterious element in the
neighborhood--whether emanating from the Perdu itself or from the
spirits of the people about it--appeared to find a focus in the
personalities of the two children. All the weird, formless
stories,--rather suggestions or impressions than stories,--that in the
course of time had gathered about the place, were revived with added
vividness and awe. New ones, too, sprang into existence all over the
country-side, and were certain to be connected, soon after their origin,
with the name of Reuben Waugh. To be sure, when all was said and sifted,
there remained little that one could grasp or set down in black and
white for question. Every experience, every manifestation, when
investigated, seemed to resolve itself into something of an epidemic
sense of unseen but thrilling influences. The only effect of all this, however, was to invest Reuben with an
interest and importance that consorted curiously with his youth. With a
certain consciousness of superiority, born of his taste for
out-of-the-way reading, and dreaming, and introspection, the boy
accepted the subtle tribute easily, and was little affected by it. He
had the rare fortune not to differ in essentials from his neighbors, but
only to intensify and give visible expression to the characteristics
latent in them all. Thus year followed year noiselessly, till Reuben was seventeen and Celia
fifteen. For all the expectancy, the sense of eventfulness even, of
these years, little had really happened save the common inexplicable
happenings of life and growth. The little that might be counted an
exception may be told in a few words. The customs of angling for catfish and tapping the birch trees for sap,
had been suffered to fall into disuse. Rather, it seemed interesting to
wander vaguely together, or in the long grass to read together from the
books which Reuben would borrow from the cobwebby library of the old
schoolmaster. As the girl reached up mentally, or perhaps, rather, emotionally, toward
the imaginative stature of her companion, her hold upon him
strengthened. Of old, his perceptions had been keenest when alone, but
now they were in every way quickened by her presence. And now it
happened that the great blue heron came more frequently to visit the
Perdu. While the children were sitting amid the birches, they heard the
_hush! hush!_ of the bird's wings fanning the pallid water. The bird,
did I say? But it seemed to them a spirit in the guise of a bird. It had
gradually forgotten its seclusiveness, and now dropped its long legs at
a point right over the middle of the Perdu, alighted apparently on the
liquid surface, and stood suddenly transformed into a moveless statue of
a bird, gazing upon the playmates with bright, significant eyes. The
look made Celia tremble. The Perdu, as might have been expected when so many mysteries were
credited to it, was commonly held to be bottomless. It is a very poor
neighborhood indeed, that cannot show a pool with this distinction. Reuben, of course, knew the interpretation of the myth. He knew the
Perdu was very deep. Except at either end, or close to the banks, no
bottom could be found with such fathom-lines as he could command. To
him, and hence to Celia, this idea of vast depths was thrillingly
suggestive, and yet entirely believable. The palpably impossible had
small appeal for them. But when first they saw the great blue bird
alight where they knew the water was fathoms deep, they came near being
surprised. At least, they felt the pleasurable sensation of wonder. How
was the heron supported on the water? From their green nest the children
gazed and gazed; and the great blue bird held them with the gem-like
radiance of its unwinking eye. At length to Reuben came a vision of the
top of an ancient tree-trunk just beneath the bird's feet, just beneath
the water's surface. Down, slanting far down through the opaline
opaqueness, he saw the huge trunk extend itself, to an immemorial
root-hold in the clayey, perpendicular walls of the Perdu. He unfolded
the vision to Celia, who understood. "And it's just as wonderful," said
the girl, "for how did the trunk get there?" "That's so," answered Reuben, with his eyes fixed on the bird,--"but
then it's quite possible!" And at the low sound of their voices the bird winnowed softly away. At another time, when the children were dreaming by the Perdu, a far-off
dinner-horn sounded, hoarsely but sweetly, its summons to the workers in
the fields. It was the voice of noon. As the children, rising to go,
glanced together across the Perdu, they clasped each other with a start
of mild surprise. "Did you see that?" whispered Celia. "What did you see?" asked the boy. "It looked like pale green hand, that waved for a moment over the water,
and then sank," said Celia. "Yes," said Reuben, "that's just what it looked like. But I don't
believe it really was a hand! You see those thin lily-leaves all about
the spot? Their stems are long, wonderfully long and slender. If one of
those queer, whitish catfish, like we used to catch, were to take hold
of a lily-stem and pull hard, the edges of the leaf might rise up and
wave just the way _that_ did! You can't tell what the catfish won't do
down there!" "Perhaps that's all it was," said Celia. "Though we can't be sure," added Reuben. And thereafter, whensoever that green hand seemed to wave to them across
the pale water, they were content to leave the vision but half
explained. It also came to pass, as unexpectedly as anything could come to pass by
the banks of the Perdu, that one dusky evening, as the boy and girl came
slowly over the meadows, they saw a radiant point of light that wavered
fitfully above the water. They watched it in silence. As it came to a
pause, the girl said in her quiet voice,--

"It has stopped right over the place where the heron stands!" "Yes," replied Reuben, "it is evidently a will-o'-the-wisp. The queer
gas, which makes it, comes perhaps from the end of that dead tree-trunk,
just under the surface." But the fact that the point of light was thus explicable, made it no
less interesting and little less mysterious to the dwellers about the
Perdu. As it came to be an almost nightly feature of the place, the
people supplemented its local habitation with a name, calling it "Reuben
Waugh's Lantern." Celia's father, treating the Perdu and all that
pertained to it with a reverent familiarity befitting his right of
proprietorship, was wont to say to Reuben,--

"Who gave you leave, Reuben, to hoist your lantern on my property? If
you don't take it away pretty soon, I'll be having the thing put in
pound." It may be permitted me to cite yet one more incident to illustrate more
completely the kind of events which seemed of grave importance in the
neighborhood of the Perdu. It was an accepted belief that, even in the
severest frosts, the Perdu could not be securely frozen over. Winter
after winter, to be sure, it lay concealed beneath such a covering of
snow as only firm ice could be expected to support. Yet this fact was
not admitted in evidence. Folks said the ice and snow were but a film,
waiting to yield upon the slightest pressure. Furthermore, it was held
that neither bird nor beast was ever known to tread the deceptive
expanse. No squirrel track, no slim, sharp foot-mark of partridge,
traversed the immaculate level. One winter, after a light snowfall in
the night, as Reuben strayed into the low-ceilinged kitchen of the
Hansen farm-house, Mr. Hansen remarked in his quaint, dreamy drawl,--

"What for have you been walking on the Perdu, Reuben? This morning, on
the new snow, I saw foot-marks of a human running right across it. It
must have been you, Reuben. There's nobody else round here 'd do it!" "No," said Reuben, "I haven't been nigh the Perdu these three days past. And then I didn't try walking on it, any way." "Well," continued Celia's father, "I suppose folks would call it queer! Those foot-marks just began at one side of the Perdu, and ended right up
sharp at the other. There wasn't another sign of a foot, on the meadow
or in the grove!" "Yes," assented Reuben, "it looks queer in a way. But then, it's easy
for the snow to drift over the other tracks; while the Perdu lies low
out of the wind." The latter days of Reuben's stay beside the banks of the Perdu were
filled up by a few events like these, by the dreams which these evoked,
and above all by the growing realization of his love for Celia. At
length the boy and girl slipped unawares into mutual self-revelations;
and for a day or two life seemed so materially and tangibly joyous that
vision and dream eluded them. Then came the girl's naive account of how
her confidences had been received at home. She told of her mother's
objections, soon overruled by her father's obstinate plea that "Reuben
Waugh, when he got to be a man grown, would be good enough for any girl
alive." Celia had dwelt with pride on her father's championship of their cause. Her mother's opposition she had been familiar with for as long as she
could remember. But it was the mother's opposition that loomed large in
Reuben's eyes. First it startled him with a vague sense of disquiet. Then it filled his
soul with humiliation as its full significance grew upon him. Then he
formed a sudden resolve; and neither the mother's relenting cordiality,
nor the father's practical persuasions, nor Celia's tears, could turn
him from his purpose. He said that he would go away, after the
time-honored fashion, and seek his fortune in the world. He vowed that
in three or four years, when they would be of a fit age to marry, he
would come back with a full purse and claim Celia on even terms. This
did not suit the unworldly old farmer, who had inherited, not in vain,
the spiritualities and finer influences of his possession, the Perdu. He
desired, first of all, his girl's happiness. He rebuked Reuben's pride
with a sternness unusual for him. But Reuben went. He went down the great river. Not many miles from the quiet region of
the Perdu there was a little riverside landing, where Reuben took the
steamer and passed at once into another atmosphere, another world. The
change was a spiritual shock to him, making him gasp as if he had fallen
into a tumultuous sea. There was the same chill, there was a like
difficulty in getting his balance. But this was not for long. His innate
self-reliance steadied him rapidly. His long-established habit of
superiority helped him to avoid betraying his first sense of ignorance
and unfitness. His receptiveness led him to assimilate swiftly the
innumerable and novel facts of life with which he came all at once in
contact; and he soon realized that the stirring, capable crowd, whose
ready handling of affairs had at first overawed him, was really inferior
in true insight to the peculiar people whom he had left about the Perdu. He found that presently he himself could handle the facts of life with
the light dexterity which had so amazed him; but through it all he
preserved (as he could see that those about him did not) his sense of
the relativity of things. He perceived, always, the dependence of the
facts of life upon the ideas underlying them, and thrusting them forward
as manifestations or utterances. With his undissipated energy, his
curious frugality in the matter of self-revelation, and his instinctive
knowledge of men, he made his way from the first, and the roaring port
at the mouth of the great river yielded him of its treasures for the
asking. This was in a quiet enough way, indeed, but a way that more than
fulfilled his expectations; and in the height of the blossoming time of
his fifth summer in the world he found himself rich enough to go back to
the Perdu and claim Celia. He resolved that he would buy property near
the Perdu and settle there. He had no wish to live in the world; but to
the world he would return often, for the sake of the beneficence of its
friction,--as a needle, he thought, is the keener for being thrust often
amid the grinding particles of the emery-bag. He resigned his situation
and went aboard an up-river boat,--a small boat that would stop at every
petty landing, if only to put ashore an old woman or a bag of meal, if
only to take in a barrel of potatoes or an Indian with baskets and
bead-work. About mid-morning of the second day, at a landing not a score of miles
below the one whereat Reuben would disembark, an Indian did come aboard
with baskets and bead-work. At sight of him the old atmosphere of
expectant mystery came over Reuben as subtly as comes the desire of
sleep. He had seen this same Indian--he recognized the unchanging
face--on the banks of the Perdu one morning years before, brooding
motionless over the motionless water. Reuben began unconsciously to
divest himself of his lately gathered worldliness; his mouth softened,
his eyes grew wider and more passive, his figure fell into looser and
freer lines, his dress seemed to forget its civil trimness. When at
length he had disembarked at the old wharf under the willows, had struck
across through the hilly sheep-pastures, and had reached a slope
overlooking the amber-bright country of the Perdu, he was once more the
silently eager boy, the quaintly reasoning visionary, his spirit waiting
alert at his eyes and at his ears. Reuben had little concern for the highways. Therefore he struck straight
across the meadows, through the pale green vetch-tangle, between the
intense orange lilies, amid the wavering blue butterflies and the warm,
indolent perfumes of the wild-parsnip. As he drew near the Perdu there
appeared the giant blue heron, dropping to his perch in mid-water. In
almost breathless expectancy Reuben stepped past a clump of red willows,
banked thick with clematis. His heart was beating quickly, and he could
hear the whisper of the blood in his veins, as he came once more in view
of the still, white water. His gaze swept the expanse once and again, then paused, arrested by the
unwavering, significant eye of the blue heron. The next moment he was
vaguely conscious of a hand, that seemed to wave once above the water,
far over among the lilies. He smiled as he said to himself that nothing
had changed. But at this moment the blue heron, as if disturbed, rose
and winnowed reluctantly away; and Reuben's eyes, thus liberated, turned
at once to the spot where he had felt, rather than seen, the vision. As
he looked the vision came again,--a hand, and part of an arm, thrown out
sharply as if striving to grasp support, then dropping back and bearing
down the lily leaves. For an instant Reuben's form seemed to shrink and
cower with horror,--and the next he was cleaving with mighty strokes the
startled surface of the Perdu. That hand--it was not pale green, like
the waving hand of the old, childish vision. It was white and the arm
was white, and white the drenched lawn sleeve clinging to it. He had
recognized it, he knew not how, for Celia's. Reaching the edge of the lily patch, Reuben dived again and again,
groping desperately among the long, serpent-like stems. The Perdu at
this point--and even in his horror he noted it with surprise--was
comparatively shallow. He easily got the bottom and searched it
minutely. The edge of the dark abyss, into which he strove in vain to
penetrate, was many feet distant from the spot where the vision had
appeared. Suddenly, as he rested, breathless and trembling, on the
grassy brink of the Perdu, he realized that this, too, was but a vision. It was but one of the old mysteries of the Perdu; and it had taken for
him that poignant form, because his heart and brain were so full of
Celia. With a sigh of exquisite relief he thought how amused she would
be at his plight, but how tender when she learned the cause of it. He
laughed softly; and just then the blue heron came back to the Perdu. Reuben shook himself, pressed some of the water from his dripping
clothes, and climbed the steep upper bank of the Perdu. As he reached
the top he paused among the birch trees to look back upon the water. How
like a floor of opal it lay in the sun; then his heart leaped into his
throat suffocatingly, for again rose the hand and arm, and waved, and
dropped back among the lilies! He grasped the nearest tree, that he
might not, in spite of himself, plunge back into the pale mystery of the
Perdu. He rubbed his eyes sharply, drew a few long breaths to steady his
heart, turned his back doggedly on the shining terror, and set forward
swiftly for the farm-house, now in full view not three hundred yards
away. For all the windless down-streaming summer sunshine, there was that in
Reuben's drenched clothes which chilled him to the heart. As he reached
the wide-eaved cluster of the farmstead, a horn in the distance blew
musically for noon. It was answered by another and another. But no such
summons came from the kitchen door to which his feet now turned. The
quiet of the Seventh Day seemed to possess the wide, bright farm-yard. A
flock of white ducks lay drowsing on a grassy spot. A few hens dusted
themselves with silent diligence in the ash-heap in front of the shed;
and they stopped to watch with bright eyes the stranger's approach. From
under the apple-trees the horses whinnied to him lonesomely. It was very
peaceful; but the peacefulness of it bore down upon Reuben's soul like
lead. It seemed as if the end of things had come. He feared to lift the
latch of the well-known door. As he hesitated, trembling, he observed that the white blinds were down
at the sitting-room windows. The window nearest him was open, and the
blind stirred almost imperceptibly. Behind it, now, his intent ear
caught a sound of weary sobbing. At once he seemed to see all that was
in the shadowed room. The moveless, shrouded figure, the unresponding
lips, the bowed heads of the mourners, all came before him as clearly as
if he were standing in their midst. He leaned against the door-post, and
at this moment the door opened. Celia's father stood before him. The old man's face was drawn with his grief. Something of bitterness
came into his eyes as he looked on Reuben. "You've heard, then!" he said harshly. "I know!" shaped itself inaudibly on Reuben's lips. At the sight of his anguish the old man's bitterness broke. "You've come
in time for the funeral," he exclaimed piteously. "Oh, Reube, if you'd
stayed it might have been different!" "The Young Ravens that Call upon Him." It was just before dawn, and a grayness was beginning to trouble the
dark about the top of the mountain. Even at that cold height there was no wind. The veil of cloud that hid
the stars hung but a hand-breadth above the naked summit. To eastward
the peak broke away sheer, beetling in a perpetual menace to the valleys
and the lower hills. Just under the brow, on a splintered and creviced
ledge, was the nest of the eagles. As the thick dark shrank down the steep like a receding tide, and the
grayness reached the ragged heap of branches forming the nest, the young
eagles stirred uneasily under the loose droop of the mother's wings. She
raised her head and peered about her, slightly lifting her wings as she
did so; and the nestlings, complaining at the chill air that came in
upon their unfledged bodies, thrust themselves up amid the warm feathers
of her thighs. The male bird, perched on a jutting fragment beside the
nest, did not move. But he was awake. His white, narrow, flat-crowned
head was turned to one side, and his yellow eye, under its straight,
fierce lid, watched the pale streak that was growing along the distant
eastern sea-line. The great birds were racked with hunger. Even the nestlings, to meet the
petitions of whose gaping beaks they stinted themselves without mercy,
felt meagre and uncomforted. Day after day the parent birds had fished
almost in vain; day after day their wide and tireless hunting had
brought them scant reward. The schools of alewives, mackerel, and
herring seemed to shun their shores that spring. The rabbits seemed to
have fled from all the coverts about their mountain. The mother eagle, larger and of mightier wing than her mate, looked as
if she had met with misadventure. Her plumage was disordered. Her eyes,
fiercely and restlessly anxious, at moments grew dull as if with
exhaustion. On the day before, while circling at her viewless height
above a lake far inland, she had marked a huge lake-trout, basking near
the surface of the water. Dropping upon it with half-closed, hissing
wings, she had fixed her talons in its back. But the fish had proved too
powerful for her. Again and again it had dragged her under water, and
she had been almost drowned before she could unloose the terrible grip
of her claws. Hardly, and late, had she beaten her way back to the
mountain-top. And now the pale streak in the east grew ruddy. Rust-red stains and
purple, crawling fissures began to show on the rocky face of the peak. A
piece of scarlet cloth, woven among the fagots of the nest, glowed like
new blood in the increasing light. And presently a wave of rose appeared
to break and wash down over the summit, as the rim of the sun came above
the horizon. The male eagle stretched his head far out over the depth, lifted his
wings and screamed harshly, as if in greeting of the day. He paused a
moment in that position, rolling his eye upon the nest. Then his head
went lower, his wings spread wider, and he launched himself smoothly and
swiftly into the abyss of air as a swimmer glides into the sea. The
female watched him, a faint wraith of a bird darting through the gloom,
till presently, completing his mighty arc, he rose again into the full
light of the morning. Then on level, all but moveless wing, he sailed
away toward the horizon. As the sun rose higher and higher, the darkness began to melt on the
tops of the lower hills and to diminish on the slopes of the upland
pastures, lingering in the valleys as the snow delays there in spring. As point by point the landscape uncovered itself to his view, the eagle
shaped his flight into a vast circle, or rather into a series of
stupendous loops. His neck was stretched toward the earth, in the
intensity of his search for something to ease the bitter hunger of his
nestlings and his mate. Not far from the sea, and still in darkness, stood a low, round hill, or
swelling upland. Bleak and shelterless, whipped by every wind that the
heavens could let loose, it bore no bush but an occasional juniper
scrub. It was covered with mossy hillocks, and with a short grass,
meagre but sweet. There in the chilly gloom, straining her ears to catch
the lightest footfall of approaching peril, but hearing only the hushed
thunder of the surf, stood a lonely ewe over the lamb to which she had
given birth in the night. Having lost the flock when the pangs of travail came upon her, the
unwonted solitude filled her with apprehension. But as soon as the first
feeble bleating of the lamb fell upon her ear, everything was changed. Her terrors all at once increased tenfold,--but they were for her young,
not for herself; and with them came a strange boldness such as her heart
had never known before. As the little weakling shivered against her
side, she uttered low, short bleats and murmurs of tenderness. When an
owl hooted in the woods across the valley, she raised her head angrily
and faced the sound, suspecting a menace to her young. When a mouse
scurried past her, with a small, rustling noise amid the withered mosses
of the hillock, she stamped fiercely, and would have charged had the
intruder been a lion. When the first gray of dawn descended over the pasture, the ewe feasted
her eyes with the sight of the trembling little creature, as it lay on
the wet grass. With gentle nose she coaxed it and caressed it, till
presently it struggled to its feet, and, with its pathetically awkward
legs spread wide apart to preserve its balance, it began to nurse. Turning her head as far around as she could, the ewe watched its every
motion with soft murmurings of delight. And now that wave of rose, which had long ago washed the mountain and
waked the eagles spread tenderly across the open pasture. The lamb
stopped nursing; and the ewe, moving forward two or three steps, tried
to persuade it to follow her. She was anxious that it should as soon as
possible learn to walk freely, so they might together rejoin the flock. She felt that the open pasture was full of dangers. The lamb seemed afraid to take so many steps. It shook its ears and
bleated piteously. The mother returned to its side, caressed it anew,
pushed it with her nose, and again moved away a few feet, urging it to
go with her. Again the feeble little creature refused, bleating loudly. At this moment there came a terrible hissing rush out of the sky, and a
great form fell upon the lamb. The ewe wheeled and charged madly; but at
the same instant the eagle, with two mighty buffetings of his wings,
rose beyond her reach and soared away toward the mountain. The lamb hung
limp from his talons; and with piteous cries the ewe ran beneath, gazing
upward, and stumbling over the hillocks and juniper bushes. In the nest of the eagles there was content. The pain of their hunger
appeased, the nestlings lay dozing in the sun, the neck of one resting
across the back of the other. The triumphant male sat erect upon his
perch, staring out over the splendid world that displayed itself beneath
him. Now and again he half lifted his wings and screamed joyously at the
sun. The mother bird, perched upon a limb on the edge of the nest,
busily rearranged her plumage. At times she stooped her head into the
nest to utter over her sleeping eaglets a soft chuckling noise, which
seemed to come from the bottom of her throat. But hither and thither over the round bleak hill wandered the ewe,
calling for her lamb, unmindful of the flock, which had been moved to
other pastures. Within Sound of the Saws. Lumber had gone up, and the big mill on the Aspohegan was working
overtime. Through the range of square openings under the eaves the sunlight
streamed in steadily upon the strident tumult, the confusion of sun and
shadow, within the mill. The air was sweet with the smell of fresh
sawdust and clammy with the ooze from great logs just "yanked" up the
dripping slides from the river. One had to pitch his voice with peculiar
care to make it audible amid the chaotic din of the saws. In the middle of the mill worked the "gang," a series of upright saws
that rose and fell swiftly, cleaving their way with a pulsating, vicious
clamor through an endless and sullen procession of logs. Here and there,
each with a massive table to itself, hummed the circulars, large and
small; and whensoever a deal, or a pile of slabs, was brought in contact
with one of the spinning discs, upon the first arching spirt of sawdust
spray began a shrieking note, which would run the whole vibrant and
intolerable gamut as the saw bit through the fibres from end to end. In
the occasional brief moments of comparative silence, when several of the
saws would chance to be disengaged at the same instant, might be heard,
far down in the lower story of the mill, the grumbling roar of the two
great turbine wheels, which, sucking in the tortured water from the
sluices, gave life to all the wilderness of cranks and shafts above. That end of the mill which looked down river stood open, to a height of
about seven feet, across the whole of the upper story. From this opening
ran a couple of long slanting ways each two feet wide and about a
hundred feet in length, raised on trestles. The track of these "slides,"
as they are technically termed, consisted of a series of wooden rollers,
along which the deals raced in endless sequence from the saws, to drop
with a plunge into a spacious basin, at the lower end of which they were
gathered into rafts. Whenever there was a break in the procession of
deals, the rollers would be left spinning briskly with a cheerful
murmur. There was also a shorter and steeper "slide," diverging to the
lumber yard, where clapboards and such light stuff were piled till they
could be carted to the distant station. In former days it had been the easy custom to dump the sawdust into the
stream, but the fish-wardens had lately interfered and put a stop to the
practice. Now, a tall young fellow, in top boots, gray homespun trousers
and blue shirt, was busy carting the sawdust to a swampy hollow near the
lower end of the main slides. Sandy MacPherson was a new hand. Only that morning had he joined the
force at the Aspohegan Mill; and every now and then he would pause,
remove his battered soft felt from his whitish yellow curls, mop his red
forehead, and gaze with a hearty appreciation at the fair landscape
spread out beyond the mill. With himself and with the world in general
he felt on fairly good terms--an easy frame of mind which would have
been much jarred had he been conscious of the fact that from a corner in
the upper story of the mill his every movement was watched with a
vindictive and ominous interest. In that corner, close by the head of one of the main slides, stood a
table whose presiding genius was a little swinging circular. The
circular was tended by a powerful, sombre-visaged old mill-hand called
'Lije Vandine, whose office it was to trim square the ragged ends of the
"stuff" before it went down the slide. At the very back of the table
hummed the saw, like a great hornet; and whenever Vandine got two or
three deals in place before him he would grasp a lever above his head,
and forward through its narrow slit in the table would dart the little
saw, and scream its way in a second through the tough white spruce. Every time he let the saw swing back, Vandine would drop his eyes to the
blue-shirted figure below, and his harsh features would work with
concentrated fury. These seven years he had been waiting for the day
when he should meet Sandy MacPherson face to face. Seven years before, 'Lije Vandine had been working in one of the mills
near St. John, New Brunswick, while his only daughter, Sarah, was living
out at service in the city. At this time Sandy MacPherson was employed
on the city wharves, and an acquaintance which he formed with the pretty
housemaid resulted in a promise of marriage between the two. Vandine and
his wife were satisfied with the girl's account of her lover, and the
months slipped by swiftly without their making his acquaintance. Among
the fishing and lumbering classes, however, it not seldom happens that
betrothal brings with it rather more intimate privileges than propriety
could sanction, whence it came to pass that one evening Sarah returned
to her parents unexpectedly, having been dismissed from her situation in
disgrace. Vandine, though ignorant, was a clear-seeing man, who
understood his own class thoroughly; and after his first outburst of
wounded indignation he had forgiven and comforted his daughter no less
tenderly than her mother had done. He knew perfectly that the girl was
no wanton. He went at once into the city, with the intention of fetching
Sandy out and covering up the disgrace by an immediate marriage. He
visited the wharves, but the young man was not there. With growing
apprehension he hastened to his boarding-house, only to learn that
MacPherson had left the place and was departing for the States by the
next train, having been married the previous evening. The man's pain and
fury at this revelation almost choked him, but he mastered himself
sufficiently to ask a boy of the house to accompany him to the station
and point out the betrayer. If the train had not gone, he would be in
time to avenge his poor girl. The boy, however, took alarm at something
in Vandine's face, and led him by a roundabout way, so that just as he
drew near the station the Western Express rolled out with increasing
speed. On the rear platform stood a laughing young woman bedecked in
many colors, and beside her a tall youth with a curly yellow head, whom
the boy pointed out as Sandy MacPherson. He was beyond the reach of
vengeance for the time. But his features stamped themselves ineffaceably
on the avenger's memory. As the latter turned away, to bide his time in
grim silence, the young woman on the platform of the car said to her
husband, "I wonder who that was, Sandy, that looked like he was going to
run after the cars! Didn't you see? His arms kind o' jerked out, like
that; but he didn't start after all. There he goes up the hill, with one
pant-leg in his boot. He looked kind of wild. I'm just as glad he didn't
get aboard!" "He's one of your old fellers as you've give the go-by to, I kind of
suspicion, Sis," replied the young man with a laugh. And the train
roared into a cutting. About a year after these events Vandine's wife died, and Vandine
thereupon removed, with Sarah and her baby, to the interior of the
province, settling down finally at Aspohegan Mills. Here he built
himself a small cottage, on a steep slope overlooking the mill; and here
Sarah, by her quiet and self-sacrificing devotion to her father and her
child, wiped out the memory of her error and won the warm esteem of the
settlement. As for the child, he grew into a handsome, blue-eyed, sturdy
boy, whom his grandfather loved with a passionate tenderness intensified
by a subtle strain of pity. As year by year his daughter and the boy
twined themselves ever closer about his heart, Vandine's hate against
the man who had wronged them both kept ever deepening to a keener
anguish. But now at last the day had come. When first he had caught sight of
MacPherson in the yard below, the impulse to rush down and throttle him
was so tremendous that as he curbed it the blood forsook his face,
leaving it the color of ashes, and for a few seconds he could not tend
his saw. Presently, when the yelping little demon was again at work
biting across the timbers, the foreman drew near, and Vandine asked him,
"Who's the new hand down yonder?" "Oh!" said the foreman, leaning a little over the bench to follow
Vandine's pointing, "yon's one Sandy MacPherson, from over on the
Kennebec. He's been working in Maine these seven year past, but says he
kind of got a hankering after his own country, an' so he's come back. Good hand!" "_That_ so!" was all Vandine replied. All the long forenoon, amid the wild, or menacing, or warning, or
complaining crescendos and diminuendos of the unresting saws, the man's
brain seethed with plans of vengeance. After all these years of waiting
he would be satisfied with no common retribution. To merely kill the
betrayer would be insufficient. He would wring his soul and quench his
manhood with some strange unheard-of horror, ere dealing the final
stroke that should rid earth of his presence. Scheme after scheme burned
through his mind, and at times his gaunt face would crease itself in a
dreadful smile as he pulled the lever that drove his blade through the
deals. Finding no plan altogether to his taste, however, he resolved to
postpone his revenge till night, at least, that he might have the more
time to think it over, and to indulge the luxury of anticipation with
realization so easily within his grasp. At noon Vandine, muttering to himself, climbed the steep path to the
little cottage on the hillside. He ate his dinner in silence, with
apparently no perception of what was being set before him. His daughter
dared not break in upon this preoccupation. Even his idolized Stevie
could win from him no notice, save a smile of grim triumph that
frightened the child. Just as he was leaving the cottage to return to
the mill, he saw Sarah start back from the window and sit down suddenly,
grasping at her bosom, and blanching to the lips as if she had seen a
ghost. Glancing downward to the black road, deep with rotted sawdust, he
saw MacPherson passing. "Who is it?" he asked the girl. "It's Sandy," she murmured, flushing scarlet and averting her face. Her father turned away without a word and started down the hill. Presently the girl remembered that there was something terrifying in the
expression of his face as he asked the curt question. With a sudden
vague fear rising in her breast, she ran to the cottage door. "Father!" she cried, "father!" But Vandine paid no heed to her calls,
and after a pause she turned back into the room to answer Stevie's
demand for a cup of milk. Along about the middle of the afternoon, while Sandy MacPherson was
still carting sawdust, and Vandine tending his circular amid the
bewildering din, Stevie and some other children came down to play around
the mill. The favorite amusement with these embryo mill-hands, stream-drivers, and
lumbermen, was to get on the planks as they emerged from the upper story
of the mill, and go careering swiftly and smoothly down the slides,
till, just before coming to the final plunge, they would jump off, and
fall on the heap of sawdust. This was a game that to strangers looked
perilous enough; but there had never been an accident, so at Aspohegan
Mills it had outgrown the disapproval of the hands. To Sandy MacPherson,
however, it was new, and from time to time he eyed the sport
apprehensively. And all the while Vandine glared upon him from his
corner in the upper story, and the children raced shouting down the
slides, and tumbled with bright laughter into the sawdust. Among the children none enjoyed more than Stevie this racing down the
slides. His mother, looking out of the window on the hillside, saw the
merry little figure, bareheaded, the long yellow curls floating out
behind him, as he half knelt, half sat on the sliding plank ready to
jump off at the proper moment. She had no thought of danger as she
resumed her housework. Neither had Stevie. At length it happened,
however, that just as he was nearing the end of the descent, an eagle
came sailing low overhead, caught the little fellow's eye, and diverted
his attention for a moment. It was the fatal moment. Just as he looked
down again, gathering himself to jump, his heart sprang into his throat,
and the plank with a sickening lurch plunged into the churning basin. The child's shrill, frightened shriek was not half uttered ere the
waters choked it. Vandine had just let the buzzing little circular slip back into its
recess, when he saw MacPherson spring from his cart and dash madly down
to the shore. At the same instant came that shrill cry, so abruptly silenced. Vandine's heart stood still with awful terror,--he had recognized the
child's voice. In a second he had swung himself down over the
scaffolding, alighting on a sawdust heap. "Hold back the deals!" he yelled in a voice that pierced the din. It was
not five seconds ere every one in the mill seemed to know what had
happened. Two men sprang on the slides and checked the stream of deals. Then the great turbines ceased to grumble, and all the clamor of the
saws was hushed. The unexpected silence was like a blow, and sickened
the nerves. And meanwhile--Stevie? The plank that bore his weight clinging
desperately to it, plunged deeper than its fellows, and came up somewhat
further from the slide, but not now with Stevie upon it. The child had
lost his hold, and when he rose it was only to strike against the
bottoms of three or four deals that lay clustered together. This, though apparently fatal, was in reality the child's salvation, for
during the half or three-quarters of a minute that intervened before the
slides could be stopped, the great planks kept dropping and plunging and
crashing about him; and had it not been for those very timbers that cut
him off from the air he was choking to breathe, he would have been
crushed and battered out of all human semblance in a second. As it was,
ere he had time to suffocate, MacPherson was on the spot. In an instant the young man's heavy boots were kicked off, and without
pausing to count the odds, which were hideously against him, he sprang
into the chaos of whirling timbers. All about him pounded the falling
deals, then ceased, just as he made a clean dive beneath that little
cluster that covered Stevie. As Vandine reached the shore, and was
casting desperate glances over the basin in search of some clue to guide
his plunge, MacPherson reappeared at the other side of the deals, and
Stevie's yellow curls were floating over his shoulder. The young man
clung rather faintly to the supporting planks, as if he had overstrained
himself; and two or three hands, who had already shoved off a "bateau,"
pushed out and picked him up with his burden. Torn by a convulsion of fiercely antagonized passions, Vandine sat down
on the edge of the bank and waited stupidly. About the same moment Sarah
looked out of the cottage door in wonder to see why the mill had stopped
so suddenly. In all his dreams, Vandine had never dreamed of such chance as that his
enemy should deserve his gratitude. In his nature there had grown up one
thing stronger than his thirst for vengeance, and that one thing was his
love for Stevie. In spite of himself, and indeed to his furious
self-scorn, he found his heart warming strangely to the man who, at
deadliest risk, had saved the life of his darling. At the same time he
was conscious of a fresh sense of injury. A bitter resentment throbbed
up in his bewildered bosom, to think that MacPherson should thus have
robbed him of the sweets of that revenge he had so long anticipated. The
first clear realization that came to him was that, though he must kill
the man who had wronged his girl, he would nevertheless be tortured with
remorse for ever after. A moment more, and--as he saw Sandy step out of
the "bateau" with the boy, now sobbing feebly, in his arms--he knew that
his vengeance had been made for ever impossible. He longed fiercely to
grasp the fellow's hand, and make some poor attempt to thank him. But he
mastered the impulse--Sarah must not be forgotten. He strode down the
bank. One of the hands had taken Stevie, and MacPherson was leaning
against a pile of boards, panting for breath. Vandine stepped up to him,
his fingers twitching, and struck him a furious blow across the mouth
with his open hand. Then he turned aside, snatched Stevie to his bosom,
and started up the bank. Before going two paces, however, he paused, as
if oppressed by the utter stillness that followed his astounding act. Bending a strange look on the young man, he said, in a voice as harsh as
the saw's:--

"I _was_ going to kill you to-night, Sandy MacPherson. But now after
this day's work of yourn, I guess yer safe from me from this out." He
shut his mouth with a snap, and strode up through the piles of sawdust
toward the cottage on the hill. As for MacPherson, he was dumbfounded. Though no boaster, he knew he had
done a magnificently heroic thing, and to get his mouth slapped for it
was an exigency which he did not know what to do with. He had staggered
against the boards from the force of the stroke, but it had not occurred
to him to resent it, though ordinarily he was hot-blooded and quick in a
quarrel. He stared about him sheepishly, bewildered and abashed, and
unspeakably aggrieved. In the faces of the mill-hands who were gathered
about him, he found no solution of the mystery. They looked as
astonished as himself, and almost equally hot and ashamed. Presently he
ejaculated, "Well, I swan!" Then one of the men who had taken out the
"bateau" and picked him up, found voice. "I'll be gosh-darned ef that ain't the damnedest," said he, slowly. "Why, so, I'd thought as how he was a-goin' right down on his
prayer-handles to ye. That there kid is the apple of his eye." "An' he was sot on _killin'_ me to-night, was he?" murmured MacPherson
in deepest wonderment. "What might his name be, anyhow?" "'Lije Vandine," spoke up another of the hands. "An' that's his
grandchild, Stevie. I reckon he must have a powerful grudge agin you,
Sandy, or he'd never 'a' acted that way." MacPherson's face had grown suddenly serious and dignified. "Is the
boy's father and mother livin'?" he inquired. "Sarah Vandine's living with the old man," answered the foreman, "and as
fine a girl as there'll be in Aspohegan. Don't know anything about the
lad's father, nor don't want to. The man that'd treat a girl like Sarah
Vandine that way--hangin 's too good for 'im." MacPherson's face flushed crimson, and he dropped his eyes. "Boys," said he, huskily, "ef 'Lije Vandine had 'a' served me as he
intended, I guess as how I'd have only got my deserts. I reckon as how
_I'm_ the little lad's father!" The hands stared at each other. Nothing could make them forget what
MacPherson had just done. They were all daring and ready in emergency,
but each man felt that he would have thought twice before jumping into
the basin when the deals were running on the slides. The foreman could
have bitten his tongue out for what he had just said. He tried to mend
matters. "I wouldn't have thought you was that sort of a man, to judge from what
I've just seen o' you," he explained. "Anyhow, I reckon you've more'n
made up this day for the wrong you done when you was younger. But Sarah
Vandine's as good a girl as they make, an' I don't hardly see how you
could 'a' served her that trick." A certain asperity grew in the foreman's voice as he thought of it; for,
as his wife used to say, he "set a great store by 'Lije's girl, not
havin' no daughter of his own." "It was lies as done it, boys," said MacPherson. "As for _whose_ lies,
why _that_ ain't neither here nor there, now--an' she as did the
mischief's dead and buried--and before she died she told me all about
it. That was last winter--of the grippe--and I tell you I've felt bad
about Sarah ever since. An' to think the little lad's mine! _Boys_, but
ain't he a beauty?" And Sandy's face began to beam with satisfaction at
the thought. By this time all the hands looked gratified at the turn affairs were, to
them, so plainly taking. Every one returned to work, the foreman
remarking aside to a chum, "I reckon Sarah's all right." And in a minute
or two the saws were once more shrieking their way through the logs and
slabs and deals. On the following morning, as 'Lije Vandine tended his vicious little
circular, he found its teeth needed resetting. They had been tried by a
lot of knotty timber. He unshipped the saw and took it to the foreman. While he was waiting for the latter to get him another saw, Sandy
MacPherson came up. With a strong effort Vandine restrained himself from
holding out his hand in grateful greeting. There was a lull in the
uproar, the men forgetting to feed their saws as they watched the
interview. Sandy's voice was heard all over the mill:--

"'Lije Vandine, I saved the little lad's life, an' _that_, counts for
_something_; but I know right well I ain't got no right to expect you or
Sarah ever to say a kind word to me. But I swear, so help me God, I
hadn't no sort of idee what I was doin'. My wife died las' winter, over
on the Kennebec, an' afore she died she told me everything--as I'd take
it kindly ef you'd let _me_ tell _you_, more particular, another time. An' as I was wantin' to say now, I'd take it kind ef you'd let me go up
along to your place this evenin', and maybe Sarah'd let me jest talk to
the boy a little. Ef so be ez I could persuade her by-and-by to forget
an' forgive--and you'd trust me after what I'd done--I'd lay out to
marry her the minute she'd say the word, fur there ain't no other woman
I've ever set such store by as I do now by her. An' then ther's
Stevie----"

"Stevie and the lass hez both got a good home," interrupted Vandine,
roughly. "An' I wouldn't want a better for 'em," exclaimed MacPherson, eagerly,
catching the train of the old man's thought. "What I'd want would be, ef
maybe you'd let me come in along with them and you." By this time Vandine had got his new saw, and he turned away without
replying. Sandy followed him a few paces, and then turned back
dejectedly to attend his own circular--he having been moved into the
mill that morning. All the hands looked at him in sympathy, and many
were the ingenious backwoods oaths which were muttered after Vandine for
his ugliness. The old man paid little heed, however, to the tide of
unpopularity that was rising about him. Probably, absorbed in his own
thoughts, he was utterly unaware of it. All the morning long he swung
and fed his circular, and when the horn blew for twelve his mind was
made up. In the sudden stillness he strode over to the place where
MacPherson worked, and said in a voice of affected carelessness--

"You better come along an' have a bite o' dinner with us, Sandy. You'll
be kinder expected, I reckon, for Stevie's powerful anxious to see you." Sandy grabbed his coat and went along. The Butt of the Camp. He was a mean-looking specimen, this Simon Gillsey, and the Gornish Camp
was not proud of him. His neck was long, his mouth was long and
protruding, like a bird's beak, his hair was thin and colorless, his
shoulders sloped in such a manner that his arms, which were long and
lean, seemed to start from somewhere near his waist. His body started forward from the hips, and he used his hands in a
deprecating fashion that seemed to beseech so much recognition as might
be conveyed in a passing kick. He was muscular to a degree that would never be guessed from his
make-up, but the camp was possessed with a sense of shame at tolerating
his presence, and protected its self-respect by reminding him
continually that he was considered beneath contempt. Simon seemed quite unconscious of the difference between the truth and a
lie. It was not that he lied from malice--the hands said he hadn't
"spunk" enough to know what malice was--but sheer mental obliquity led
him to lie by preference, unless he saw reason to believe that the truth
would conciliate his comrades. He used to steal tobacco and other trifles whenever he found a good
opportunity, and when he was caught his repentance was that of fear
rather than of shame. At the same time, the poor wretch was thoroughly courageous in the face
of some physical and external dangers. The puniest man in camp could cow
him with a look, yet none was prompter than he to face the grave perils
of breaking a log-jam, and there was no cooler hand than his in the
risky labors of stream-driving. Altogether he was a disagreeable problem
to the lumbermen,--who resented any element of pluck in one so unmanly
and meagre-spirited as he was. In spite of their contempt, however, they could ill have done without
this cringing axeman. He did small menial services for his fellows, was
ordered about at all times uncomplainingly, and bore the blame for
everything that went wrong in the Gornish Camp. When one of the hands was in a particularly bad humor, he could always
find some relief for his feelings by kicking Gillsey in the shins, at
which Gillsey would but smile an uneasy protest, showing the conspicuous
absence of his upper front teeth. Then again the Gornish Camp was waggishly inclined. The hands were much
addicted to practical jokes. It was not always wholesome to play these
on each other, but Gillsey afforded a safe object for the ingenuity of
the backwoods wit. For instance, whenever the men thought it was time to "chop a fellow
down," in default of a greenhorn from the older settlements they would
select Gillsey for the victim, and order that reluctant scarecrow up to
the tree-top. This was much like the hunting of a tame fox, as far as
exhilaration and manliness were concerned; but sport is sport, and the
men would have their fun, with the heedless brutality of primitive
natures. This diversion, though rough and dangerous, is never practised on any
but green hands or unwary visitors; but all signs fail in dry weather,
and for Gillsey no traditions held. When he had climbed as high as his tormentors thought advisable--which
usually was just as high as the top of the tree--a couple of vigorous
choppers would immediately attack the tree with their axes. As the tall trunk began to topple with a sickening hesitation, Gillsey's
eyes would stick out and his thin hair seem to stand on end, for to this
torture he never grew accustomed. Then, as the men yelled with delight,
the mass of dark branches would sweep down with a soft, windy crash into
the snow, and Gillsey, pale and nervous, but adorned with that unfailing
toothless smile, would pick himself out of the _debris_ and slink off to
camp. The men usually consoled him after such an experience with a couple of
plugs of "black-jack" tobacco,--which seemed to him ample compensation. In camp at night, when the hands had all gone to bed, two or three
wakeful ones would sometimes get up to have a smoke in the fire-light. Such a proceeding almost always resulted in skylarking, of which Simon
would be the miserable object. Perhaps the arch-conspirator would go to
the cook's flour-barrel, fill his mouth with dry flour, and then,
climbing to the slumbering Simon's bunk, would blow the dusty stuff in a
soft, thin stream all over the sleeper's face and hair and scraggy
beard. This process was called "blowing him," and was counted a huge
diversion. On soft nights, when the camp was hot and damp, it made, of course, a
sufficiently nasty mess in the victim's hair, but Gillsey, by contrast,
deemed rather to enjoy it. It never woke him up. If the joker's mood happened to be more boisterous, the approved
procedure was to softly uncover Gillsey's feet, and tie a long bit of
salmon twine to each big toe. After waking all the other hands, the
conspirators would retire to their bunks. Presently some one would give a smart tug on one of the strings, and
pass it over hastily to his neighbor. Gillsey would wake up with a
nervous yell, and grabbing his toe, seek to extricate it from the loop. Then would come another and sharper pull at the other toe, diverting
Gillsey's attention to that member. The game would be kept up till the bunks were screaming with laughter,
and poor Gillsey bathed in perspiration and anxiety. Then the boss would
interfere, and Gillsey would be set free. These are only instances of what the butt was made to endure, though he
was probably able to thrash almost any one of his tormentors, and had he
mustered spirit to attempt this, all the camp would have seen that he
got fair play. At last, however, it began to be suspected that Gillsey was stealing
from the pork barrels and other stores. This was serious, and the men
would not play any more jokes upon the culprit. Pending proof, he was
left severely to himself, and enjoyed comparative peace for nearly a
week. This peace, strange to say, did not seem to please him. The strange
creature hated to be ignored, and even courted further indignities. No
one would notice him, however, till one night when he came in late, and
undertook to sleep on the "deacon-seat." A word of explanation is needed here. The "deacon-seat"--why so called I
cannot say--is a raised platform running alongside of the stove, between
the chimney and the tier of bunks. It is, of course, a splendid place to
sleep on a bitter night, but no one is allowed so to occupy it, because
in that position he shuts off the warmth from the rest. The hands were all apparently asleep when Gillsey, after a long solitary
smoke, reached for his blanket, and rolled himself up on the coveted
"deacon-seat," with his back to the glowing fire. After a deprecating
grin directed toward the silent bunks, he sank to sleep. Soon in the bunks arose a whispered consultation, as a result of which
stalwart woodsmen climbed down, braced their backs against the lower
tier, doubled up their knees, and laid their sock feet softly against
the sleeper's form. At a given signal the legs all straightened out with
tremendous force, and poor Gillsey shot right across the "deacon-seat"
and brought up with a thud upon the stove. With a yell, he bounced away from his scorching quarters and plunged
into his bunk, not burnt, but very badly scared. After that he eschewed
the "deacon-seat." At last the unfortunate wretch was caught purloining the pork. It became
known in the camp, somehow, that he was a married man, and father of a
family as miserable and shiftless as himself. Here was an explanation of
his raids upon the provisions, for nobody in the camp would for a moment
imagine that Gillsey could, unaided, support a family. One Sunday night he was tracked to a hollow about a mile from camp,
where he was met by a gaunt, wild, eccentric-looking girl, who was
clearly his daughter. The two proceeded to an old stump concealed under
some logs in a thicket, and out of the hollow, of the stump Gillsey
fished a lump of salt pork, together with a big bundle of "hard-tack,"
and a parcel or two of some other kind of provender. The girl threw herself upon the food like a famishing animal, devoured
huge mouthfuls, and then, gathering all promiscuously into her scanty
skirt, darted off alone through the gloom. As soon as she had
disappeared with her stores, Gillsey was captured and dragged back to
camp. At first he was too helpless with terror to open his mouth; but when
formally arraigned before the boss he found his tongue. He implored
forgiveness in the most piteous tones, while at the same time he flatly
denied every charge. He even declared he was not married, that he had no
family, and that he knew no one at all in the Gornish district or that
part of the province. But the boss knew all about him, even to his parentage. He lived about
ten miles from the camp, across the mountains, on the Gornish River
itself. As for his guilt, there was no room for a shadow of uncertainty. A misdemeanor of this sort is always severely handled in the lumber
camps. But every man, from the boss down, was filled with profound
compassion for Gillsey's family. A family so afflicted as to own Gillsey
for husband and sire appeared to them deserving of the tenderest pity. It was the pathetic savagery and haggardness of the young girl that had
moved the woodmen to let her off with her booty; and now, the boss
declared, if Gillsey were dismissed without his wages--as was customary,
in addition to other punishment--the family would surely starve, cut off
from the camp pork-barrel. It was decided to give the culprit his wages
up to date. Then came the rough-and-ready sentence of the
camp-followers. The prisoner was to be "dragged"--the most humiliating
punishment on the woodmen's code. Gillsey's tears of fright were of no avail. He was wrapped in a sort of
winding-sheet of canvas, smeared from head to foot with grease to make
him slip smoothly, and hitched by the fettered wrists to a pair of
horses. The strange team was then driven, at a moderate pace, for about
half a mile along the main wood-road, the whole camp following in
procession, and jeering at the unhappy thief. When the man was unhitched, unbound, and set upon his feet,--not
physically the worse for his punishment save that, presumably, his
wrists ached somewhat,--he was given a bundle containing his scanty
belongings, and told to "streak" for home. As he seemed reluctant to
obey, he was kicked into something like alacrity. When he had got well out of sight the woodmen returned to their camp. As
for the wretched Gillsey, after the lamentations wherewith he enlivened
his tramp had sunk to silence, he began to think his bundle remarkably
heavy. He sat down on a stump to examine it. To his blank amazement he
found a large lump of pork and a small bag of flour wrapped up in his
dilapidated overalls. The snow was unusually deep in the woods that winter, and toward spring
there came a sudden, prolonged, and heavy thaw. The ice broke rapidly
and every loosened brook became a torrent. Past the door of the camp,
which was set in a valley, the Gornish River went boiling and roaring
like a mill-race, all-forgetful of its wonted serene placidity. From the camp to Gillsey's wretched cabin was only about ten miles
across the mountain, but by the stream, which made a great circuit to
get around a spur of the hills, it was hardly less than three times as
far. To Gillsey, in his log hut on a lofty knoll by the stream, the winter
had gone by rather happily. The degradation of his punishment hardly
touched him or his barbarous brood; and his wages had brought him food
enough to keep the wolf from the door. He had nothing to do but to sit
in his cabin and watch the approach of spring, while his lean boys
snared an occasional rabbit. At last, on a soft moonlight night, when the woods were full of the
sounds of melting and settling snow, a far-off, ominous roaring smote
his ear and turned his gaze down to the valley. Down the stream, on the
still night, came the deadly, rushing sound, momently increasing in
volume. The tall girl, she who had carried off the pork, heard the
noise, and came to her father's side. "Hackett's dam's bust, shore!" she exclaimed in a moment. Gillsey turned upon her one of his deprecating, toothless smiles. "'T
aint a-goin' ter tech us here," said he; "but I'm powerful glad ter be
outer the Gornish Camp ter night. Them chaps be a-goin' ter ketch it,
blame the'r skins!" The girl--she was a mere overgrown child of fourteen or fifteen--looked
thoughtful a moment, and then darted toward the woods. "Whar yer goin', sis?" called Gillsey, in a startled voice. "Warn 'em!" said the girl, laconically, not stopping her pace. "Stop! stop! Come back!" shouted her father, starting in pursuit. But
the girl never paused. "Blame the'r skins! Blame the'r skins!" murmured Gillsey to himself. Then, seeing that he was not gaining on the child, he seemed to gulp
something down in his throat, and finally he shouted:--

"_I'll_ go, sis, _honest_ I'll go. Yer kaint do it yerself. Come back
home!" The girl stopped, turned round, and walked back, saying to her father,
"They've kep' us the winter. Yer _must_ git thar in time, dad!" Gillsey went by the child, at a long trot, without answering, and
disappeared in the woods; and at the same moment the flood went through
the valley, filling it half-way up to the spot where the cabin stood. That lanky youngster's word was law to the father, and she had set his
thoughts in a new channel. He felt the camp must be saved, if he died
for it. The girl said so. He only remembered now how easily the men had
let him off, when they might have half-killed him; and their jests and
jeers and tormentings he forgot. His loose-hung frame gave him a long
stride, and his endurance was marvellous. Through the gray and silver
glades, over stumps and windfalls, through thickets and black valleys
and treacherous swamps, he went leaping at almost full speed. Before long the tremendous effort began to tell. At first he would not
yield; but presently he realized that he was in danger of giving out, so
he slackened speed a little, in order to save his powers. But as he came
out upon the valley and neared the camp, he caught once more a whisper
of the flood, and sprang forward desperately. Could he get there in
time? The child had said he _must_. He _would_. His mouth was dry as a board, and he gasped painfully for breath, as he
stumbled against the camp-door; and the roar of the flood was in his
ears. Unable to speak at first, he battered furiously on the door with
an axe, and then smashed in the window. As the men came jumping wrathfully from their bunks, he found voice to
yell:--

"The water! Dam broke! Run! Run!" But the noise of the onrushing flood was now in their startled ears, and
they needed no words to tell them their awful peril. Not staying an
instant, every man ran for the hillside, barefooted in the snow. Ere
they reached a safe height, Gillsey stumbled and fell, utterly
exhausted, and for a moment no one noticed his absence. Then the boss of the camp looked back and saw him lying motionless in
his tracks. Already the camp had gone down under the torrent, and the
flood was about to lick up the prostrate figure; but the boss turned
back with tremendous bounds, swung Gillsey over his shoulder like a sack
of oats, and staggered up the slope, as the water swelled, with a
sobbing moan, from his ankles to his knees. Seeing the situation of the boss, several more of the hands, who had
climbed to a level of safety, rushed to the rescue. They seized him and
his burden, while others formed a chain, laying hold of hands. With a
shout the whole gang surged up the hill,--and the river saw its prey
dragged out of its very teeth. After a rest of a few moments, Gillsey quite recovered, and began most
abject apologies for not getting to camp sooner, so as to give the boys
time to save something. The demonstrative hand-shakings and praises and gratitude of the men
whom he had snatched from a frightful death seemed to confuse him. He
took it at first for chaff, and said, humbly, that "Bein' as sis wanted
him to git thar in time, he'd did his best." But at length it dawned
upon him that his comrades regarded him as a man, as a hero, who had
done a really splendid and noble thing. He began to feel their gratitude
and their respect. Then it seemed as if a transformation was worked upon the poor cringing
fellow, and he began to believe in himself. A new, firmer, manlier light
woke in his eye, and he held himself erect. He presently began to move
about among the woodsmen as their equal, and their enduring gratitude
gave his new self-confidence time to ripen. From that day Simon Gillsey
stood on a higher plane. In that one act of heroism he had found his
slumbering manhood. In the Accident Ward. The grass was gray, of a strange and dreadful pallor, but long and soft. Unbroken, and bending all one way, as if to look at something, it
covered the wide, low, rounded hill that rose before me. Over the hill
the sky hung close, gray and thick, with the color of a parched
interminable twilight. Dew or a drop of rain could not be thought of as
coming from such a sky. Along the base of the low hill ran a red road of baked clay, blood red,
and beaten with nameless and innumerable feet. I stood in the middle of
this road and prepared to ascend the hill obliquely by a narrow
footpath, red as blood, which divided the soft gray bending of the
grasses. Behind me the road made a sharp turn, descending out of thick
clouds into a little blood-red hollow, where it was crossed by an open
gate. In this gate, through which I had somehow come, stood two gray
leopards and a small ape. The beasts stood on tip-toe and eyed me with a
dreadful curiosity; and from somewhere in the little hollow I heard a
word whispered which I could not understand. But the beasts heard it,
and drew away through the open gate, and disappeared. Between the footpath (which all the time gleamed redly through the
over-gathering grasses) and the rounded brink of the gulf there seemed
to be a fence of some sort, so fine that I could not quite distinguish
it, but which I knew to be there. I turned my eyes to the low summit of the hill. There I saw a figure,
all gray, cleaving the grasses in flight as swift as an arrow. Behind,
in pursuit, came another figure, of the color of the grasses, tall and
terrible beyond thought. This being, as it seemed to me, was the Second
Death, and my knees trembled with horror and a sort of loathing. Then I
saw that he who fled made directly for me; and as they sped I could hear
a strange hissing and rustling of their garments cleaving the grasses. When the fleeing ghost reached me, and fell at my feet, and clasped my
knees in awful fear, I felt myself grow strong, and all dread left my
soul. I reached forth my right hand and grasped the pursuing horror by
the throat. I heard the being laugh, and the iron grip of my own strong and
implacable fingers seemed to close with a keen agony upon my own throat,
and a curtain seemed to fall over my eyes. Then I gasped for breath, and
a warm pungent smell clung in my nostrils, and a white light swam into
my eyes, and I heard a voice murmuring far off, but in an accent
strangely familiar and commonplace, "He's coming round all right now." I opened my eyes with a dim wonder, and found myself surrounded by the
interested faces of the doctors and the clean white walls of the
hospital ward. I heard a sound of some one breathing hoarsely near by,
and a white-capped nurse with kind eyes stepped up to my pillow, and I
perceived that the heavy breather was myself. I was lying with my head
and neck swathed in bandages, and a sharp pain at my throat. Then
flashed across my memory the crash and sickening upheaval of the
collision. I wondered feebly how it had fared with my fellow-passengers,
and again I saw that instant's vision of wild and startled faces as the
crowded car rose and pitched downward, I knew not whither. With a sense
of inexpressible weariness, my brain at once allowed the terrible scene
to slip from its grasp, and I heard a doctor, who was standing at the
bedside watch in hand, say, quietly, "He'll sleep now for a couple of
hours." The Romance of an Ox-Team. The oxen, lean and rough-haired, one of them carroty red, the other
brindle and white, were slouching inertly along the narrow backwoods
road. From habit they sagged heavily on the yoke, and groaned huge windy
sighs, although the vehicle they were hauling held no load. This
structure, the mere skeleton of a cart, consisted of two pairs of
clumsy, broad-tired wheels, united by a long tongue of ash, whose tip
was tied with rope to the middle of the forward axle. The road looked
innocent of even the least of the country-road-master's well-meaning
attempts at repair,--a circumstance, indeed, which should perhaps be set
to its credit. It was made up of four deep, parallel ruts, the two
outermost eroded by years of journeying cart-wheels, the inner ones worn
by the companioning hoofs of many a yoke of oxen. Down the centre ran a
high and grassy ridge, intolerable to the country parson and the country
doctor, compelled to traverse this highway in their one-horse wagons. From ruts and ridges alike protruded the imperishable granite boulder,
which wheels and feet might polish but never efface. On either side of
the roadway was traced an erratic furrow, professing to do duty for a
drain, and at intervals emptying a playful current across the track to
wander down the ruts. Along beside the slouching team slouched a tall, lank, stoop-shouldered
youth, the white down just beginning to stiffen into bristles on his
long upper lip. His pale eyes and pale hair looked yet paler by contrast
with his thin, red, wind-roughened face. In his hand he carried a
long-handled ox-whip, with a short goad in the butt of it. "Gee, Buck!" he drawled, prodding the near ox lightly in the ribs. And
the team lurched to the right to avoid a markedly obtrusive boulder. "Haw, Bright!" he ejaculated a minute later, flicking with his whip the
off shoulder of the farther ox. And with sprawling legs and swaying of
hind-quarters the team swerved obediently to the left, shunning a
mire-hole that would have taken in the wheel to the hub. Presently,
coming to a swampy spot that stretched all the way across the road, the
youth seated himself sidewise on the narrow tongue connecting the fore
and hind axles, and drove his team dry-shod. It was a slow and creaking progress; but there seemed to be no hurry,
and the youth dreamed gloomily on his jolting perch. His eyes took no
note of the dark-mossed, scrubby hillocks, the rough clearings blackened
with fire, the confused and ragged woods, as they crept past in sombre
procession. But suddenly, as the cart rounded a turn in the road, there
came into view the figure of a girl travelling in the same direction. The young man slipped from his perch and prodded up the oxen to a brisk
walk. As the noise of the team approached her, the girl looked around. She was
good to see, with her straight, vigorous young figure in its blue-gray
homespun gown. Her hair, in color not far from that of the red ox, was
rich and abundant, and lay in a coil so gracious that not even the
tawdry millinery of her cheap "store" hat could make her head look quite
commonplace. Her face was freckled, but wholesome and comely. A shade of
displeasure passed over it as she saw who was behind her, and she
hastened her steps perceptibly. But presently she remembered that she
had a good five miles to go ere she would reach her destination; and she
realized that she could not hope to escape by flight. With a pout of
vexation she resigned herself to the inevitable, and dropped back into
her former pace. Immediately the ox-team overtook her. As the oxen slowed up she stepped to the right to let them pass, and
then walked on, thus placing the cart between herself and her undesired
companion. The youth looked disconcerted by these tactics, and for a few
moments could find nothing to say. Then, dropping his long white lashes
sheepishly, he murmured, "Good-day, Liz." "Well, Jim-Ed!" replied the girl, coolly. "Won't ye set on an' let me give ye a lift home?" he asked, with
entreaty in his voice. "No," she said, with finality: "I'd ruther walk." Not knowing how to answer this rebuff, he tried to cover his
embarrassment by exclaiming authoritatively, "Haw, Bright!" whereupon
the team slewed to the left and crowded him into the ditch. Soon he began again. "Ye _might_ set on, Liz," he pleaded. "Yes, I _might_," said she, with what she considered rather withering
smartness; "but I ain't a-goin' to." "Ye'll be tired afore ye git home," he persisted, encouraged by finding
that she would talk back at him. "James-Ed A'ki'son," she declared, with emphasis, "if ye think I'm
a-goin' to be beholden to _you_ fer a lift home, ye're mistaken, that's
all." After this there was silence for some time, broken only by the rattling
and bumping of the cart, and once by the whir of a woodcock that
volleyed across the road. Young Atkinson chewed the cud of gloomy
bewilderment. At length he roused himself to another effort. "Liz," said he, plaintively, "y' ain't been like ye used to, sence ye
come back from the States." "Ain't I?" she remarked, indifferently. "No, Liz, ye ain't," he repeated, with a sort of pathetic emphasis, as
if eager to persuade himself that she had condescended to rebut his
accusation. "Y' ain't been like ye used to at all. Appears like as if ye
thought us folks in the Settlement wasn't good enough fer ye now." At this the girl tossed her head crossly. "It appears like as if ye wanted to be back in the States ag'in," he
continued, in a voice of anxious interrogation. "My lands," exclaimed the girl, "but ye're green!" To the young man this seemed such an irrelevant remark that he was
silent for some time, striving to fathom its significance. As his head
sank lower and lower, and he seemed to lose himself completely in
joyless revery, the girl shot occasional glances at him out of the
corners of her eyes. She had spent the preceding winter in a factory in
a crude but stirring little New England town, and had come back to Nova
Scotia ill content with the monotony of life in the backwoods seclusion
of Wyer's Settlement. Before she went away she had been, to use the
vernacular of the Settlement, "keepin' company with Jim-Ed A'ki'son;"
and now, to her, the young man seemed to unite and concentrate in his
person all that she had been wont to persuade herself she had outgrown. To be sure, she not seldom caught herself dropping back comfortably into
the old conditions. But these symptoms stirred in her heart an uneasy
resentment, akin to that which she felt whenever--as would happen at
times--she could not help recognizing that Jim-Ed and his affairs were
not without a passing interest in her eyes. Now she began to grow particularly angry at him because, as she thought,
"he hadn't nothing to say fer himself." Sadly to his disadvantage, she
compared his simplicity and honest diffidence with the bold
self-assertion and easy familiarity of the young fellows with whom she
had come in contact during the winter. Their impertinences had offended
her grievously at the time, but, woman-like, she permitted herself to
forget that now, in order to accentuate the deficiencies of the man whom
she was unwilling to think well of. "My lands!" she reiterated to herself, with accumulated scorn, "but
_ain't_ he green? He--why, he wouldn't know a 'lectric car from a
waterin'-cart. An' _soft_, too, takin' all my sass 'thout givin' me no
lip back, no more 'n if I was his mother!" But the young man presently broke in upon these unflattering
reflections. With a sigh he said slowly, as if half to himself,--

"Lands, but I used to set a powerful store by ye, Liz!" He paused; and at that "used to" the girl opened her eyes with angry
apprehension. But he went on,--

"An' I set still more store by ye now, Liz, someways. Seems like I jest
couldn't live without ye. I always did feel as how ye was too good, a
sight too good, fer me, an' you so smart; an' now I feel it more 'n
ever, bein' 's ye've seen so much of the world like. But, Liz, I _don't_
allow as it's right an' proper fer even you to look down the way ye do
on the place ye was born in an' the folks ye was brung up with." "My!" thought the girl to herself, "he's got some spunk, after all, to
git off such a speech as that, an' to rake me over the coals, too!" But aloud she retorted, "Who's a-lookin' down on anybody, Jim-Ed
A'ki'son? An', anyways, _you_ ain't the whole of Wyer's Settlement, be
ye?" The justice of this retort seemed to strike the young man with great
force. "That's so," he acknowledged, gloomily. "'Course I ain't. An' I s'pose I
hadn't oughter said what I did." Then he relapsed into silence. For half a mile he slouched on without a
syllable, save an occasional word of command addressed to the team. Coming to another boggy bit of road, he seated himself dejectedly on the
cart, and apparently would not presume to again press unwelcome
assistance upon his fellow-way-farer. Quite uncertain whether to
interpret this action as excess of humility or as a severe rebuke, the
girl picked her way as best she could, flushed with a sense of injury. When the mud was passed, the young man absent-mindedly, kept his seat. Beginning to boil with indignation, the girl speedily lost her confident
superiority, and felt humiliated. She did not know exactly what to do. She could not continue to walk humbly beside the cart. The situation was
profoundly altered by the mere fact that the young man was riding. She
tried to drop behind; but the team had an infinite capacity for
loitering. At last, with head high in the air, she darted ahead of the
team, and walked as fast as she could. Although she heard no orders
given by their driver, she knew at once that the oxen had quickened
their pace, and that she was not leaving them behind. Presently she found herself overtaken; whereupon, with swelling heart
and face averted, she dropped again to the rear. She was drawing
perilously near the verge of that feminine cataclysm, tears, when Fate
stepped in to save her from such a mortification. Fate goes about in many merry disguises. At this juncture she presented
herself under the aspect of two half-tipsy commercial travellers driving
a single horse in a light open trap. They were driving in from the
Settlement, in haste to reach the hotel at Bolton Corners before
nightfall. The youth hawed his team vigorously till the nigh wheels were
on the other side of the ditch, leaving a liberal share of the road for
them to pass in. But the drummers were not satisfied with this. After a glance at the
bashful face and dejected attitude of the young man on the ox-cart, they
decided that they wanted the whole road. When their horse's head almost
touched the horns of the off ox, they stopped. "Get out of the way there!" cried the man who held the reins,
insolently. At any other time Jim-Ed would have resented the town man's tone and
words; just now he was thinking about the way Liz had changed. "I've gi'n ye the best half o' the road, mister," he said,
deprecatingly, "'n' I can't do no better fer ye than that." "Yes, you can, too," shouted the driver of the trap; "you can give us
the whole road. It won't hurt your old cart to go out in the stumps, but
_we_ ain't going to drive in the ditch, not by a jugful. Get over, I
tell you, and be quick about it." To this the youth made no immediate reply; but he began to forget about
the girl, and to feel himself growing hot. As for the girl, she had
stepped to the front, resolved to "show off" and to make very manifest
to the city men her scorn for her companion. Her cheeks and eyes were
flaming, and the drummers were not slow to respond to the challenge
which she flashed at them from under her drooped lids. "Ah, there, my beauty!" said the driver, his attention for a moment
diverted from the question of right of way. His companion, a smallish
man in striped trousers and fawn-colored overcoat, sprang lightly out of
the trap, with the double purpose of clearing the road and amusing
himself with Liz. The saucy smile with which she met him turned into a
frown, however, as he began brutally kicking the knees of the oxen to
make them stand over. The patient brutes crowded into the ditch. "Whoa, there! Gee, Buck! gee, Bright!" ordered the youth, and the team
lurched back into the road. At the same time he stepped over the
cart-beam and came forward on the off side of the team. "Ye'd better quit that, mister!" he exclaimed, with a threatening note
in his voice. "Give the lout a slap in the mouth, and make him get out of the way,"
cried the man in the trap. But the man in the fawn-colored overcoat was busy. Liz was much to his
taste. "Jump in and take a ride with us, my pretty," said he. But Liz shrank away, regretting her provocative glances now that she saw
the kind of men she had to do with. "Come, come," coaxed the man, "don't be shy, my blooming daisy. We'll
drive you right in to the Corners and set up a good time for you." And,
grasping her hand, he slipped an arm about her waist and tried to kiss
her lips. As she tore herself fiercely away, she heard the man in the
trap laugh loud approval. She struck at her insulter with clenched hand;
but she did not touch him, for just then something happened to him. The
long arm of the youth went out like a cannon-ball, and the drummer
sprawled in the ditch. He nimbly picked himself up and darted upon his
assailant, while the man in the trap shouted to him encouragingly,--

"Give it to him pretty, Mike." But the young countryman caught him by the neck with long, vise-like
fingers, inexorable, and, holding him thus helpless at arm's length,
struck him again heavily in the ribs, and hurled him over the ditch into
a blueberry thicket, where he remained in dazed discretion. Though of a lamb-like gentleness on ordinary occasions, the young
countryman was renowned throughout the Settlement for the astonishing
strength that lurked in his lean frame. At this moment he was well
aroused, and Liz found herself watching him with a consuming admiration. He no longer slouched, and his pale eyes, like polished steel, shot a
menacing gleam. He stepped forward and took the horse by the bridle. "Now," said he to the driver, "I've gi'n ye half the road, an' if ye
can't drive by in that I'm a-going to lead ye by, 'thout no more
nonsense." "Let go that bridle!" yelled the driver, standing up and lashing at him
with the whip. One stroke caught the young man down the side of the face, and stung. It
was a rash stroke. "Hold the horse's head, Liz," he cried; and, leaping forward, he reached
into the trap for his adversary. Heeding not at all the butt end of the
whip which was brought down furiously upon his head, he wrenched the
driver ignominiously from his seat, spun him around, shook him as if his
had been a rag baby, and hurled him violently against a rotten stump on
the other side of the ditch. The stump gave way, and the drummer
splashed into a bog hole. Nothing cows a man more quickly than a shaking combined with a ducking. Without a word the drummer hauled himself out of the slop and walked
sullenly forward. His companion joined him; and Liz, leading the horse
and trap carefully past the cart, delivered them up to their owners with
a sarcastic smile on her lips. Then she resumed her place beside the
cart, the young man flicked the oxen gently, and the team once more got
slowly under way. As the discomfited drummers climbed into their trap, the girl, in the
ardor of her suddenly adopted hero-worship, could not refrain from
turning around again to triumph over them. When the men were fairly
seated, and the reins gathered up for prompt departure, the smaller man
turned suddenly and threw a large stone, with vindictive energy and
deadly aim. "Look out!" shrieked the girl; and the young countryman turned aside
just in time to escape the full force of the missile. It grazed the side
of his head, however, with such violence as to bring him to his knees,
and the blood spread throbbing out of the long cut like a scarlet veil. The drummers whipped their horse to a gallop, and disappeared. The girl first stopped the team, with a true country-side instinct; and
she was at the young man's side, sobbing with anxious fear, just as he
staggered blindly to his feet. Seating him on the cart, she proceeded to
stanch the bleeding with the edge of her gown. Observing this, he
protested, and declared that the cut was nothing. But she would not be
gainsaid, and he yielded, apparently well content under her hands. Then,
tearing a strip from her colored cotton petticoat, she gently bound up
the wound, not artistically, perhaps, but in every way to his
satisfaction. "If ye hadn't gi'n me warnin', Liz, that there stun'd about fixed me,"
he remarked. The girl smiled happily, but said nothing. After a long pause he spoke again. "Seems to me ye're like what ye used to, Liz," said he, "only nicer, a
sight nicer; an' y' used to be powerful nice. I allow there couldn't
_be_ another girl so nice as you, Liz. An' what ever's made ye quit
lookin' down on me, so sudden like?" "Jim-Ed," she replied, in a caressing tone, "ef y' _ain't_ got no paper
collar on, ner no glas' di'mon' pin, I allow ye're a _man_. An'
maybe--maybe ye're the _kind_ of man I _like_, Jim-Ed." To even such genuine modesty as Jim-Ed's this was comprehensible. Shyly
and happily he reached out his hand for hers. They were both seated very
comfortably on the cart-beam, so he did not consider it necessary to
move. Side by side, and hand in hand, they journeyed homeward in a
glorified silence. The oxen appeared to guide themselves very fairly. The sunset flushed strangely the roadside hillocks. The nighthawks
swooped in the pale zenith with the twang of smitten chords. And from a
thick maple on the edge of a clearing a hermit-thrush fluted slowly over
and over his cloistral ecstasy. A Tragedy of the Tides. This is the story of the fate that befell Lieutenant Henry Crewe and
Margaret Neville, his betrothed, who disappeared from the infant city of
Halifax on the afternoon of September 18th, 1749. The facts were
gathered by one Nicholas Pinson from the mouths of Indians more or less
concerned, from members of the Neville family, and from much sagacious
conjecture; and woven, with an infinite deal of irrelevant detail, into
a narrative which has been rigorously condensed in the present
rendering. 