



Produced by Janet Blenkinship and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.) GIGOLO

  BY

  EDNA FERBER


  AUTHOR OF

  SO BIG, EMMA McCHESNEY & CO.,
  FANNY HERSELF, THE GIRLS, ETC. GROSSET & DUNLAP
  PUBLISHERS   NEW YORK

  Made in the United States of America

  COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY
  DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

  COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY McCLURE's MAGAZINE, INCORPORATED
  COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY P. F. COLLIER & SON COMPANY IN THE UNITED STATES,
  GREAT BRITAIN AND CANADA

  COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY THE CROWELL PUBLISHING COMPANY,
  AND THE PICTORIAL REVIEW COMPANY

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES AT
  THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y. *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS

                                     PAGE

  THE AFTERNOON OF A FAUN               1

  OLD MAN MINICK                       34

  GIGOLO                               69

  NOT A DAY OVER TWENTY-ONE           106

  HOME GIRL                           150

  AIN'T NATURE WONDERFUL! 188

  THE SUDDEN SIXTIES                  222

  IF I SHOULD EVER TRAVEL! 259




_GIGOLO_




THE AFTERNOON OF A FAUN


Though he rarely heeded its summons--cagy boy that he was--the telephone
rang oftenest for Nick. Because of the many native noises of the place,
the telephone had a special bell that was a combination buzz and ring. It sounded above the roar of outgoing cars, the splash of the hose, the
sputter and hum of the electric battery in the rear. Nick heard it,
unheeding. A voice--Smitty's or Mike's or Elmer's--answering its call. Then, echoing through the grey, vaulted spaces of the big garage: "Nick! Oh, Ni-ick!" From the other side of the great cement-floored enclosure, or in muffled
tones from beneath a car: "Whatcha want?" "Dame on the wire." "I ain't in." The obliging voice again, dutifully repeating the message: "He ain't
in.... Well, it's hard to say. He might be in in a couple hours and
then again he might not be back till late. I guess he's went to Hammond
on a job----" (Warming to his task now.) "Say, won't I do?... Who's
fresh! Aw, say, _lady_!" You'd think, after repeated rebuffs of this sort, she could not possibly
be so lacking in decent pride as to leave her name for Smitty or Mike or
Elmer to bandy about. But she invariably did, baffled by Nick's
elusiveness. She was likely to be any one of a number. Miss Bauers
phoned: Will you tell him, please? (A nasal voice, and haughty, with the
hauteur that seeks to conceal secret fright.) Tell him it's important. Miss Ahearn phoned: Will you tell him, please? Just say Miss Ahearn. A-h-e-a-r-n. Miss Olson: Just Gertie. But oftenest Miss Bauers. Cupid's messenger, wearing grease-grimed overalls and the fatuous grin
of the dalliant male, would transmit his communication to the uneager
Nick. "'S wonder you wouldn't answer the phone once yourself. Says you was to
call Miss Bauers any time you come in between one and six at Hyde
Park--wait a min't'--yeh--Hyde Park 6079, and any time after six at----"

"Wha'd she want?" "Well, how the hell should I know! Says call Miss Bauers any time
between one and six at Hyde Park 6----"

"Swell chanst. _Swell_ chanst!" Which explains why the calls came oftenest for Nick. He was so
indifferent to them. You pictured the patient and persistent Miss
Bauers, or the oxlike Miss Olson, or Miss Ahearn, or just Gertie
hovering within hearing distance of the telephone listening,
listening--while one o'clock deepened to six--for the call that never
came; plucking up fresh courage at six until six o'clock dragged on to
bedtime. When next they met: "I bet you was there all the time. Pity you
wouldn't answer a call when a person leaves their name. You could of
give me a ring. I bet you was there all the time." "Well, maybe I was." Bewildered, she tried to retaliate with the boomerang of vituperation. How could she know? How could she know that this slim, slick young
garage mechanic was a woodland creature in disguise--a satyr in store
clothes--a wild thing who perversely preferred to do his own pursuing? How could Miss Bauers know--she who cashiered in the Green Front Grocery
and Market on Fifty-third Street? Or Miss Olson, at the Rialto ticket
window? Or the Celtic, emotional Miss Ahearn, the manicure? Or Gertie
the goof? They knew nothing of mythology; of pointed ears and pug noses
and goat's feet. Nick's ears, to their fond gaze, presented an honest
red surface protruding from either side of his head. His feet, in tan
laced shoes, were ordinary feet, a little more than ordinarily expert,
perhaps, in the convolutions of the dance at Englewood Masonic Hall,
which is part of Chicago's vast South Side. No; a faun, to Miss Bauers,
Miss Olson, Miss Ahearn, and just Gertie, was one of those things in the
Lincoln Park Zoo. Perhaps, sometimes, they realized, vaguely, that Nick was different. When, for example, they tried--and failed--to picture him looking
interestedly at one of those three-piece bedroom sets glistening like
pulled taffy in the window of the installment furniture store, while
they, shy yet proprietary, clung to his arm and eyed the price ticket. Now $98.50. You couldn't see Nick interested in bedroom sets, in price
tickets, in any of those settled, fixed, everyday things. He was fluid,
evasive, like quicksilver, though they did not put it thus. Miss Bauers, goaded to revolt, would say pettishly: "You're like a
mosquito, that's what. Person never knows from one minute to the other
where you're at." "Yeh," Nick would retort. "When you know where a mosquito's at, what do
you do to him? Plenty. I ain't looking to be squashed." Miss Ahearn, whose public position (the Hygienic Barber Shop. Gent's
manicure, 50c.) offered unlimited social opportunities, would assume a
gay indifference. "They's plenty boys begging to take me out every hour
in the day. Swell lads, too. I ain't waiting round for any greasy
mechanic like you. Don't think it. Say, lookit your nails! They'd queer
you with me, let alone what else all is wrong with you." In answer Nick would put one hand--one broad, brown, steel-strong hand
with its broken discoloured nails--on Miss Ahearn's arm, in its flimsy
georgette sleeve. Miss Ahearn's eyelids would flutter and close, and a
little shiver would run with icy-hot feet all over Miss Ahearn. Nick was like that. Nick's real name wasn't Nick at all--or scarcely at all. His last name
was Nicholas, and his parents, long before they became his parents,
traced their origin to some obscure Czechoslovakian province--long
before we became so glib with our Czechoslovakia. His first name was
Dewey, knowing which you automatically know the date of his birth. It
was a patriotic but unfortunate choice on the part of his parents. The
name did not fit him; was too mealy; not debonair enough. Nick. Nicky in
tenderer moments (Miss Bauers, Miss Olson, Miss Ahearn, just Gertie, et
al.). His method with women was firm and somewhat stern, but never brutal. He
never waited for them if they were late. Any girl who assumed that her
value was enhanced in direct proportion to her tardiness in keeping an
engagement with Nick found herself standing disconsolate on the corner
of Fifty-third and Lake trying to look as if she were merely waiting for
the Lake Park car and not peering wistfully up and down the street in
search of a slim, graceful, hurrying figure that never came. It is difficult to convey in words the charm that Nick possessed. Seeing
him, you beheld merely a medium-sized young mechanic in reasonably
grimed garage clothes when working; and in tight pants, tight coat, silk
shirt, long-visored green cap when at leisure. A rather pallid skin due
to the nature of his work. Large deft hands, a good deal like the hands
of a surgeon, square, blunt-fingered, spatulate. Indeed, as you saw him
at work, a wire-netted electric bulb held in one hand, the other plunged
deep into the vitals of the car on which he was engaged, you thought of
a surgeon performing a major operation. He wore one of those round
skullcaps characteristic of his craft (the brimless crown of an old felt
hat). He would deftly remove the transmission case and plunge his hand
deep into the car's guts, feeling expertly about with his engine-wise
fingers as a surgeon feels for liver, stomach, gall bladder, intestines,
appendix. When he brought up his hand, all dripping with grease (which
is the warm blood of the car), he invariably had put his finger on the
sore spot. All this, of course, could not serve to endear him to the girls. On the
contrary, you would have thought that his hands alone, from which he
could never quite free the grease and grit, would have caused some
feeling of repugnance among the lily-fingered. But they, somehow, seemed
always to be finding an excuse to touch him: his tie, his hair, his coat
sleeve. They seemed even to derive a vicarious thrill from holding his
hat or cap when on an outing. They brushed imaginary bits of lint from
his coat lapel. They tried on his seal ring, crying: "Oo, lookit, how
big it is for me, even my thumb!" He called this "pawing a guy over";
and the lint ladies he designated as "thread pickers." No; it can't be classified, this powerful draw he had for them. His
conversation furnished no clue. It was commonplace conversation,
limited, even dull. When astonished, or impressed, or horrified, or
amused, he said: "Ken yuh feature that!" When emphatic or confirmatory,
he said: "You _tell_ 'em!" It wasn't his car and the opportunities it furnished for drives, both
country and city. That motley piece of mechanism represented such an
assemblage of unrelated parts as could only have been made to cooerdinate
under Nick's expert guidance. It was out of commission more than half
the time, and could never be relied upon to furnish a holiday. Both
Miss Bauers and Miss Ahearn had twelve-cylinder opportunities that
should have rendered them forever unfit for travel in Nick's one-lung
vehicle of locomotion. It wasn't money. Though he was generous enough with what he had, Nick
couldn't be generous with what he hadn't. And his wage at the garage was
$40 a week. Miss Ahearn's silk stockings cost $4.50. His unconcern should have infuriated them, but it served to pique. He
wasn't actually as unconcerned as he appeared, but he had early learned
that effort in their direction was unnecessary. Nick had little
imagination; a gorgeous selfishness; a tolerantly contemptuous liking
for the sex. Naturally, however, his attitude toward them had been
somewhat embittered by being obliged to watch their method of driving a
car in and out of the Ideal Garage doorway. His own manipulation of the
wheel was nothing short of wizardry. He played the harmonica. Each Thursday afternoon was Nick's half day off. From twelve until
seven-thirty he was free to range the bosky highways of Chicago. When
his car--he called it "the bus"--was agreeable, he went awheel in search
of amusement. The bus being indisposed, he went afoot. He rarely made
plans in advance; usually was accompanied by some successful
telephonee. He rather liked to have a silken skirt beside him fluttering
and flirting in the breeze as he broke the speed regulations. On this Thursday afternoon in July he had timed his morning job to a
miraculous nicety so that at the stroke of twelve his workaday garments
dropped from him magically, as though he were a male (and reversed)
Cinderella. There was a wash room and a rough sort of sleeping room
containing two cots situated in the second story of the Ideal Garage. Here Nick shed the loose garments of labour for the fashionably tight
habiliments of leisure. Private chauffeurs whose employers housed their
cars in the Ideal Garage used this nook for a lounge and smoker. Smitty,
Mike, Elmer, and Nick snatched stolen siestas there in the rare absences
of the manager. Sometimes Nick spent the night there when forced to work
overtime. His home life, at best, was a sketchy affair. Here chauffeurs,
mechanics, washers lolled at ease exchanging soft-spoken gossip, motor
chat, speculation, comment, and occasional verbal obscenity. Each
possessed a formidable knowledge of that neighbourhood section of
Chicago known as Hyde Park. This knowledge was not confined to car costs
and such impersonal items, but included meals, scandals, relationships,
finances, love affairs, quarrels, peccadillos. Here Nick often played
his harmonica, his lips sweeping the metal length of it in throbbing
rendition of such sure-fire sentimentality as The Long, Long Trail, or
Mammy, while the others talked, joked, kept time with tapping feet or
wagging heads. To-day the hot little room was empty except for Nick, shaving before the
cracked mirror on the wall, and old Elmer, reading a scrap of
yesterday's newspaper as he lounged his noon hour away. Old Elmer was
thirty-seven, and Nicky regarded him as an octogenarian. Also, old
Elmer's conversation bored Nick to the point of almost sullen
resentment. Old Elmer was a family man. His talk was all of his
family--the wife, the kids, the flat. A garrulous person, lank, pasty,
dish-faced, and amiable. His half day off was invariably spent tinkering
about the stuffy little flat--painting, nailing up shelves, mending a
broken window shade, puttying a window, playing with his pasty little
boy, aged sixteen months, and his pasty little girl, aged three years. Next day he regaled his fellow workers with elaborate recitals of his
holiday hours. "Believe me, that kid's a caution. Sixteen months old, and what does he
do yesterday? He unfastens the ketch on the back-porch gate. We got a
gate on the back porch, see." (This frequent "see" which interlarded
Elmer's verbiage was not used in an interrogatory way, but as a period,
and by way of emphasis. His voice did not take the rising inflection as
he uttered it.) "What does he do, he opens it. I come home, and the wife
says to me: 'Say, you better get busy and fix a new ketch on that gate
to the back porch. Little Elmer, first thing I know, he'd got it open
to-day and was crawling out almost.' Say, can you beat that for a kid
sixteen months----"

Nick had finished shaving, had donned his clean white soft shirt. His
soft collar fitted to a miracle about his strong throat. Nick's
sartorial effects were a triumph--on forty a week. "Say, can't you talk
about nothing but that kid of yours? I bet he's a bum specimen at that. Runt, like his pa."

Elmer flung down his newspaper in honest indignation as Nick had
wickedly meant he should. "Is that so! Why, we was wrastling round--me
and him, see--last night on the floor, and what does he do, he raises
his mitt and hands me a wallop in the stomick it like to knock the wind
out of me. That's all. Sixteen months----"

"Yeh. I suppose this time next year he'll be boxing for money." Elmer resumed his paper. "What do _you_ know." His tone mingled pity
with contempt. Nick took a last critical survey of the cracked mirror's reflection and
found it good. "Nothing, only this: you make me sick with your kids and
your missus and your place. Say, don't you never have no fun?" "Fun! Why, say, last Sunday we was out to the beach, and the kid swum
out first thing you know----"

"Oh, shut up!" He was dressed now. He slapped his pockets. Harmonica. Cigarettes. Matches. Money. He was off, his long-visored cloth cap
pulled jauntily over his eyes. Elmer, bearing no rancour, flung a last idle query: "Where you going?" "How should I know? Just bumming around. Bus is outa commission, and I'm
outa luck." He clattered down the stairs, whistling. Next door for a shine at the Greek bootblack's. Enthroned on the dais, a
minion at his feet, he was momentarily monarchial. How's the boy? Good? Same here. Down, his brief reign ended. Out into the bright noon-day
glare of Fifty-third Street. A fried-egg sandwich. Two blocks down and into the white-tiled
lunchroom. He took his place in the row perched on stools in front of
the white slab, his feet on the railing, his elbows on the counter. Four
white-aproned vestals with blotchy skins performed rites over the
steaming nickel urns, slid dishes deftly along the slick surface of the
white slab, mopped up moisture with a sly grey rag. No nonsense about
them. This was the rush hour. Hungry men from the shops and offices and
garages of the district were bent on food (not badinage). They ate
silently, making a dull business of it. Coffee? What kinda pie do you
want? No fooling here. "Hello, Jessie." As she mopped the slab in front of him you noticed a slight softening of
her features, intent so grimly on her task. "What's yours?" "Bacon-and-egg sandwich. Glass of milk. Piece of pie. Blueberry." Ordinarily she would not have bothered. But with him: "The blueberry
ain't so good to-day, I noticed. Try the peach?" "All right." He looked at her. She smiled. Incredibly, the dishes
ordered seemed to leap out at her from nowhere. She crashed them down on
the glazed white surface in front of him. The bacon-and-egg sandwich was
served open-faced, an elaborate confection. Two slices of white bread,
side by side. On one reposed a fried egg, hard, golden, delectable,
indigestible. On the other three crisp curls of bacon. The ordinary
order held two curls only. A dish so rich in calories as to make it food
sufficient for a day. Jessie knew nothing of calories, nor did Nick. She
placed a double order of butter before him--two yellow pats,
moisture-beaded. As she scooped up his milk from the can you saw that
the glass was but three quarters filled. From a deep crock she ladled a
smaller scoop and filled the glass to the top. The deep crock held
cream. Nick glanced up at her again. Again Jessie smiled. A plain
damsel, Jessie, and capable. She went on about her business. What's
yours? Coffee with? White or rye? No nonsense about her. And yet: "Pie
all right?" "Yeh. It's good." She actually blushed. He finished, swung himself off the stool, nodded to Jessie. She stacked
his dishes with one lean, capable hand, mopped the slab with the other,
but as she made for the kitchen she flung a glance at him over her
shoulder. "Day off?" "Yeh." "Some folks has all the luck." He grinned. His teeth were strong and white and even. He walked toward
the door with his light quick step, paused for a toothpick as he paid
his check, was out again into the July sunlight. Her face became dull
again. Well, not one o'clock. Guessed he'd shoot a little pool. He dropped into
Moriarty's cigar store. It was called a cigar store because it dealt in
magazines, newspapers, soft drinks, golf balls, cigarettes, pool,
billiards, chocolates, chewing gum, and cigars. In the rear of the store
were four green-topped tables, three for pool and one for billiards. He
hung about aimlessly, watching the game at the one occupied table. The
players were slim young men like himself, their clothes replicas of his
own, their faces lean and somewhat hard. Two of them dropped out. Nick
took a cue from the rack, shed his tight coat. They played under a
glaring electric light in the heat of the day, yet they seemed cool,
aloof, immune from bodily discomfort. It was a strangely silent game and
as mirthless as that of the elfin bowlers in Rip Van Winkle. The
slim-waisted shirted figures bent plastically over the table in the
graceful postures of the game. You heard only the click of the balls, an
occasional low-voiced exclamation. A solemn crew, and unemotional. Now and then: "What's all the shootin' fur?" "In she goes." Nick, winner, tired of it in less than an hour. He bought a bottle of
some acidulous drink just off the ice and refreshed himself with it,
drinking from the bottle's mouth. He was vaguely restless, dissatisfied. Out again into the glare of two o'clock Fifty-third Street. He strolled
up a block toward Lake Park Avenue. It was hot. He wished the bus wasn't
sick. Might go in swimming, though. He considered this idly. Hurried
steps behind him. A familiar perfume wafted to his senses. A voice nasal
yet cooing. Miss Bauers. Miss Bauers on pleasure bent, palpably, being
attired in the briefest of silks, white-strapped slippers, white silk
stockings, scarlet hat. The Green Front Grocery and Market closed for a
half day each Thursday afternoon during July and August. Nicky had not
availed himself of the knowledge. "Well, if it ain't Nicky! I just seen you come out of Moriarty's as I
was passing." (She had seen him go in an hour before and had waited a
patient hour in the drug store across the street.) "What you doing
around loose this hour the day, anyway?" "I'm off 'safternoon." "Are yuh? So'm I." Nicky said nothing. Miss Bauers shifted from one
plump silken leg to the other. "What you doing?" "Oh, nothing much." "So'm I. Let's do it together." Miss Bauers employed the direct method. "Well," said Nick, vaguely. He didn't object particularly. And yet he
was conscious of some formless programme forming mistily in his mind--a
programme that did not include the berouged, be-powdered, plump, and
silken Miss Bauers. "I phoned you this morning, Nicky. Twice." "Yeh?" "They said you wasn't in." "Yeh?" A hard young woman, Miss Bauers, yet simple: powerfully drawn toward
this magnetic and careless boy; powerless to forge chains strong enough
to hold him. "Well, how about Riverview? I ain't been this summer." "Oh, that's so darn far. Take all day getting there, pretty near." "Not driving, it wouldn't." "I ain't got the bus. Busted." His apathy was getting on her nerves. "How about a movie, then?" Her
feet hurt. It was hot. His glance went up the street toward the Harper, down the street toward
the Hyde Park. The sign above the Harper offered Mother o' Mine. The
lettering above the Hyde Park announced Love's Sacrifice. "Gawd, no," he made decisive answer. Miss Bauers's frazzled nerves snapped. "You make me sick! Standing
there. Nothing don't suit you. Say, I ain't so crazy to go round with
you. Cheap guy! Prob'ly you'd like to go over to Wooded Island or
something, in Jackson Park, and set on the grass and feed the squirrels. That'd be a treat for me, that would." She laughed a high, scornful
tear-near laugh. "Why--say----" Nick stared at her, and yet she felt he did not see her. A sudden peace came into his face--the peace of a longing fulfilled. He
turned his head. A Lake Park Avenue street car was roaring its way
toward them. He took a step toward the roadway. "I got to be going." Fear flashed its flame into Miss Bauers's pale blue eyes. "Going! How do
you mean, going? Going where?" "I got to be going." The car had stopped opposite them. His young face
was stern, implacable. Miss Bauers knew she was beaten, but she clung to
hope tenaciously, piteously. "I got to see a party, see?" "You never said anything about it in the first place. Pity you wouldn't
say so in the first place. Who you got to see, anyway?" She knew it was
useless to ask. She knew she was beating her fists against a stone wall,
but she must needs ask notwithstanding: "Who you got to see?" "I got to see a party. I forgot." He made the car step in two long
strides; had swung himself up. "So long!" The car door slammed after
him. Miss Bauers, in her unavailing silks, stood disconsolate on the hot
street corner. He swayed on the car platform until Sixty-third Street was reached. There he alighted and stood a moment at the curb surveying idly the
populous corner. He purchased a paper bag of hot peanuts from a vender's
glittering scarlet and nickel stand, and crossed the street into the
pathway that led to Jackson Park, munching as he went. In an open space
reserved for games some boys were playing baseball with much hoarse
hooting and frenzied action. He drew near to watch. The ball,
misdirected, sailed suddenly toward him. He ran backward at its swift
approach, leaped high, caught it, and with a long curving swing, so easy
as to appear almost effortless, sent it hurtling back. The lad on the
pitcher's mound made as if to catch it, changed his mind, dodged,
started after it. The boy at bat called to Nick: "Heh, you! Wanna come on and pitch?" Nick shook his head and went on. He wandered leisurely along the gravel path that led to the park golf
shelter. The wide porch was crowded with golfers and idlers. A foursome
was teed up at the first tee. Nick leaned against a porch pillar waiting
for them to drive. That old boy had pretty good practise swing ... Stiff, though ... Lookit that dame. Je's! I bet she takes fifteen shots
before she ever gets on to the green ... There, that kid had pretty good
drive. Must of been hundred and fifty, anyway. Pretty good for a kid. Nick, in the course of his kaleidoscopic career, had been a caddie at
thirteen in torn shirt and flapping knickers. He had played the smooth,
expert, scornful game of the caddie with a natural swing from the lithe
waist and a follow-through that was the envy of the muscle-bound men
who watched him. He hadn't played in years. The game no longer
interested him. He entered the shelter lunchroom. The counters were
lined with lean, brown, hungry men and lean, brown, hungry women. They
were eating incredible dishes considering that the hour was 3 P.
M. and the day a hot one. Corned-beef hash with a poached egg on
top; wieners and potato salad; meat pies; hot roast beef sandwiches;
steaming cups of coffee in thick white ware; watermelon. Nick slid a leg
over a stool as he had done earlier in the afternoon. Here, too, the
Hebes were of stern stuff, as they needs must be to serve these ravenous
hordes of club swingers who swarmed upon them from dawn to dusk. Their
task it was to wait upon the golfing male, which is man at his
simplest--reduced to the least common denominator and shorn of all
attraction for the female eye and heart. They represented merely hungry
mouths, weary muscles, reaching fists. The waitresses served them as a
capable attendant serves another woman's child--efficiently and without
emotion. "Blueberry pie a la mode," said Nick--"with strawberry ice cream." Inured as she was to the horrors of gastronomic miscegenation, the
waitress--an old girl--recoiled at this. "Say, I don't think you'd like that. They don't mix so very good. Why
don't you try the peach pie instead with the strawberry ice cream--if
you want strawberry?" He looked so young and cool and fresh. "Blueberry," repeated Nick sternly, and looked her in the eye. The old
waitress laughed a little and was surprised to find herself laughing. "'S for you to say." She brought him the monstrous mixture, and he
devoured it to the last chromatic crumb. "Nothing the matter with that," he remarked as she passed, dish-laden. She laughed again tolerantly, almost tenderly. "Good thing you're
young." Her busy glance lingered a brief moment on his face. He
sauntered out. Now he took the path to the right of the shelter, crossed the road,
struck the path again, came to a rustic bridge that humped high in the
middle, spanning a cool green stream, willow-bordered. The cool green
stream was an emerald chain that threaded its way in a complete circlet
about the sylvan spot known as Wooded Island, relic of World's Fair
days. The little island lay, like a thing under enchantment, silent, fragrant,
golden, green, exquisite. Squirrels and blackbirds, rabbits and pigeons
mingled in AEsopian accord. The air was warm and still, held by the
encircling trees and shrubbery. There was not a soul to be seen. At the
far north end the two Japanese model houses, survivors of the
exposition, gleamed white among the trees. Nick stood a moment. His eyelids closed, languorously. He stretched his
arms out and up deliciously, bringing his stomach in and his chest out. He took off his cap and stuffed it into his pocket. He strolled across
the thick cool nap of the grass, deserting the pebble path. At the west
edge of the island a sign said: "No One Allowed in the Shrubbery." Ignoring it, Nick parted the branches, stopped and crept, reached the
bank that sloped down to the cool green stream, took off his coat, and
lay relaxed upon the ground. Above him the tree branches made a pattern
against the sky. Little ripples lipped the shore. Scampering
velvet-footed things, feathered things, winged things made pleasant stir
among the leaves. Nick slept. He awoke in half an hour refreshed. He lay there, thinking of nothing--a
charming gift. He found a stray peanut in his pocket and fed it to a
friendly squirrel. His hand encountered the cool metal of his harmonica. He drew out the instrument, placed his coat, folded, under his head,
crossed his knees, one leg swinging idly, and began to play rapturously. He was perfectly happy. He played Gimme Love, whose jazz measures are
stolen from Mendelssohn's Spring Song. He did not know this. The leaves
rustled. He did not turn his head. "Hello, Pan!" said a voice. A girl came down the slope and seated
herself beside him. She was not smiling. Nick removed the harmonica from his lips and wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand. "Hello who?" "Hello, Pan." "Wrong number, lady," Nick said, and again applied his lips to the mouth
organ. The girl laughed then, throwing back her head. Her throat was
long and slim and brown. She clasped her knees with her arms and looked
at Nick amusedly. Nick thought she was a kind of homely little thing. "Pan," she explained, "was a pagan deity. He played pipes in the woods." "'S all right with me," Nick ventured, bewildered but amiable. He wished
she'd go away. But she didn't. She began to take off her shoes and
stockings. She went down to the water's edge, then, and paddled her
feet. Nick sat up, outraged. "Say, you can't do that." She glanced back at him over her shoulder. "Oh, yes, I can. It's so
hot." She wriggled her toes ecstatically. The leaves rustled again, briskly, unmistakably this time. A heavy
tread. A rough voice. "Say, looka here! Get out of there, you! What
the----" A policeman, red-faced, wroth. "You can't do that! Get outa
here!" It was like a movie, Nick thought. The girl turned her head. "Oh, now, Mr. Elwood," she said. "Oh, it's you, miss," said the policeman. You would not have believed it
could be the same policeman. He even giggled. "Thought you was away." "I was. In fact, I am, really. I just got sick of it and ran away for a
day. Drove. Alone. The family'll be wild." "All the way?" said the policeman, incredulously. "Say, I thought that
looked like your car standing out there by the road; but I says no, she
ain't in town." He looked sharply at Nick, whose face had an Indian
composure, though his feelings were mixed. "Who's this?" "He's a friend of mine. His name's Pan." She was drying her feet with an
inadequate rose-coloured handkerchief. She crept crabwise up the bank,
and put on her stockings and slippers. "Why'n't you come out and set on a bench?" suggested the policeman,
worriedly. The girl shook her head. "In Arcadia we don't sit on benches. I should
think you'd know that. Go on away, there's a dear. I want to talk to
this--to Pan." He persisted. "What'd your pa say, I'd like to know!" The girl shrugged
her shoulders. Nick made as though to rise. He was worried. A nut,
that's what. She pressed him down again with a hard brown hand. "Now it's all right. He's going. Old Fuss!" The policeman stood a brief
moment longer. Then the foliage rustled again. He was gone. The girl
sighed, happily. "Play that thing some more, will you? You're a wiz at
it, aren't you?" "I'm pretty good," said Nick, modestly. Then the outrageousness of her
conduct struck him afresh. "Say, who're you, anyway?" "My name's Berry--short for Bernice.... What's yours, Pan?" "Nick--that is--Nick." "Ugh, terrible! I'll stick to Pan. What d'you do when you're not
Panning?" Then, at the bewilderment in his face: "What's your job?" "I work in the Ideal Garage. Say, you're pretty nosey, ain't you?" "Yes, pretty.... That accounts for your nails, h'm?" She looked at her
own brown paws. "'Bout as bad as mine. I drove one hundred and fifty
miles to-day." "Ya-as, you did!" "I did! Started at six. And I'll probably drive back to-night." "You're crazy!" "I know it," she agreed, "and it's wonderful.... Can you play the Tommy
Toddle?" "Yeh. It's kind of hard, though, where the runs are. I don't get the
runs so very good." He played it. She kept time with head and feet. When
he had finished and wiped his lips:

"Elegant!" She took the harmonica from him, wiped it brazenly on the
much-abused, rose-coloured handkerchief and began to play, her cheeks
puffed out, her eyes round with effort. She played the Tommy Toddle, and
her runs were perfect. Nick's chagrin was swallowed by his admiration
and envy. "Say, kid, you got more wind than a factory whistle. Who learned you to
play?" She struck her chest with a hard brown fist. "Tennis ... Tim taught me." "Who's Tim?" "The--a chauffeur." Nick leaned closer. "Say, do you ever go to the dances at Englewood
Masonic Hall?" "I never have." "'Jah like to go some time?" "I'd love it." She grinned up at him, her teeth flashing white in her
brown face. "It's swell here," he said, dreamily. "Like the woods?" "Yes." "Winter, when it's cold and dirty, I think about how it's here summers. It's like you could take it out of your head and look at it whenever you
wanted to." "Endymion." "Huh?" "A man said practically the same thing the other day. Name of Keats." "Yeh?" "He said: 'A thing of beauty is a joy forever.'" "That's one way putting it," he agreed, graciously. Unsmilingly she reached over with one slim forefinger, as if compelled,
and touched the blond hairs on Nick's wrist. Just touched them. Nick
remained motionless. The girl shivered a little, deliciously. She
glanced at him shyly. Her lips were provocative. Thoughtlessly, blindly,
Nick suddenly flung an arm about her, kissed her. He kissed her as he
had never kissed Miss Bauers--as he had never kissed Miss Ahearn, Miss
Olson, or just Gertie. The girl did not scream, or push him away, or
slap him, or protest, or giggle as would have the above-mentioned young
ladies. She sat breathing rather fast, a tinge of scarlet showing
beneath the tan. "Well, Pan," she said, low-voiced, "you're running true to form,
anyway." She eyed him appraisingly. "Your appeal is in your virility, I
suppose. Yes." "My what?" She rose. "I've got to go." Panic seized him. "Say, don't drive back to-night, huh? Wherever it is
you've got to go. You ain't driving back to-night?" She made no answer; parted the bushes, was out on the gravel path in the
sunlight, a slim, short-skirted, almost childish figure. He followed. They crossed the bridge, left the island, reached the roadway almost in
silence. At the side of the road was a roadster. Its hood was the kind
that conceals power. Its lamps were two giant eyes rimmed in precious
metal. Its line spelled strength. Its body was foreign. Nick's
engine-wise eyes saw these things at a glance. "That your car?" "Yes." "Gosh!" She unlocked it, threw in the clutch, shifted, moved. "Say!" was wrung
from Nick helplessly. She waved at him. "Good-bye, Pan." He stared,
stricken. She was off swiftly, silently; flashed around a corner; was
hidden by the trees and shrubs. He stood a moment. He felt bereaved, cheated. Then a little wave of
exaltation shook him. He wanted to talk to someone. "Gosh!" he said
again. He glanced at his wrist. Five-thirty. He guessed he'd go home. He guessed he'd go home and get one of Ma's dinners. One of Ma's dinners
and talk to Ma. The Sixty-third Street car. He could make it and back in
plenty time. Nick lived in that section of Chicago known as Englewood, which is not
so sylvan as it sounds, but appropriate enough for a faun. Not only
that; he lived in S. Green Street, Englewood. S. Green Street, near
Seventieth, is almost rural with its great elms and poplars, its frame
cottages, its back gardens. A neighbourhood of thrifty, foreign-born
fathers and mothers, many children, tree-lined streets badly paved. Nick
turned in at a two-story brown frame cottage. He went around to the
back. Ma was in the kitchen. Nick's presence at the evening meal was an uncertain thing. Sometimes he
did not eat at home for a week, excepting only his hurried early
breakfast. He rarely spent an evening at home, and when he did used the
opportunity for making up lost sleep. Pa never got home from work until
after six. Nick liked his dinner early and hot. On his rare visits his
mother welcomed him like one of the Gracchi. Mother and son understood
each other wordlessly, having much in common. You would not have thought
it of her (forty-six bust, forty waist, measureless hips), but Ma was a
nymph at heart. Hence Nick. "Hello, Ma!" She was slamming expertly about the kitchen. "Hello, yourself," said Ma. Ma had a line of slang gleaned from her
numerous brood. It fell strangely from her lips. Ma had never quite lost
a tinge of foreign accent, though she had come to America when a girl. A
hearty, zestful woman, savouring life with gusto, undiminished by
child-bearing and hard work. "Eating home, Dewey?" She alone used his
given name. "Yeh, but I gotta be back by seven-thirty. Got anything ready?" "Dinner ain't, but I'll get you something. Plenty. Platter ham and eggs
and a quick fry. Cherry cobbler's done. I'll fix you some." (Cherry
cobbler is shortcake with a soul.) He ate enormously at the kitchen table, she hovering over him. "What's the news, Dewey?" "Ain't none." He ate in silence. Then: "How old was you when you married
Pa?" "Me? Say, I wasn't no more'n a kid. I gotta laugh when I think of it." "What was Pa earning?" She laughed a great hearty laugh, dipping a piece of bread sociably in
the ham fat on the platter as she stood by the table, just to bear him
company. "Say, earn! If he'd of earned what you was earning now, we'd of thought
we was millionaires. Time Etty was born he was pulling down thirteen a
week, and we saved on it." She looked at him suddenly, sharply. "Why?" "Oh, I was just wondering." "Look what good money he's getting now! If I was you, I wouldn't stick
around no old garage for what they give you. You could get a good job in
the works with Pa; first thing you know you'd be pulling down big money. You're smart like that with engines.... Takes a lot of money nowadays
for feller to get married." "You _tell_ 'em," agreed Nick. He looked up at her, having finished
eating. His glance was almost tender. "How'd you come to marry Pa,
anyway? You and him's so different." The nymph in Ma leaped to the surface and stayed there a moment,
sparkling, laughing, dimpling. "Oh, I dunno. I kept running away and he
kept running after. Like that." He looked up again quickly at that. "Yeh. That's it. Fella don't like to
have no girl chasing him all the time. Say, he likes to do the chasing
himself. Ain't that the truth?" "You _tell_ 'em!" agreed Ma. A great jovial laugh shook her. Heavy-footed now, but light of heart. Suddenly: "I'm thinking of going to night school. Learn something. I
don't know nothing." "You do, too, Dewey!" "Aw, wha'd I know? I never had enough schooling. Wished I had." "Who's doings was it? You wouldn't stay. Wouldn't go no more than sixth
reader and quit. Nothing wouldn't get you to go." He agreed gloomily. "I know it. I don't know what nothing is. Uh--Arcadia--or--now--vitality or nothing." "Oh, that comes easy," she encouraged him, "when you begin once." He reached for her hand gratefully. "You're a swell cook, Ma." He had a
sudden burst of generosity, of tenderness. "Soon's the bus is fixed I'll
take you joy-riding over to the lake." Ma always wore a boudoir cap of draggled lace and ribbon for motoring. Nick almost never offered her a ride. She did not expect him to. She pushed him playfully. "Go on! You got plenty young girls to take
riding, not your ma." "Oh, girls!" he said, scornfully. Then in another tone: "Girls." He was off. It was almost seven. Pa was late. He caught a car back to
Fifty-third Street. Elmer was lounging in the cool doorway of the
garage. Nick, in sheer exuberance of spirits, squared off, doubled his
fists, and danced about Elmer in a semicircle, working his arms as a
prizefighter does, warily. He jabbed at Elmer's jaw playfully. "What you been doing," inquired that long-suffering gentleman, "makes
you feel so good? Where you been?" "Oh, nowheres. Bumming round. Park." He turned in the direction of the stairway. Elmer lounged after him. "Oh, say, dame's been calling you for the last hour and a half. Like to
busted the phone. Makes me sick." "Aw, Bauers." "No, that wasn't the name. Name's Mary or Berry, or something like that. A dozen times, I betcha. Says you was to call her as soon as you come
in. Drexel 47--wait a min't'--yeh--that's right--Drexel 473----"

"Swell chanst," said Nick. Suddenly his buoyancy was gone. His shoulders
drooped. His cigarette dangled limp. Disappointment curved his lips,
burdened his eyes. "_Swell_ chanst!" OLD MAN MINICK


His wife had always spoiled him outrageously. No doubt of that. Take,
for example, the matter of the pillows merely. Old man Minick slept
high. That is, he thought he slept high. He liked two plump pillows on
his side of the great, wide, old-fashioned cherry bed. He would sink
into them with a vast grunting and sighing and puffing expressive of
nerves and muscles relaxed and gratified. But in the morning there was
always one pillow on the floor. He had thrown it there. Always, in the
morning, there it lay, its plump white cheek turned reproachfully up at
him from the side of the bed. Ma Minick knew this, naturally, after
forty years of the cherry bed. But she never begrudged him that extra
pillow. Each morning, when she arose, she picked it up on her way to
shut the window. Each morning the bed was made up with two pillows on
his side of it, as usual. Then there was the window. Ma Minick liked it open wide. Old man Minick,
who rather prided himself on his modernism (he called it being up to
date) was distrustful of the night air. In the folds of its sable
mantle lurked a swarm of dread things--colds, clammy miasmas, fevers. "Night air's just like any other air," Ma Minick would say, with some
asperity. Ma Minick was no worm; and as modern as he. So when they went
to bed the window would be open wide. They would lie there, the two old
ones, talking comfortably about commonplace things. The kind of talk
that goes on between a man and a woman who have lived together in
wholesome peace (spiced with occasional wholesome bickerings) for more
than forty years. "Remind me to see Gerson to-morrow about that lock on the basement door. The paper's full of burglars." "If I think of it." She never failed to. "George and Nettie haven't been over in a week now." "Oh, well, young folks.... Did you stop in and pay that Koritz the fifty
cents for pressing your suit?" "By golly, I forgot again! First thing in the morning." A sniff. "Just smell the Yards." It was Chicago. "Wind must be from the west." Sleep came with reluctant feet, but they wooed her patiently. And
presently she settled down between them and they slept lightly. Usually,
some time during the night, he awoke, slid cautiously and with infinite
stealth from beneath the covers and closed the wide-flung window to
within a bare two inches of the sill. Almost invariably she heard him;
but she was a wise old woman; a philosopher of parts. She knew better
than to allow a window to shatter the peace of their marital felicity. As she lay there, smiling a little grimly in the dark and giving no sign
of being awake, she thought, "Oh, well, I guess a closed window won't
kill me either." Still, sometimes, just to punish him a little, and to prove that she was
nobody's fool, she would wait until he had dropped off to sleep again
and then she, too, would achieve a stealthy trip to the window and would
raise it slowly, carefully, inch by inch. "How did that window come to be open?" he would say in the morning,
being a poor dissembler. "Window? Why, it's just the way it was when we went to bed." And she
would stoop to pick up the pillow that lay on the floor. There was little or no talk of death between this comfortable, active,
sound-appearing man of almost seventy and this plump capable woman of
sixty-six. But as always, between husband and wife, it was understood
wordlessly (and without reason) that old man Minick would go first. Not
that either of them had the slightest intention of going. In fact, when
it happened they were planning to spend the winter in California and
perhaps live there indefinitely if they liked it and didn't get too
lonesome for George and Nettie, and the Chicago smoke, and Chicago
noise, and Chicago smells and rush and dirt. Still, the solid sum paid
yearly in insurance premiums showed clearly that he meant to leave her
in comfort and security. Besides, the world is full of widows. Everyone
sees that. But how many widowers? Few. Widows there are by the
thousands; living alone; living in hotels; living with married daughters
and sons-in-law or married sons and daughters-in-law. But of widowers in
a like situation there are bewilderingly few. And why this should be no
one knows. So, then. The California trip never materialized. And the year that
followed never was quite clear in old man Minick's dazed mind. In the
first place, it was the year in which stocks tumbled and broke their
backs. Gilt-edged securities showed themselves to be tinsel. Old man
Minick had retired from active business just one year before, meaning to
live comfortably on the fruit of a half-century's toil. He now saw that
fruit rotting all about him. There was in it hardly enough nourishment
to sustain them. Then came the day when Ma Minick went downtown to see
Matthews about that pain right here and came home looking shrivelled,
talking shrilly about nothing, and evading Pa's eyes. Followed months
that were just a jumble of agony, X-rays, hope, despair, morphia,
nothingness. After it was all over: "But I was going first," old man Minick said,
dazedly. The old house on Ellis near Thirty-ninth was sold for what it would
bring. George, who knew Chicago real-estate if any one did, said they
might as well get what they could. Things would only go lower. You'll
see. And nobody's going to have any money for years. Besides, look at
the neighbourhood! Old man Minick said George was right. He said everybody was right. You
would hardly have recognized in this shrunken figure and wattled face
the spruce and dressy old man whom Ma Minick used to spoil so
delightfully. "You know best, George. You know best." He who used to
stand up to George until Ma Minick was moved to say, "Now, Pa, you don't
know everything." After Matthews' bills, and the hospital, and the nurses and the
medicines and the thousand and one things were paid there was left
exactly five hundred dollars a year. "You're going to make your home with us, Father," George and Nettie
said. Alma, too, said this would be the best. Alma, the married
daughter, lived in Seattle. "Though you know Ferd and I would be only
too glad to have you." Seattle! The ends of the earth. Oh, no. No! he protested, every fibre
of his old frame clinging to the accustomed. Seattle, at seventy! He
turned piteous eyes on his son George and his daughter-in-law Nettie. "You're going to make your home with us, Father," they reassured him. He
clung to them gratefully. After it was over Alma went home to her
husband and their children. So now he lived with George and Nettie in the five-room flat on South
Park Avenue, just across from Washington Park. And there was no extra
pillow on the floor. Nettie hadn't said he couldn't have the extra pillow. He had told her he
used two and she had given him two the first week. But every morning she
had found a pillow cast on the floor. "I thought you used two pillows, Father." "I do." "But there's always one on the floor when I make the bed in the morning. You always throw one on the floor. You only sleep on one pillow,
really." "I use two pillows." But the second week there was one pillow. He tossed and turned a good
deal there in his bedroom off the kitchen. But he got used to it in
time. Not used to it, exactly, but--well----

The bedroom off the kitchen wasn't as menial as it sounds. It was really
rather cosy. The five-room flat held living room, front bedroom, dining
room, kitchen, and maid's room. The room off the kitchen was intended as
a maid's room but Nettie had no maid. George's business had suffered
with the rest. George and Nettie had said, "I wish there was a front
room for you, Father. You could have ours and we'd move back here, only
this room's too small for twin beds and the dressing table and the
chiffonier." They had meant it--or meant to mean it. "This is fine," old man Minick had said. "This is good enough for
anybody." There was a narrow white enamel bed and a tiny dresser and a
table. Nettie had made gay cretonne covers and spreads and put a little
reading lamp on the table and arranged his things. Ma Minick's picture
on the dresser with her mouth sort of pursed to make it look small. It
wasn't a recent picture. Nettie and George had had it framed for him as
a surprise. They had often urged her to have a picture taken, but she
had dreaded it. Old man Minick didn't think much of that photograph,
though he never said so. He needed no photograph of Ma Minick. He had a
dozen of them; a gallery of them; thousands of them. Lying on his one
pillow he could take them out and look at them one by one as they passed
in review, smiling, serious, chiding, praising, there in the dark. He
needed no picture on his dresser. A handsome girl, Nettie, and a good girl. He thought of her as a girl,
though she was well past thirty. George and Nettie had married late. This was only the third year of their marriage. Alma, the daughter, had
married young, but George had stayed on, unwed, in the old house on
Ellis until he was thirty-six and all Ma Minick's friends' daughters had
had a try at him in vain. The old people had urged him to marry, but it
had been wonderful to have him around the house, just the same. Somebody
young around the house. Not that George had stayed around very much. But
when he was there you knew he was there. He whistled while dressing. He
sang in the bath. He roared down the stairway, "Ma, where's my clean
shirts?" The telephone rang for him. Ma Minick prepared special dishes
for him. The servant girl said, "Oh, now, Mr. George, look what you've
done! Gone and spilled the grease all over my clean kitchen floor!" and
wiped it up adoringly while George laughed and gobbled his bit of food
filched from pot or frying pan. They had been a little surprised about Nettie. George was in the bond
business and she worked for the same firm. A plump, handsome,
eye-glassed woman with fine fresh colouring, a clear skin that old man
Minick called appetizing, and a great coil of smooth dark hair. She wore
plain tailored things and understood the bond business in a way that
might have led you to think hers a masculine mind if she hadn't been so
feminine, too, in her manner. Old man Minick had liked her better than
Ma Minick had. Nettie had called him Pop and joked with him and almost flirted with him
in a daughterly sort of way. He liked to squeeze her plump arm and pinch
her soft cheek between thumb and forefinger. She would laugh up at him
and pat his shoulder and that shoulder would straighten spryly and he
would waggle his head doggishly. "Look out there, George!" the others in the room would say. "Your dad'll
cut you out. First thing you know you'll lose your girl, that's all." Nettie would smile. Her teeth were white and strong and even. Old man
Minick would laugh and wink, immensely pleased and flattered. "We
understand each other, don't we, Pop?" Nettie would say. During the first years of their married life Nettie stayed home. She
fussed happily about her little flat, gave parties, went to parties,
played bridge. She seemed to love the ease, the relaxation, the small
luxuries. She and George were very much in love. Before her marriage she
had lived in a boarding house on Michigan Avenue. At mention of it now
she puckered up her face. She did not attempt to conceal her fondness
for these five rooms of hers, so neat, so quiet, so bright, so cosy. Over-stuffed velvet in the living room, with silk lampshades, and small
tables holding books and magazines and little boxes containing
cigarettes or hard candies. Very modern. A gate-legged table in the
dining room. Caramel-coloured walnut in the bedroom, rich and dark and
smooth. She loved it. An orderly woman. Everything in its place. Before
eleven o'clock the little apartment was shining, spotless; cushions
plumped, crumbs brushed, vegetables in cold water. The telephone. "Hello!... Oh, hello, Bess! Oh, hours ago ... Not a thing ... Well, if
George is willing ... I'll call him up and ask him. We haven't seen a
show in two weeks. I'll call you back within the next half hour ... No,
I haven't done my marketing yet.... Yes, and have dinner downtown. Meet
at seven." Into this orderly smooth-running mechanism was catapulted a bewildered
old man. She no longer called him Pop. He never dreamed of squeezing the
plump arm or pinching the smooth cheek. She called him Father. Sometimes
George's Father. Sometimes, when she was telephoning, there came to
him--"George's father's living with us now, you know. I can't." They were very kind to him, Nettie and George. "Now just you sit right
down here, Father. What do you want to go poking off into your own room
for?" He remembered that in the last year Nettie had said something about
going back to work. There wasn't enough to do around the house to keep
her busy. She was sick of afternoon parties. Sew and eat, that's all,
and gossip, or play bridge. Besides, look at the money. Business was
awful. The two old people had resented this idea as much as George
had--more, in fact. They were scandalized. "Young folks nowdays!" shaking their heads. "Young folks nowdays. What
are they thinking of! In my day when you got married you had babies." George and Nettie had had no babies. At first Nettie had said, "I'm so
happy. I just want a chance to rest. I've been working since I was
seventeen. I just want to rest, first." One year. Two years. Three. And
now Pa Minick. Ma Minick, in the old house on Ellis Avenue, had kept a loose sort of
larder; not lavish, but plentiful. They both ate a great deal, as old
people are likely to do. Old man Minick, especially, had liked to
nibble. A handful of raisins from the box on the shelf. A couple of nuts
from the dish on the sideboard. A bit of candy rolled beneath the
tongue. At dinner (sometimes, toward the last, even at noon-time) a
plate of steaming soup, hot, revivifying, stimulating. Plenty of this
and plenty of that. "What's the matter, Jo? You're not eating." But he
was, amply. Ma Minick had liked to see him eat too much. She was wrong,
of course. But at Nettie's things were different. Hers was a sufficient but stern
menage. So many mouths to feed; just so many lamb chops. Nettie knew
about calories and vitamines and mysterious things like that, and talked
about them. So many calories in this. So many calories in that. He never
was quite clear in his mind about these things said to be lurking in his
food. He had always thought of spinach as spinach, chops as chops. But
to Nettie they were calories. They lunched together, these two. George
was, of course, downtown. For herself Nettie would have one of those
feminine pick-up lunches; a dab of apple sauce, a cup of tea, and a
slice of cold toast left from breakfast. This she would eat while old
man Minick guiltily supped up his cup of warmed-over broth, or his
coddled egg. She always pressed upon him any bit of cold meat that was
left from the night before, or any remnants of vegetable or spaghetti. Often there was quite a little fleet of saucers and sauce plates grouped
about his main plate. 