GREEN***




Transcribed from the 1920 J. W. Arrowsmith edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





Sketches in Lavender
Blue and Green


BY
JEROME K. JEROME
AUTHOR OF "THREE MEN IN A BOAT"
"THREE MEN ON THE BUMMEL," "NOVEL NOTES"
"THE IDLE THOUGHTS OF AN IDLE FELLOW," ETC. BRISTOL
J. W. ARROWSMITH LTD., QUAY STREET
LONDON
SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & CO. LIMITED
1920

Contents:

Reginald Blake, Financier and Cad
An item of Fashionable Intelligence
Blase Billy
The Choice of Cyril Harjohn
The Materialisation of Charles and Mivanway
Portrait of a Lady
The Man Who Would Manage
The Man Who Lived For Others
A Man of Habit
The Absent-minded Man
A Charming Woman
Whibley's Spirit
The Man Who Went Wrong
The Hobby Rider
The Man Who Did Not Believe In Luck
Dick Dunkerman's Cat
The Minor Poet's Story
The Degeneration of Thomas Henry
The City of The Sea
Driftwood

   La-ven-der's blue, did-dle, did-dle! La-ven-der's green;
   When I am king, did-dle, did-dle! You shall be queen. Call up your men, did-dle, did-dle! Set them to work;
   Some to the plough, did-dle, did-dle! Some to the cart. Some to make hay, did-dle, did-dle! Some to cut corn;
   While you and I, did-dle, did-dle! Keep ourselves warm. REGINALD BLAKE, FINANCIER AND CAD


The advantage of literature over life is that its characters are clearly
defined, and act consistently. Nature, always inartistic, takes pleasure
in creating the impossible. Reginald Blake was as typical a specimen of
the well-bred cad as one could hope to find between Piccadilly Circus and
Hyde Park Corner. Vicious without passion, and possessing brain without
mind, existence presented to him no difficulties, while his pleasures
brought him no pains. His morality was bounded by the doctor on the one
side, and the magistrate on the other. Careful never to outrage the
decrees of either, he was at forty-five still healthy, though stout; and
had achieved the not too easy task of amassing a fortune while avoiding
all risk of Holloway. He and his wife, Edith (_nee_ Eppington), were as
ill-matched a couple as could be conceived by any dramatist seeking
material for a problem play. As they stood before the altar on their
wedding morn, they might have been taken as symbolising satyr and saint. More than twenty years his junior, beautiful with the beauty of a
Raphael's Madonna, his every touch of her seemed a sacrilege. Yet once
in his life Mr. Blake played the part of a great gentleman; Mrs. Blake,
on the same occasion, contenting herself with a singularly mean
_role_--mean even for a woman in love. The affair, of course, had been a marriage of convenience. Blake, to do
him justice, had made no pretence to anything beyond admiration and
regard. Few things grow monotonous sooner than irregularity. He would
tickle his jaded palate with respectability, and try for a change the
companionship of a good woman. The girl's face drew him, as the
moonlight holds a man who, bored by the noise, turns from a heated room
to press his forehead to the window-pane. Accustomed to bid for what he
wanted, he offered his price. The Eppington family was poor and
numerous. The girl, bred up to the false notions of duty inculcated by a
narrow conventionality, and, feminine like, half in love with martyrdom
for its own sake, let her father bargain for a higher price, and then
sold herself. To a drama of this description, a lover is necessary, if the
complications are to be of interest to the outside world. Harry Sennett,
a pleasant-looking enough young fellow, in spite of his receding chin,
was possessed, perhaps, of more good intention than sense. Under the
influence of Edith's stronger character he was soon persuaded to
acquiesce meekly in the proposed arrangement. Both succeeded in
convincing themselves that they were acting nobly. The tone of the
farewell interview, arranged for the eve of the wedding, would have been
fit and proper to the occasion had Edith been a modern Joan of Arc about
to sacrifice her own happiness on the altar of a great cause; as the girl
was merely selling herself into ease and luxury, for no higher motive
than the desire to enable a certain number of more or less worthy
relatives to continue living beyond their legitimate means, the sentiment
was perhaps exaggerated. Many tears were shed, and many everlasting good-
byes spoken, though, seeing that Edith's new home would be only a few
streets off, and that of necessity their social set would continue to be
the same, more experienced persons might have counselled hope. Three
months after the marriage they found themselves side by side at the same
dinner-table; and after a little melodramatic fencing with what they were
pleased to regard as fate, they accommodated themselves to the customary
positions. Blake was quite aware that Sennett had been Edith's lover. So had half a
dozen other men, some younger, some older than himself. He felt no more
embarrassment at meeting them than, standing on the pavement outside the
Stock Exchange, he would have experienced greeting his brother jobbers
after a settling day that had transferred a fortune from their hands into
his. Sennett, in particular, he liked and encouraged. Our whole social
system, always a mystery to the philosopher, owes its existence to the
fact that few men and women possess sufficient intelligence to be
interesting to themselves. Blake liked company, but not much company
liked Blake. Young Sennett, however, could always be relied upon to
break the tediousness of the domestic dialogue. A common love of sport
drew the two men together. Most of us improve upon closer knowledge, and
so they came to find good in one another. "That is the man you ought to have married," said Blake one night to his
wife, half laughingly, half seriously, as they sat alone, listening to
Sennett's departing footsteps echoing upon the deserted pavement. "He's
a good fellow--not a mere money-grubbing machine like me." And a week later Sennett, sitting alone with Edith, suddenly broke out
with:

"He's a better man than I am, with all my high-falutin' talk, and, upon
my soul, he loves you. Shall I go abroad?" "If you like," was the answer. "What would you do?" "Kill myself," replied the other, with a laugh, "or run away with the
first man that asked me." So Sennett stayed on. Blake himself had made the path easy to them. There was little need for
either fear or caution. Indeed, their safest course lay in recklessness,
and they took it. To Sennett the house was always open. It was Blake
himself who, when unable to accompany his wife, would suggest Sennett as
a substitute. Club friends shrugged their shoulders. Was the man
completely under his wife's thumb; or, tired of her, was he playing some
devil's game of his own? To most of his acquaintances the latter
explanation seemed the more plausible. The gossip, in due course, reached the parental home. Mrs. Eppington
shook the vials of her wrath over the head of her son-in-law. The
father, always a cautious man, felt inclined to blame his child for her
want of prudence. "She'll ruin everything," he said. "Why the devil can't she be careful?" "I believe the man is deliberately plotting to get rid of her," said Mrs.
Eppington. "I shall tell him plainly what I think." "You're a fool, Hannah," replied her husband, allowing himself the
licence of the domestic hearth. "If you are right, you will only
precipitate matters; if you are wrong, you will tell him what there is no
need for him to know. Leave the matter to me. I can sound him without
giving anything away, and meanwhile you talk to Edith." So matters were arranged, but the interview between mother and daughter
hardly improved the position. Mrs. Eppington was conventionally moral;
Edith had been thinking for herself, and thinking in a bad atmosphere. Mrs. Eppington, grew angry at the girl's callousness. "Have you no sense of shame?" she cried. "I had once," was Edith's reply, "before I came to live here. Do you
know what this house is for me, with its gilded mirrors, its couches, its
soft carpets? Do you know what I am, and have been for two years?" The elder woman rose, with a frightened pleading look upon her face, and
the other stopped and turned away towards the window. "We all thought it for the best," continued Mrs. Eppington meekly. The girl spoke wearily without looking round. "Oh! every silly thing that was ever done, was done for the best. _I_
thought it would be for the best, myself. Everything would be so simple
if only we were not alive. Don't let's talk any more. All you can say
is quite right." The silence continued for a while, the Dresden-china clock on the
mantelpiece ticking louder and louder as if to say, "I, Time, am here. Do
not make your plans forgetting me, little mortals; I change your thoughts
and wills. You are but my puppets." "Then what do you intend to do?" demanded Mrs. Eppington at length. "Intend! Oh, the right thing of course. We all intend that. I shall
send Harry away with a few well-chosen words of farewell, learn to love
my husband and settle down to a life of quiet domestic bliss. Oh, it's
easy enough to intend!" The girl's face wrinkled with a laugh that aged her. In that moment it
was a hard, evil face, and with a pang the elder woman thought of that
other face, so like, yet so unlike--the sweet pure face of a girl that
had given to a sordid home its one touch of nobility. As under the
lightning's flash we see the whole arc of the horizon, so Mrs. Eppington
looked and saw her child's life. The gilded, over-furnished room
vanished. She and a big-eyed, fair-haired child, the only one of her
children she had ever understood, were playing wonderful games in the
twilight among the shadows of a tiny attic. Now she was the wolf,
devouring Edith, who was Red Riding Hood, with kisses. Now Cinderella's
prince, now both her wicked sisters. But in the favourite game of all,
Mrs. Eppington was a beautiful princess, bewitched by a wicked dragon, so
that she seemed to be an old, worn woman. But curly-headed Edith fought
the dragon, represented by the three-legged rocking-horse, and slew him
with much shouting and the toasting-fork. Then Mrs. Eppington became
again a beautiful princess, and went away with Edith back to her own
people. In this twilight hour the misbehaviour of the "General," the importunity
of the family butcher, and the airs assumed by cousin Jane, who kept two
servants, were forgotten. The games ended. The little curly head would be laid against her breast
"for five minutes' love," while the restless little brain framed the
endless question that children are for ever asking in all its thousand
forms, "What is life, mother? I am very little, and I think, and think,
until I grow frightened. Oh, mother, tell me, what is life?" Had she dealt with these questions wisely? Might it not have been better
to have treated them more seriously? Could life after all be ruled by
maxims learned from copy-books? She had answered as she had been
answered in her own far-back days of questioning. Might it not have been
better had she thought for herself? Suddenly Edith was kneeling on the floor beside her. "I will try to be good, mother." It was the old baby cry, the cry of us all, children that we are, till
mother Nature kisses us and bids us go to sleep. Their arms were round each other now, and so they sat, mother and child
once more. And the twilight of the old attic, creeping westward from the
east, found them again. The masculine duet had more result, but was not conducted with the
_finesse_ that Mr. Eppington, who prided himself on his diplomacy, had
intended. Indeed, so evidently ill at ease was that gentleman, when the
moment came for talk, and so palpably were his pointless remarks mere
efforts to delay an unpleasant subject, that Blake, always direct bluntly
though not ill-naturedly asked him, "How much?" Mr. Eppington was disconcerted. "It's not that--at least that's not what I have come about," he answered
confusedly. "What have you come about?" Inwardly Mr. Eppington cursed himself for a fool, for the which he was
perhaps not altogether without excuse. He had meant to act the part of a
clever counsel, acquiring information while giving none; by a blunder, he
found himself in the witness-box. "Oh, nothing, nothing," was the feeble response, "merely looked in to see
how Edith was." "Much the same as at dinner last night, when you were here," answered
Blake. "Come, out with it." It seemed the best course now, and Mr. Eppington took the plunge. "Don't you think," he said, unconsciously glancing round the room to be
sure they were alone, "that young Sennett is a little too much about the
house?" Blake stared at him. "Of course, we know it is all right--as nice a young fellow as ever
lived--and Edith--and all that. Of course, it's absurd, but--"

"But what?" "Well, people will talk." "What do they say?" The other shrugged his shoulders. Blake rose. He had an ugly look when angry, and his language was apt to
be coarse. "Tell them to mind their own business, and leave me and my wife alone." That was the sense of what he said; he expressed himself at greater
length, and in stronger language. "But, my dear Blake," urged Mr. Eppington, "for your own sake, is it
wise? There was a sort of boy and girl attachment between them--nothing
of any moment, but all that gives colour to gossip. Forgive me, but I am
her father; I do not like to hear my child talked about." "Then don't open your ears to the chatter of a pack of fools," replied
his son-in-law roughly. But the next instant a softer expression passed
over his face, and he laid his hand on the older man's arm. "Perhaps there are many more, but there's one good woman in the world,"
he said, "and that's your daughter. Come and tell me that the Bank of
England is getting shaky on its legs, and I'll listen to you." But the stronger the faith, the deeper strike the roots of suspicion. Blake said no further word on the subject, and Sennett was as welcome as
before. But Edith, looking up suddenly, would sometimes find her
husband's eyes fixed on her with a troubled look as of some dumb creature
trying to understand; and often he would slip out of the house of an
evening by himself, returning home hours afterwards, tired and
mud-stained. He made attempts to show his affection. This was the most fatal thing he
could have done. Ill-temper, ill-treatment even, she might have borne. His clumsy caresses, his foolish, halting words of tenderness became a
horror to her. She wondered whether to laugh or to strike at his
upturned face. His tactless devotion filled her life as with some sickly
perfume, stifling her. If only she could be by herself for a little
while to think! But he was with her night and day. There were times
when, as he would cross the room towards her, he grew monstrous until he
towered above her, a formless thing such as children dream of. And she
would sit with her lips tight pressed, clutching the chair lest she
should start up screaming. Her only thought was to escape from him. One day she hastily packed a
few necessaries in a small hand-bag and crept unperceived from the house. She drove to Charing Cross, but the Continental Express did not leave for
an hour, and she had time to think. Of what use was it? Her slender stock of money would soon be gone; how
could she live? He would find her and follow her. It was all so
hopeless! Suddenly a fierce desire of life seized hold of her, the angry answer of
her young blood to despair. Why should she die, never having known what
it was to live? Why should she prostrate herself before this juggernaut
of other people's respectability? Joy called to her; only her own
cowardice stayed her from stretching forth her hand and gathering it. She
returned home a different woman, for hope had come to her. A week later the butler entered the dining room, and handed Blake a
letter addressed to him in his wife's handwriting. He took it without a
word, as though he had been expecting it. It simply told him that she
had left him for ever. * * * * *

The world is small, and money commands many services. Sennett had gone
out for a stroll; Edith was left in the tiny _salon_ of their
_appartement_ at Fecamp. It was the third day of their arrival in the
town. The door was opened and closed, and Blake stood before her. She rose frightened, but by a motion he reassured her. There was a quiet
dignity about the man that was strange to her. "Why have you followed me?" she asked. "I want you to return home." "Home!" she cried. "You must be mad. Do you not know--"

He interrupted her vehemently. "I know nothing. I wish to know nothing. Go back to London at once. I have made everything right; no one
suspects. I shall not be there; you will never see me again, and you
will have an opportunity of undoing your mistake--our mistake." She listened. Hers was not a great nature, and the desire to obtain
happiness without paying the price was strong upon her. As for his good
name, what could that matter? he urged. People would only say that he
had gone back to the evil from which he had emerged, and few would be
surprised. His life would go on much as it had done, and she would only
be pitied. She quite understood his plan; it seemed mean of her to accept his
proposal, and she argued feebly against it. But he overcame all her
objections. For his own sake, he told her, he would prefer the scandal
to be connected with his name rather than with that of his wife. As he
unfolded his scheme, she began to feel that in acquiescing she was
conferring a favour. It was not the first deception he had arranged for
the public, and he appeared to be half in love with his own cleverness. She even found herself laughing at his mimicry of what this acquaintance
and that would say. Her spirits rose; the play that might have been a
painful drama seemed turning out an amusing farce. The thing settled, he rose to go, and held out his hand. As she looked
up into his face, something about the line of his lips smote upon her. "You will be well rid of me," she said. "I have brought you nothing but
trouble." "Oh, trouble," he answered. "If that were all! A man can bear trouble." "What else?" she asked. His eyes travelled aimlessly about the room. "They taught me a lot of
things when I was a boy," he said, "my mother and others--they meant
well--which as I grew older I discovered to be lies; and so I came to
think that nothing good was true, and that everything and everybody was
evil. And then--"

His wandering eyes came round to her and he broke off abruptly. "Good-
bye," he said, and the next moment he was gone. She sat wondering for a while what he had meant. Then Sennett returned,
and the words went out of her head. * * * * *

A good deal of sympathy was felt for Mrs. Blake. The man had a charming
wife; he might have kept straight; but as his friends added, "Blake
always was a cad." AN ITEM OF FASHIONABLE INTELLIGENCE


Speaking personally, I do not like the Countess of ---. She is not the
type of woman I could love. I hesitate the less giving expression to
this sentiment by reason of the conviction that the Countess of --- would
not be unduly depressed even were the fact to reach her ears. I cannot
conceive the Countess of ---'s being troubled by the opinion concerning
her of any being, human or divine, other than the Countess of ---. But to be honest, I must admit that for the Earl of --- she makes an
ideal wife. She rules him as she rules all others, relations and
retainers, from the curate to the dowager, but the rod, though firmly
held, is wielded with justice and kindly intent. Nor is it possible to
imagine the Earl of ---'s living as contentedly as he does with any
partner of a less dominating turn of mind. He is one of those
weak-headed, strong-limbed, good-natured, childish men, born to be guided
in all matters, from the tying of a neck-cloth to the choice of a
political party, by their women folk. Such men are in clover when their
proprietor happens to be a good and sensible woman, but are to be pitied
when they get into the hands of the selfish or the foolish. As very
young men, they too often fall victims to bad-tempered chorus girls or to
middle-aged matrons of the class from which Pope judged all womankind. They make capital husbands when well managed; treated badly, they say
little, but set to work, after the manner of a dissatisfied cat, to find
a kinder mistress, generally succeeding. The Earl of --- adored his
wife, deeming himself the most fortunate of husbands, and better
testimonial than such no wife should hope for. Till the day she snatched
him away from all other competitors, and claimed him for her own, he had
obeyed his mother with a dutifulness bordering on folly. Were the
countess to die to-morrow, he would be unable to tell you his mind on any
single subject until his eldest daughter and his still unmarried sister,
ladies both of strong character, attracted towards one another by a
mutual antagonism, had settled between themselves which was to be
mistress of him and of his house. However, there is little fear (bar accidents) but that my friend the
countess will continue to direct the hereditary vote of the Earl of ---
towards the goal of common sense and public good, guide his social policy
with judgment and kindness, and manage his estates with prudence and
economy for many years to come. She is a hearty, vigorous lady, of
generous proportions, with the blood of sturdy forebears in her veins,
and one who takes the same excellent good care of herself that she
bestows on all others dependent upon her guidance. "I remember," said the doctor--we were dining with the doctor in homely
fashion, and our wives had adjourned to the drawing-room to discuss
servants and husbands and other domestic matters with greater freedom,
leaving us to the claret and the twilight--"I remember when we had the
cholera in the village--it must be twenty years ago now--that woman gave
up the London season to stay down here and take the whole burden of the
trouble upon her own shoulders. I do not feel any call to praise her;
she liked the work, and she was in her element, but it was good work for
all that. She had no fear. She would carry the children in her arms if
time pressed and the little ambulance was not at hand. I have known her
sit all night in a room not twelve feet square, between a dying man and
his dying wife. But the thing never touched her. Six years ago we had
the small-pox, and she went all through that in just the same way. I
don't believe she has ever had a day's illness in her life. She will be
physicking this parish when my bones are rattling in my coffin, and she
will be laying down the laws of literature long after your statue has
become a familiar ornament of Westminster Abbey. She's a wonderful
woman, but a trifle masterful." He laughed, but I detected a touch of irritation in his voice. My host
looked a man wishful to be masterful himself. I do not think he quite
relished the calm way in which this grand dame took possession of all
things around her, himself and his work included. "Did you ever hear the story of the marriage?" he asked. "No," I replied, "whose marriage? The earl's?" "I should call it the countess's," he answered. "It was the gossip of
the county when I first came here, but other curious things have happened
among us to push it gradually out of memory. Most people, I really
believe, have quite forgotten that the Countess of --- once served behind
a baker's counter." "You don't say so," I exclaimed. The remark, I admit, sounds weak when
written down; the most natural remarks always do. "It's a fact," said the doctor, "though she does not suggest the shop-
girl, does she? But then I have known countesses, descended in a direct
line from William the Conqueror, who did, so things balance one another. Mary, Countess of ---, was, thirty years ago, Mary Sewell, daughter of a
Taunton linen-draper. The business, profitable enough as country
businesses go, was inadequate for the needs of the Sewell family,
consisting, as I believe it did, of seven boys and eight girls. Mary,
the youngest, as soon as her brief schooling was over, had to shift for
herself. She seems to have tried her hand at one or two things, finally
taking service with a cousin, a baker and confectioner, who was doing
well in Oxford Street. She must have been a remarkably attractive girl;
she's a handsome woman now. I can picture that soft creamy skin when it
was fresh and smooth, and the West of England girls run naturally to
dimples and eyes that glisten as though they had been just washed in
morning dew. The shop did a good trade in ladies' lunches--it was the
glass of sherry and sweet biscuit period. I expect they dressed her in
some neat-fitting grey or black dress, with short sleeves, showing her
plump arms, and that she flitted around the marble-topped tables,
smiling, and looking cool and sweet. There the present Earl of ---, then
young Lord C---, fresh from Oxford, and new to the dangers of London
bachelordom, first saw her. He had accompanied some female relatives to
the photographer's, and, hotels and restaurants being deemed impossible
in those days for ladies, had taken them to Sewell's to lunch. Mary
Sewell waited upon the party; and now as many of that party as are above
ground wait upon Mary Sewell." "He showed good sense in marrying her," I said, "I admire him for it." The doctor's sixty-four Lafitte was excellent. I felt charitably
inclined towards all men and women, even towards earls and countesses. "I don't think he had much to do with it," laughed the doctor, "beyond
being, like Barkis, 'willing.' It's a queer story; some people profess
not to believe it, but those who know her ladyship best think it is just
the story that must be true, because it is so characteristic of her. And
besides, I happen to know that it is true." "I should like to hear it," I said. "I am going to tell it you," said the doctor, lighting a fresh cigar, and
pushing the box towards me. * * * * *

I will leave you to imagine the lad's suddenly developed appetite for
decantered sherry at sixpence a glass, and the familiar currant bun of
our youth. He lunched at Sewell's shop, he tea'd at Sewell's,
occasionally he dined at Sewell's, off cutlets, followed by assorted
pastry. Possibly, merely from fear lest the affair should reach his
mother's ears, for he was neither worldly-wise nor vicious, he made love
to Mary under an assumed name; and to do the girl justice, it must be
remembered that she fell in love with and agreed to marry plain Mr. John
Robinson, son of a colonial merchant, a gentleman, as she must have seen,
and a young man of easy means, but of a position not so very much
superior to her own. The first intimation she received that her lover
was none other than Lord C---, the future Earl of ---, was vouchsafed her
during a painful interview with his lordship's mother. "I never knew it, madam," asserted Mary, standing by the window of the
drawing-room above the shop, "upon my word of honour, I never knew it." "Perhaps not," answered her ladyship coldly. "Would you have refused him
if you had?" "I cannot tell," was the girl's answer; "it would have been different
from the beginning. He courted me and asked me to be his wife." "We won't go into all that," interrupted the other; "I am not here to
defend him. I do not say he acted well. The question is, how much will
compensate you for your natural disappointment?" Her ladyship prided herself upon her bluntness and practicability. As
she spoke she took her cheque-book out of her reticule, and, opening it,
dipped her pen into the ink. I am inclined to think that the flutter of
that cheque-book was her ladyship's mistake. The girl had common sense,
and must have seen the difficulties in the way of a marriage between the
heir to an earldom and a linen-draper's daughter; and had the old lady
been a person of discernment, the interview might have ended more to her
satisfaction. She made the error of judging the world by one standard,
forgetting there are individualities. Mary Sewell came from a West of
England stock that, in the days of Drake and Frobisher, had given more
than one able-bodied pirate to the service of the country, and that
insult of the cheque-book put the fight into her. Her lips closed with a
little snap, and the fear fell from her. "I am sorry I don't see my way to obliging your ladyship," she said. "What do you mean, girl?" asked the elder woman. "I don't mean to be disappointed," answered the girl, but she spoke
quietly and respectfully. "We have pledged our word to one another. If
he is a gentleman, as I know he is, he will keep his, and I shall keep
mine." Then her ladyship began to talk reason, as people do when it is too late. She pointed out to the girl the difference of social position, and
explained to her the miseries that come from marrying out of one's
station. But the girl by this time had got over her surprise, and
perhaps had begun to reflect that, in any case, a countess-ship was worth
fighting for. The best of women are influenced by such considerations. * * * * *

"I am not a lady, I know," she replied quietly, "but my people have
always been honest folk, well known, and I shall try to learn. I am not
wishing to speak disrespectfully of my betters, but I was in service
before I came here, ma'am, as lady's maid, in a place where I saw much of
what is called Society. I think I can be as good a lady as some I know,
if not better." The countess began to grow angry again. "And who do you think will
receive you?" she cried, "a girl who has served in a pastry-cook's shop!" "Lady L--- came from behind the bar," Mary answered, "and that's not much
better. And the Duchess of C---, I have heard, was a ballet girl, but
nobody seems to remember it. I don't think the people whose opinion is
worth having will object to me for very long." The girl was beginning
rather to enjoy the contest. "You profess to love my son," cried the countess fiercely, "and you are
going to ruin his life. You will drag him down to your own level." The girl must have looked rather fine at that moment, I should dearly
love to have been present. "There will be no dragging down, my lady," she replied, "on either side. I do love your son very dearly. He is one of the kindest and best of
gentlemen. But I am not blind, and whatever amount of cleverness there
may be between us belongs chiefly to me. I shall make it my duty to fit
myself for the position of his wife, and to help him in his work. You
need not fear, my lady, I shall be a good wife to him, and he shall never
regret it. You might find him a richer wife, a better educated wife, but
you will never find him a wife who will be more devoted to him and to his
interests." That practically brought the scene to a close. The countess had sense
enough to see that she was only losing ground by argument. She rose and
replaced her cheque-book in her bag. "I think, my good girl, you must be mad," she said; "if you will not
allow me to do anything for you, there's an end to the matter. I did not
come here to quarrel with you. My son knows his duty to me and to his
family. You must take your own course, and I must take mine." "Very well, my lady," said Mary Sewell, holding the door open for her
ladyship to pass out, "we shall see who wins." But however brave a front Mary Sewell may have maintained before the
enemy, I expect she felt pretty limp when thinking matters calmly over
after her ladyship's departure. She knew her lover well enough to guess
that he would be as wax in the firm hands of his mother, while she
herself would not have a chance of opposing her influence against those
seeking to draw him away from her. Once again she read through the few
schoolboy letters he had written her, and then looked up at the framed
photograph that hung above the mantelpiece of her little bedroom. The
face was that of a frank, pleasant-looking young fellow, lightened by
eyes somewhat large for a man, but spoiled by a painfully weak mouth. The
more Mary Sewell thought, the more sure she felt in her own mind that he
loved her, and had meant honestly by her. Did the matter rest with him,
she might reckon on being the future Countess of ---, but, unfortunately
for her, the person to be considered was not Lord C---, but the present
Countess of ---. From childhood, through boyhood, into manhood it had
never once occurred to Lord C--- to dispute a single command of his
mother's, and his was not the type of brain to readily receive new ideas. If she was to win in the unequal contest it would have to be by art, not
by strength. She sat down and wrote a letter which under all the
circumstances was a model of diplomacy. She knew that it would be read
by the countess, and, writing it, she kept both mother and son in mind. She made no reproaches, and indulged in but little sentiment. It was the
letter of a woman who could claim rights, but who asked only for
courtesy. It stated her wish to see him alone and obtain from his own
lips the assurance that he wished their engagement to cease. "Do not
fear," Mary Sewell wrote, "that I shall be any annoyance to you. My own
pride would not let me urge you to marry me against your desire, and I
care for you too much to cause you any pain. Assure me with your own
lips that you wish our engagement to be at an end, and I shall release
you without another word." The family were in town, and Mary sent her letter by a trusty hand. The
countess read it with huge satisfaction, and, re-sealing it, gave it
herself into her son's hands. It promised a happy solution of the
problem. In imagination, she had all the night been listening to a
vulgar breach of promise case. She herself had been submitted to a most
annoying cross-examination by a pert barrister. Her son's assumption of
the name of Robinson had been misunderstood and severely commented upon
by the judge. A sympathetic jury had awarded thumping damages, and for
the next six months the family title would be a peg on which music-hall
singers and comic journalists would hang their ribald jokes. Lord C---
read the letter, flushed, and dutifully handed it back to his mother. She
made pretence to read it as for the first time, and counselled him to
accord the interview. "I am so glad," she said, "that the girl is taking the matter sensibly. We must really do something for her in the future, when everything is
settled. Let her ask for me, and then the servants will fancy she's a
lady's maid or something of that sort, come after a place, and won't
talk." So that evening Mary Sewell, addressed by the butler as "young woman,"
was ushered into the small drawing-room that connects the library of No. --- Grosvenor Square with the other reception rooms. The countess, now
all amiability, rose to meet her. "My son will be here in a moment," she explained, "he has informed me of
the purport of your letter. Believe me, my dear Miss Sewell, no one can
regret his thoughtless conduct more than I do. But young men will be
young men, and they do not stop to reflect that what may be a joke to
them may be taken quite seriously by others." "I don't regard the matter as a joke, my lady," replied Mary somewhat
curtly. "Of course not, my dear," added the countess, "that's what I'm saying. It
was very wrong of him altogether. But with your pretty face, you will
not, I am sure, have long to wait for a husband; we must see what we can
do for you." The countess certainly lacked tact; it must have handicapped her
exceedingly. "Thank you," answered the girl, "but I prefer to choose my own." Fortunately--or the interview might have ended in another quarrel--the
cause of all the trouble at this moment entered the room, and the
countess, whispering a few final words of instruction to him as she
passed out, left them together. Mary took a chair in the centre of the room, at equal distance from both
doors. Lord C---, finding any sort of a seat uncomfortable under the
circumstances, preferred to stand with his back to the mantelpiece. Dead
silence was maintained for a few seconds, and then Mary, drawing the
daintiest of handkerchiefs from her pocket, began to cry. The countess
must have been a poor diplomatist, or she might have thought of this; or
she may have remembered her own appearance on the rare occasions when she
herself, a big, raw-boned girl, had attempted the softening influence of
tears, and have attached little importance to the possibility. But when
these soft, dimpled women cry, and cry quietly, it is another matter. Their eyes grow brighter, and the tears, few and far between, lie like
dewdrops on a rose leaf. Lord C--- was as tender-hearted a lout as ever lived. In a moment he was
on his knees with his arm round the girl's waist, pouring out such
halting words of love and devotion as came to his unready brain, cursing
his fate, his earldom, and his mother, and assuring Mary that his only
chance of happiness lay in his making her his countess. Had Mary liked
to say the word at that moment, he would have caught her to his arms, and
defied the whole world--for the time being. But Mary was a very
practical young woman, and there are difficulties in the way of handling
a lover, who, however ready he may be to do your bidding so long as your
eyes are upon him, is liable to be turned from his purpose so soon as
another influence is substituted for your own. His lordship suggested an
immediate secret marriage. But you cannot run out into the street, knock
up a clergyman, and get married on the spot, and Mary knew that the
moment she was gone his lordship's will would revert to his mother's
keeping. Then his lordship suggested flight, but flight requires money,
and the countess knew enough to keep his lordship's purse in her own
hands. Despair seized upon his lordship. "It's no use," he cried, "it will end in my marrying her." "Who's she?" exclaimed Mary somewhat quickly. His lordship explained the position. The family estates were heavily
encumbered. It was deemed advisable that his lordship should marry
Money, and Money, in the person of the only daughter of rich and
ambitious parvenus, had offered itself--or, to speak more correctly, had
been offered. "What's she like?" asked Mary. "Oh, she's nice enough," was the reply, "only I don't care for her and
she doesn't care for me. It won't be much fun for either of us," and his
lordship laughed dismally. "How do you know she doesn't care for you?" asked Mary. A woman may be
critical of her lover's shortcomings, but at the very least he is good
enough for every other woman. "Well, she happens to care for somebody else," answered his lordship,
"she told me so herself." That would account for it. "And is she willing to marry you?" inquired Mary. His lordship shrugged his shoulders. "Oh, well, you know, her people want it," he replied. In spite of her trouble, the girl could not help a laugh. These young
swells seemed to have but small wills of their own. Her ladyship, on the
other side of the door, grew nervous. It was the only sound she had been
able to hear. "It's deuced awkward," explained his lordship, "when you're--well, when
you are anybody, you know. You can't do as you like. Things are
expected of you, and there's such a lot to be considered." Mary rose and clasped her pretty dimpled hands, from which she had drawn
her gloves, behind his neck. "You do love me, Jack?" she said, looking up into his face. For answer the lad hugged her to him very tightly, and there were tears
in his eyes. "Look here, Mary," he cried, "if I could only get rid of my position, and
settle down with you as a country gentleman, I'd do it to-morrow. Damn
the title, it's going to be the curse of my life." Perhaps in that moment Mary also wished that the title were at the bottom
of the sea, and that her lover were only the plain Mr. John Robinson she
had thought him. These big, stupid men are often very loveable in spite
of, or because of their weakness. They appeal to the mother side of a
woman's heart, and that is the biggest side in all good women. Suddenly however, the door opened. The countess appeared, and sentiment
flew out. Lord C---, releasing Mary, sprang back, looking like a guilty
school-boy. "I thought I heard Miss Sewell go out," said her ladyship in the icy
tones that had never lost their power of making her son's heart freeze
within him. "I want to see you when you are free." "I shan't be long," stammered his lordship. "Mary--Miss Sewell is just
going." Mary waited without moving until the countess had left and closed the
door behind her. Then she turned to her lover and spoke in quick, low
tones. "Give me her address--the girl they want you to marry!" "What are you going to do?" asked his lordship. "I don't know," answered the girl, "but I'm going to see her." She scribbled the name down, and then said, looking the boy squarely in
the face:

"Tell me frankly, Jack, do you want to marry me, or do you not?" "You know I do, Mary," he answered, and his eyes spoke stronger than his
words. "If I weren't a silly ass, there would be none of this trouble. But I don't know how it is; I say to myself I'll do, a thing, but the
mater talks and talks and--"

"I know," interrupted Mary with a smile. "Don't argue with her, fall in
with all her views, and pretend to agree with her." "If you could only think of some plan," said his lordship, catching at
the hope of her words, "you are so clever." "I am going to try," answered Mary, "and if I fail, you must run off with
me, even if you have to do it right before your mother's eyes." What she meant was, "I shall have to run off with you," but she thought
it better to put it the other way about. Mary found her involuntary rival a meek, gentle little lady, as much
under the influence of her blustering father as was Lord C--- under that
of his mother. What took place at the interview one can only surmise;
but certain it is that the two girls, each for her own ends, undertook to
aid and abet one another. Much to the surprised delight of their respective parents, there came
about a change in the attitude hitherto assumed towards one another by
Miss Clementina Hodskiss and Lord C---. All objections to his lordship's
unwilling attentions were suddenly withdrawn by the lady. Indeed, so
swift to come and go are the whims of women, his calls were actually
encouraged, especially when, as generally happened, they coincided with
the absence from home of Mr. and Mrs. Hodskiss. Quite as remarkable was
the new-born desire of Lord C--- towards Miss Clementina Hodskiss. Mary's
name was never mentioned, and the suggestion of immediate marriage was
listened to without remonstrance. Wiser folk would have puzzled their
brains, but both her ladyship and ex-Contractor Hodskiss were accustomed
to find all things yield to their wishes. The countess saw visions of a
rehabilitated estate, and Clementina's father dreamed of a peerage,
secured by the influence of aristocratic connections. All that the young
folks stipulated for (and on that point their firmness was supernatural)
was that the marriage should be quiet, almost to the verge of secrecy. "No beastly fuss," his lordship demanded. "Let it be somewhere in the
country, and no mob!" and his mother, thinking she understood his reason,
patted his cheek affectionately. "I should like to go down to Aunt Jane's and be married quietly from
there," explained Miss Hodskiss to her father. Aunt Jane resided on the outskirts of a small Hampshire village, and "sat
under" a clergyman famous throughout the neighbourhood for having lost
the roof to his mouth. "You can't be married by that old fool," thundered her father--Mr.
Hodskiss always thundered; he thundered even his prayers. "He christened me," urged Miss Clementina. "And Lord knows what he called you. Nobody can understand a word he
says." "I'd like him to marry me," reiterated Miss Clementina. Neither her ladyship nor the contractor liked the idea. The latter in
particular had looked forward to a big function, chronicled at length in
all the newspapers. But after all, the marriage was the essential thing,
and perhaps, having regard to some foolish love passages that had
happened between Clementina and a certain penniless naval lieutenant,
ostentation might be out of place. So in due course Clementina departed for Aunt Jane's, accompanied only by
her maid. Quite a treasure was Miss Hodskiss's new maid. "A clean, wholesome girl," said of her Contractor Hodskiss, who
cultivated affability towards the lower orders; "knows her place, and
talks sense. You keep that girl, Clemmy." "Do you think she knows enough?" hazarded the maternal Hodskiss. "Quite sufficient for any decent woman," retorted the contractor. "When
Clemmy wants painting and stuffing, it will be time enough for her to
think about getting one of your '_Ach Himmels_' or '_Mon Dieus_'." "I like the girl myself immensely," agreed Clementina's mother. "You can
trust her, and she doesn't give herself airs." Her praises reached even the countess, suffering severely at the moment
from the tyranny of an elderly Fraulein. "I must see this treasure," thought the countess to herself. "I am tired
of these foreign minxes." But no matter at what cunning hour her ladyship might call, the
"treasure" always happened for some reason or other to be abroad. "Your girl is always out when I come," laughed the countess. "One would
fancy there was some reason for it." "It does seem odd," agreed Clementina, with a slight flush. Miss Hodskiss herself showed rather than spoke her appreciation of the
girl. She seemed unable to move or think without her. Not even from the
interviews with Lord C--- was the maid always absent. The marriage, it was settled, should be by licence. Mrs. Hodskiss made
up her mind at first to run down and see to the preliminaries, but really
when the time arrived it hardly seemed necessary to take that trouble. The ordering of the whole affair was so very simple, and the "treasure"
appeared to understand the business most thoroughly, and to be willing to
take the whole burden upon her own shoulders. It was not, therefore,
until the evening before the wedding that the Hodskiss family arrived in
force, filling Aunt Jane's small dwelling to its utmost capacity. The
swelling figure of the contractor, standing beside the tiny porch,
compelled the passer-by to think of the doll's house in which the dwarf
resides during fair-time, ringing his own bell out of his own first-floor
window. The countess and Lord C--- were staying with her ladyship's
sister, the Hon. Mrs. J---, at G--- Hall, some ten miles distant, and
were to drive over in the morning. The then Earl of --- was in Norway,
salmon fishing. Domestic events did not interest him. Clementina complained of a headache after dinner, and went to bed early. The "treasure" also was indisposed. She seemed worried and excited. "That girl is as eager about the thing," remarked Mrs. Hodskiss, "as
though it was her own marriage." In the morning Clementina was still suffering from her headache, but
asserted her ability to go through the ceremony, provided everybody would
keep away, and not worry her. The "treasure" was the only person she
felt she could bear to have about her. Half an hour before it was time
to start for church her mother looked her up again. She had grown still
paler, if possible, during the interval, and also more nervous and
irritable. She threatened to go to bed and stop there if she was not
left quite alone. She almost turned her mother out of the room, locking
the door behind her. Mrs. Hodskiss had never known her daughter to be
like this before. The others went on, leaving her to follow in the last carriage with her
father. The contractor, forewarned, spoke little to her. Only once he
had occasion to ask her a question, and then she answered in a strained,
unnatural voice. She appeared, so far as could be seen under her heavy
veil, to be crying. "Well, this is going to be a damned cheerful wedding," said Mr. Hodskiss,
and lapsed into sulkiness. The wedding was not so quiet as had been anticipated. The village had
got scent of it, and had spread itself upon the event, while half the
house party from G--- Hall had insisted on driving over to take part in
the proceedings. The little church was better filled than it had been
for many a long year past. The presence of the stylish crowd unnerved the ancient clergyman, long
unaccustomed to the sight of a strange face, and the first sound of the
ancient clergyman's voice unnerved the stylish crowd. What little
articulation he possessed entirely disappeared, no one could understand a
word he said. He appeared to be uttering sounds of distress. The
ancient gentleman's infliction had to be explained in low asides, and it
also had to be explained why such an one had been chosen to perform the
ceremony. "It was a whim of Clementina's," whispered her mother. "Her father and
myself were married from here, and he christened her. The dear child's
full of sentiment. I think it so nice of her." Everybody agreed it was charming, but wished it were over. The general
effect was weird in the extreme. Lord C--- spoke up fairly well, but the bride's responses were singularly
indistinct, the usual order of things being thus reversed. The story of
the naval lieutenant was remembered, and added to, and some of the more
sentimental of the women began to cry in sympathy. In the vestry things assumed a brighter tone. There was no lack of
witnesses to sign the register. The verger pointed out to them the
place, and they wrote their names, as people in such cases do, without
stopping to read. Then it occurred to some one that the bride had not
yet signed. She stood apart, with her veil still down, and appeared to
have been forgotten. Encouraged, she came forward meekly, and took the
pen from the hand of the verger. The countess came and stood behind her. "Mary," wrote the bride, in a hand that looked as though it ought to have
been firm, but which was not. "Dear me," said the countess, "I never knew there was a Mary in your
name. How differently you write when you write slowly." The bride did not answer, but followed with "Susannah." "Why, what a lot of names you must have, my dear!" exclaimed the
countess. "When are you going to get to the ones we all know?" "Ruth," continued the bride without answering. Breeding is not always proof against strong emotion. The countess
snatched the bride's veil from her face, and Mary Susannah Ruth Sewell
stood before her, flushed and trembling, but looking none the less pretty
because of that. At this point the crowd came in useful. "I am sure your ladyship does not wish a scene," said Mary, speaking low. "The thing is done." "The thing can be undone, and will be," retorted the countess in the same
tone. "You, you--"

"My wife, don't forget that, mother," said Lord C--- coming between them,
and slipping Mary's hand on to his arm. "We are both sorry to have had
to go about the thing in this roundabout way, but we wanted to avoid a
fuss. I think we had better be getting away. I'm afraid Mr. Hodskiss is
going to be noisy." * * * * *

The doctor poured himself out a glass of claret, and drank it off. His
throat must have been dry. "And what became of Clementina?" I asked. "Did the naval lieutenant,
while the others were at church, dash up in a post-chaise and carry her
off?" "That's what ought to have happened, for the whole thing to be in
keeping," agreed the doctor. "I believe as a matter of fact she did
marry him eventually, but not till some years later, after the contractor
had died." "And did Mr. Hodskiss make a noise in the vestry?" I persisted. The
doctor never will finish a story. "I can't say for certain," answered my host, "I only saw the gentleman
once. That was at a shareholders' meeting. I should incline to the
opinion that he did." "I suppose the bride and bridegroom slipped out as quietly as possible
and drove straight off," I suggested. "That would have been the sensible thing for them to do," agreed the
doctor. "But how did she manage about her travelling frock?" I continued. "She
could hardly have gone back to her Aunt Jane's and changed her things." The doctor has no mind for minutiae. "I cannot tell you about all that," he replied. "I think I mentioned
that Mary was a practical girl. Possibly she had thought of these
details." "And did the countess take the matter quietly?" I asked. I like a tidy story, where everybody is put into his or her proper place
at the end. Your modern romance leaves half his characters lying about
just anyhow. "That also I cannot tell you for certain," answered the doctor, "but I
give her credit for so much sense. Lord C--- was of age, and with Mary
at his elbow, quite knew his own mind. I believe they travelled for two
or three years. The first time I myself set eyes on the countess (_nee_
Mary Sewell) was just after the late earl's death. I thought she looked
a countess, every inch of her, but then I had not heard the story. I
mistook the dowager for the housekeeper." BLASE BILLY


It was towards the end of August. He and I appeared to be the only two
men left to the Club. He was sitting by an open window, the _Times_
lying on the floor beside him. I drew my chair a little closer and
remarked:--"Good morning." He suppressed a yawn, and replied "Mornin'"--dropping the "g."  The
custom was just coming into fashion; he was always correct. "Going to be a very hot day, I am afraid," I continued. "'Fraid so," was the response, after which he turned his head away and
gently closed his eyes. I opined that conversation was not to his wish, but this only made me
more determined to talk, and to talk to him above all others in London. The desire took hold of me to irritate him--to break down the
imperturbable calm within which he moved and had his being; and I
gathered myself together, and settled down to the task. "Interesting paper the _Times_," I observed. "Very," he replied, taking it from the floor and handing it to me. "Won't
you read it?" I had been careful to throw into my voice an aggressive cheeriness which
I had calculated would vex him, but his manner remained that of a man who
is simply bored. I argued with him politely concerning the paper; but he
insisted, still with the same weary air, that he had done with it. I
thanked him effusively. I judged that he hated effusiveness. "They say that to read a _Times_ leader," I persisted, "is a lesson in
English composition." "So I've been told," he answered tranquilly. "Personally I don't take
them." The _Times_, I could see, was not going to be of much assistance to me. I
lit a cigarette, and remarked that he was not shooting. He admitted the
fact. Under the circumstances, it would have taxed him to deny it, but
the necessity for confession aroused him. "To myself," he said, "a tramp through miles of mud, in company with four
gloomy men in black velveteen, a couple of depressed-looking dogs, and a
heavy gun, the entire cavalcade being organised for the purpose of
killing some twelve-and-sixpence worth of poultry, suggests the
disproportionate." I laughed boisterously, and cried, "Good, good--very good!" He was the type of man that shudders inwardly at the sound of laughter. I
had the will to slap him on the back, but I thought maybe that would send
him away altogether. I asked him if he hunted. He replied that fourteen hours' talk a day
about horses, and only about horses tired him, and that in consequence he
had abandoned hunting. "You fish?" I said. "I was never sufficiently imaginative," he answered. "You travel a good deal," I suggested. He had apparently made up his mind to abandon himself to his fate, for he
turned towards me with a resigned air. An ancient nurse of mine had
always described me as the most "wearing" child she had ever come across. I prefer to speak of myself as persevering. "I should go about more," he said, "were I able to see any difference
between one place and another." "Tried Central Africa?" I inquired. "Once or twice," he answered. "It always reminds me of Kew Gardens." "China?" I hazarded. "Cross between a willow-pattern plate and a New York slum," was his
comment. "The North Pole?" I tried, thinking the third time might be lucky. "Never got quite up to it," he returned. "Reached Cape Hakluyt once." "How did that impress you?" I asked. "It didn't impress me," he replied. The talk drifted to women and bogus companies, dogs, literature, and such-
like matters. I found him well informed upon and bored by all. "They used to be amusing," he said, speaking of the first named, "until
they began to take themselves seriously. Now they are merely silly." I was forced into closer companionship with "Blase Billy" that autumn,
for by chance a month later he and I found ourselves the guests of the
same delightful hostess, and I came to liking him better. He was a
useful man to have about one. In matters of fashion one could always
feel safe following his lead. One knew that his necktie, his collar, his
socks, if not the very newest departure, were always correct; and upon
social paths, as guide, philosopher, and friend, he was invaluable. He
knew every one, together with his or her previous convictions. He was
acquainted with every woman's past, and shrewdly surmised every man's
future. He could point you out the coal-shed where the Countess of
Glenleman had gambolled in her days of innocence, and would take you to
breakfast at the coffee-shop off the Mile End Road where "Sam. Smith,
Estd. 1820," own brother to the world-famed society novelist,
Smith-Stratford, lived an uncriticised, unparagraphed, unphotographed
existence upon the profits of "rashers" at three-ha'pence and
"door-steps" at two a penny. He knew at what houses it was inadvisable
to introduce soap, and at what tables it would be bad form to denounce
political jobbery. He could tell you offhand what trade-mark went with
what crest, and remembered the price paid for every baronetcy created
during the last twenty-five years. Regarding himself, he might have made claim with King Charles never to
have said a foolish thing, and never to have done a wise one. He
despised, or affected to despise, most of his fellow-men, and those of
his fellow-men whose opinion was most worth having unaffectedly despised
him. Shortly described, one might have likened him to a Gaiety Johnny with
brains. He was capital company after dinner, but in the early morning
one avoided him. So I thought of him until one day he fell in love; or to put it in the
words of Teddy Tidmarsh, who brought the news to us, "got mashed on Gerty
Lovell." "The red-haired one," Teddy explained, to distinguish her from her
sister, who had lately adopted the newer golden shade. "Gerty Lovell!" exclaimed the captain, "why, I've always been told the
Lovell girls hadn't a penny among them." "The old man's stone broke, I know for a certainty," volunteered Teddy,
who picked up a mysterious but, in other respects, satisfactory income in
an office near Hatton Garden, and who was candour itself concerning the
private affairs of everybody but himself. "Oh, some rich pork-packing or diamond-sweating uncle has cropped up in
Australia, or America, or one of those places," suggested the captain,
"and Billy's got wind of it in good time. Billy knows his way about." We agreed that some such explanation was needed, though in all other
respects Gerty Lovell was just the girl that Reason (not always consulted
on these occasions) might herself have chosen for "Blase Billy's" mate. The sunlight was not too kind to her, but at evening parties, where the
lighting has been well considered, I have seen her look quite girlish. At
her best she was not beautiful, but at her worst there was about her an
air of breeding and distinction that always saved her from being passed
over, and she dressed to perfection. In character she was the typical
society woman: always charming, generally insincere. She went to
Kensington for her religion and to Mayfair for her morals; accepted her
literature from Mudie's and her art from the Grosvenor Gallery; and could
and would gabble philanthropy, philosophy, and politics with equal
fluency at every five-o'clock tea-table she visited. Her ideas could
always be guaranteed as the very latest, and her opinion as that of the
person to whom she was talking. Asked by a famous novelist one
afternoon, at the Pioneer Club, to give him some idea of her, little Mrs.
Bund, the painter's wife, had remained for a few moments with her pretty
lips pursed, and had then said:

"She is a woman to whom life could bring nothing more fully satisfying
than a dinner invitation from a duchess, and whose nature would be
incapable of sustaining deeper suffering than that caused by an
ill-fitting costume." At the time I should have said the epigram was as true as it was cruel,
but I suppose we none of us quite know each other. I congratulated "Blase Billy," or to drop his Club nickname and give him
the full benefit of his social label, "The Hon. William Cecil Wychwood
Stanley Drayton," on the occasion of our next meeting, which happened
upon the steps of the Savoy Restaurant, and I thought--unless a quiver of
the electric light deceived me--that he blushed. "Charming girl," I said. "You're a lucky dog, Billy." It was the phrase that custom demands upon such occasions, and it came of
its own accord to my tongue without costing me the trouble of
composition, but he seized upon it as though it had been a gem of
friendly sincerity. "You will like her even more when you know her better," he said. "She is
so different from the usual woman that one meets. Come and see her to-
morrow afternoon, she will be so pleased. Go about four, I will tell her
to expect you." I rang the bell at ten minutes past five. Billy was there. She greeted
me with a little tremor of embarrassment, which sat oddly upon her, but
which was not altogether unpleasing. She said it was kind of me to come
so early. I stayed for about half an hour, but conversation flagged, and
some of my cleverest remarks attracted no attention whatever. When I rose to take my leave, Billy said that he must be off too, and
that he would accompany me. Had they been ordinary lovers, I should have
been careful to give them an opportunity of making their adieus in
secret; but in the case of the Honourable William Drayton and the eldest
Miss Lovell I concluded that such tactics were needless, so I waited till
he had shaken hands, and went downstairs with him. But in the hall Billy suddenly ejaculated, "By Jove! Half a minute," and
ran back up the stairs three at a time. Apparently he found what he had
gone for on the landing, for I did not hear the opening of the drawing-
room door. Then the Honourable Billy redescended with a sober,
nonchalent air. "Left my gloves behind me," he explained, as he took my arm. "I am
always leaving my gloves about." I did not mention that I had seen him take them from his hat and slip
them into his coat-tail pocket. We at the Club did not see very much of Billy during the next three
months, but the captain, who prided himself upon his playing of the
_role_ of smoking-room cynic--though he would have been better in the
part had he occasionally displayed a little originality--was of opinion
that our loss would be more than made up to us after the marriage. Once
in the twilight I caught sight of a figure that reminded me of Billy's,
accompanied by a figure that might have been that of the eldest Miss
Lovell; but as the spot was Battersea Park, which is not a fashionable
evening promenade, and the two figures were holding each other's hands,
the whole picture being suggestive of the closing chapter of a _London
Journal_ romance, I concluded I had made an error. But I did see them in the Adelphi stalls one evening, rapt in a
sentimental melodrama. I joined them between the acts, and poked fun at
the play, as one does at the Adelphi, but Miss Lovell begged me quite
earnestly not to spoil her interest, and Billy wanted to enter upon a
serious argument as to whether a man was justified in behaving as Will
Terriss had just behaved towards the woman he loved. I left them and
returned to my own party, to the satisfaction, I am inclined to think, of
all concerned. They married in due course. We were mistaken on one point. She brought
Billy nothing. But they both seemed quite content on his not too
extravagant fortune. They took a tiny house not far from Victoria
Station, and hired a brougham for the season. They did not entertain
very much, but they contrived to be seen everywhere it was right and
fashionable they should be seen. The Honourable Mrs. Drayton was a much
younger and brighter person than had been the eldest Miss Lovell, and as
she continued to dress charmingly, her social position rose rapidly. Billy went everywhere with her, and evidently took a keen pride in her
success. It was even said that he designed her dresses for her, and I
have myself seen him earnestly studying the costumes in Russell and
Allen's windows. The captain's prophecy remained unfulfilled. "Blase Billy"--if the name
could still be applied to him--hardly ever visited the Club after his
marriage. But I had grown to like him, and, as he had foretold, to like
his wife. I found their calm indifference to the burning questions of
the day a positive relief from the strenuous atmosphere of literary and
artistic circles. In the drawing-room of their little house in Eaton
Row, the comparative merits of George Meredith and George R. Sims were
not considered worth discussion. Both were regarded as persons who
afforded a certain amount of amusement in return for a certain amount of
cash. And on any Wednesday afternoon, Henrick Ibsen and Arthur Roberts
would have been equally welcome, as adding piquancy to the small
gathering. Had I been compelled to pass my life in such a house, this
Philistine attitude might have palled upon me; but, under the
circumstances, it refreshed me, and I made use of my welcome, which I
believe was genuine, to its full extent. As months went by, they seemed to me to draw closer to one another,
though I am given to understand that such is not the rule in fashionable
circles. One evening I arrived a little before my time, and was shown up
into the drawing-room by the soft-footed butler. They were sitting in
the dusk with their arms round one another. It was impossible to
withdraw, so I faced the situation and coughed. A pair of middle-class
lovers could not have appeared more awkward or surprised. But the incident established an understanding between us, and I came to
be regarded as a friend before whom there was less necessity to act. Studying them, I came to the conclusion that the ways and manners of love
are very same-like throughout the world, as though the foolish boy,
unheedful of human advance, kept but one school for minor poet and East
End shop-boy, for Girton girl and little milliner; taught but the one
lesson to the end-of-the-nineteenth-century Johnny that he taught to
bearded Pict and Hun four thousand years ago. Thus the summer and the winter passed pleasantly for the Honourable
Billy, and then, as luck would have it, he fell ill just in the very
middle of the London season, when invitations to balls and dinner
parties, luncheons and "At Homes," were pouring in from every quarter;
when the lawns at Hurlingham were at their smoothest, and the paddocks at
their smartest. It was unfortunate, too, that the fashions that season suited the
Honourable Mrs. Billy as they had not suited her for years. In the early
spring, she and Billy had been hard at work planning costumes calculated
to cause a flutter through Mayfair, and the dresses and the bonnets--each
one a work of art--were waiting on their stands to do their killing work. But the Honourable Mrs. Billy, for the first time in her life, had lost
interest in such things. Their friends were genuinely sorry, for society was Billy's element, and
in it he was interesting and amusing. But, as Lady Gower said, there was
no earthly need for his wife to constitute herself a prisoner. Her
shutting herself off from the world could do him no good and it would
look odd. Accordingly the Honourable Mrs. Drayton, to whom oddness was a crime, and
the voice of Lady Gower as the voice of duty, sacrificed her inclinations
on the social shrine, laced the new costumes tight across her aching
heart, and went down into society. But the Honourable Mrs. Drayton achieved not the success of former
seasons. Her small talk grew so very small, that even Park Lane found it
unsatisfying. Her famous laugh rang mechanically. She smiled at the
wisdom of dukes, and became sad at the funny stories of millionaires. Society voted her a good wife but bad company, and confined its
attentions to cards of inquiry. And for this relief the Honourable Mrs.
Drayton was grateful, for Billy waned weaker and weaker. In the world of
shadows in which she moved, he was the one real thing. She was of very
little practical use, but it comforted her to think that she was helping
to nurse him. But Billy himself it troubled. "I do wish you would go out more," he would say. "It makes me feel that
I'm such a selfish brute, keeping you tied up here in this dismal little
house. Besides," he would add, "people miss you; they will hate me for
keeping you away." For, where his wife was concerned, Billy's knowledge
of the world availed him little. He really thought society craved for
the Honourable Mrs. Drayton, and would not be comforted where she was
not. "I would rather stop with you, dear," would be the answer; "I don't care
to go about by myself. You must get well quickly and take me." And so the argument continued, until one evening, as she sat by herself,
the nurse entered softly, closed the door behind her, and came over to
her. "I wish you would go out to-night, ma'am," said the nurse, "just for an
hour or two. I think it would please the master; he is worrying himself
because he thinks it is his fault that you do not; and just now"--the
woman hesitated for a moment--"just now I want to keep him very quiet." "Is he weaker, nurse?" "Well, he is not stronger, ma'am, and I think--I think we must humour
him." The Honourable Mrs. Drayton rose, and, crossing to the window, stood for
a while looking out. "But where am I to go, nurse?" she said at length, turning with a smile. "I've no invitations anywhere." "Can't you make believe to have one?" said the nurse. "It is only seven
o'clock. Say you are going to a dinner-party; you can come home early
then. Go and dress yourself, and come down and say good-bye to him, and
then come in again about eleven, as though you had just returned." "You think I must, nurse?" "I think it would be better, ma'am. I wish you would try it." The Honourable Mrs. Drayton went to the door, then paused. "He has such sharp ears, nurse; he will listen for the opening of the
door and the sound of the carriage." "I will see to that," said the nurse. "I will tell them to have the
carriage here at ten minutes to eight. Then you can drive to the end of
the street, slip out, and walk back. I will let you in myself." "And about coming home?" asked the other woman. "You must slip out for a few minutes before eleven, and the carriage must
be waiting for you at the corner again. Leave all that to me." In half an hour the Honourable Mrs. Drayton entered the sick-room,
radiant in evening dress and jewels. Fortunately the lights were low, or
"Blase-Billy" might have been doubtful as to the effect his wife was
likely to produce. For her face was not the face that one takes to
dinner-parties. "Nurse tells me you are going to the Grevilles this evening. I am so
glad. I've been worrying myself about you, moped up here right through
the season." He took her hands in his and held her out at arm's length from him. "How handsome you look, dear!" he said. "How they must have all been
cursing me for keeping you shut up here, like a princess in an ogre's
castle! I shall never dare to face them again." She laughed, well pleased at his words. "I shall not be late," she said. "I shall be so anxious to get back and
see how my boy has behaved. If you have not been good I shan't go
again." They kissed and parted, and at eleven she returned to the room. She told
him what a delightful evening it had been, and bragged a little of her
own success. The nurse told her that he had been more cheerful that evening than for
many nights. So every day the farce was played for him. One day it was to a luncheon
that she went, in a costume by Redfern; the next night to a ball, in a
frock direct from Paris; again to an "At Home," or concert, or dinner-
party. Loafers and passers-by would stop to stare at a haggard, red-eyed
woman, dressed as for a drawing-room, slipping thief-like in and out of
her own door. I heard them talking of her one afternoon, at a house where I called, and
I joined the group to listen. "I always thought her heartless, but I gave her credit for sense," a
woman was saying. "One doesn't expect a woman to be fond of her husband,
but she needn't make a parade of ignoring him when he is dying." I pleaded absence from town to inquire what was meant, and from all lips
I heard the same account. One had noticed her carriage at the door two
or three evenings in succession. Another had seen her returning home. A
third had seen her coming out, and so on. I could not fit the fact in with my knowledge of her, so the next evening
I called. The door was opened instantly by herself. "I saw you from the window," she said. "Come in here; don't speak." I followed her, and she closed the door behind her. She was dressed in a
magnificent costume, her hair sparkling with diamonds, and I looked my
questions. She laughed bitterly. "I am supposed to be at the opera to-night," she explained. "Sit down,
if you have a few minutes to spare." I said it was for a talk that I had come; and there, in the dark room,
lighted only by the street lamp without, she told me all. And at the end
she dropped her head on her bare arms; and I turned away and looked out
of the window for a while. "I feel so ridiculous," she said, rising and coming towards me. "I sit
here all the evening dressed like this. I'm afraid I don't act my part
very well; but, fortunately, dear Billy never was much of a judge of art,
and it is good enough for him. I tell him the most awful lies about what
everybody has said to me, and what I've said to everybody, and how my
gowns were admired. What do you think of this one?" For answer I took the privilege of a friend. "I'm glad you think well of me," she said. "Billy has such a high
opinion of you. You will hear some funny tales. I'm glad you know." I had to leave London again, and Billy died before I returned. I heard
that she had to be fetched from a ball, and was only just in time to
touch his lips before they were cold. But her friends excused her by
saying that the end had come very suddenly. I called on her a little later, and before I left I hinted to her what
people were saying, and asked her if I had not better tell them the
truth. "I would rather you didn't," she answered. "It seems like making public
the secret side of one's life." "But," I urged, "they will think--"

She interrupted me. "Does it matter very much what they think?" Which struck me as a very remarkable sentiment, coming from the Hon. Mrs.
Drayton, _nee_ the elder Miss Lovell. THE CHOICE OF CYRIL HARJOHN


Between a junior resident master of twenty-one, and a backward lad of
fifteen, there yawns an impassable gulf. Between a struggling journalist
of one-and-thirty, and an M.D. of twenty-five, with a brilliant record
behind him, and a career of exceptional promise before him, a close
friendship is however permissible. My introduction to Cyril Harjohn was through the Rev. Charles Fauerberg. "Our young friend," said the Rev. Mr. Fauerberg, standing in the most
approved tutorial attitude, with his hand upon his pupil's shoulder, "our
young friend has been somewhat neglected, but I see in him possibilities
warranting hope--warranting, I may say, very great hope. For the present
he will be under my especial care, and you will not therefore concern
yourself with his studies. He will sleep with Milling and the others in
dormitory number two." The lad formed a liking for me, and I think, and hope, I rendered his
sojourn at "Alpha House" less irksome than otherwise it might have been. The Reverend Charles' method with the backward was on all fours with that
adopted for the bringing on of geese; he cooped them up and crammed them. The process is profitable to the trainer, but painful to the goose. Young Harjohn and myself left "Alpha House" at the end of the same term;
he bound for Brasenose, I for Bloomsbury. He made a point of never
coming up to London without calling on me, when we would dine together in
one of Soho's many dingy, garlic-scented restaurants, and afterwards,
over our bottle of cheap Beaune, discuss the coming of our lives; and
when he entered Guy's I left John Street, and took chambers close to his
in Staple Inn. Those were pleasant days. Childhood is an over-rated
period, fuller of sorrow than of joy. I would not take my childhood
back, were it a gift, but I would give the rest of my life to live the
twenties over again. To Cyril I was the man of the world, and he looked to me for wisdom, not
seeing always, I fear, that he got it; while from him I gathered
enthusiasm, and learnt the profit that comes to a man from the keeping of
ideals. Often as we have talked, I have felt as though a visible light came from
him, framing his face as with the halo of some pictured saint. Nature
had wasted him, putting him into this nineteenth century of ours. Her
victories are accomplished. Her army of heroes, the few sung, the many
forgotten, is disbanded. The long peace won by their blood and pain is
settled on the land. She had fashioned Cyril Harjohn for one of her
soldiers. He would have been a martyr, in the days when thought led to
the stake, a fighter for the truth, when to speak one's mind meant death. To lead some forlorn hope for Civilisation would have been his true work;
Fate had condemned him to sentry duty in a well-ordered barrack. But there is work to be done in the world, though the labour lies now in
the vineyard, not on the battlefield. A small but sufficient fortune
purchased for him freedom. To most men an assured income is the grave of
ambition; to Cyril it was the foundation of desire. Relieved from the
necessity of working to live, he could afford the luxury of living to
work. His profession was to him a passion; he regarded it, not with the
cold curiosity of the scholar, but with the imaginative devotion of the
disciple. To help to push its frontiers forward, to carry its flag
farther into the untravelled desert that ever lies beyond the moving
boundary of human knowledge, was his dream. One summer evening, I remember, we were sitting in his rooms, and during
a silence there came to us through the open window the moaning of the
city, as of a tired child. He rose and stretched his arms out towards
the darkening streets, as if he would gather to him all the toiling men
and women and comfort them. "Oh, that I could help you!" he cried, "my brothers and my sisters. Take
my life, oh God, and spend it for me among your people." The speech sounds theatrical, as I read it, written down, but to the
young such words are not ridiculous, as to us older men. In the natural order of events, he fell in love, and with just the woman
one would expect him to be attracted by. Elspeth Grant was of the type
from which the world, by instinct rather than by convention, has drawn
its Madonnas and its saints. To describe a woman in words is impossible. Her beauty was not a possession to be catalogued, but herself. One felt
it as one feels the beauty of a summer's dawn breaking the shadows of a
sleeping city, but one cannot set it down. I often met her, and, when
talking to her, I knew myself--I, hack-journalist, frequenter of Fleet
Street bars, retailer of smoke-room stories--a great gentleman, incapable
of meanness, fit for all noble deeds. In her presence life became a thing beautiful and gracious; a school for
courtesy, and tenderness, and simplicity. I have wondered since, coming to see a little more clearly into the ways
of men, whether it would not have been better had she been less
spiritual, had her nature possessed a greater alloy of earth, making it
more fit for the uses of this work-a-day world. But at the time, these
two friends of mine seemed to me to have been created for one another. She appealed to all that was highest in Cyril's character, and he
worshipped her with an unconcealed adoration that, from any man less high-
minded, would have appeared affectation, and which she accepted with the
sweet content that Artemis might have accorded to the homage of Endymion. There was no formal engagement between them. Cyril seemed to shrink from
the materialising of his love by any thought of marriage. To him she was
an ideal of womanhood rather than a flesh-and-blood woman. His love for
her was a religion; it had no taint of earthly passion in its
composition. Had I known the world better I might have anticipated the result; for the
red blood ran in my friend's veins; and, alas, we dream our poems, not
live them. But at the time, the idea of any other woman coming between
them would have appeared to me folly. The suggestion that that other
woman might be Geraldine Fawley I should have resented as an insult to my
intelligence: that is the point of the story I do not understand to this
day. That he should be attracted by her, that he should love to linger near
her, watching the dark flush come and go across her face, seeking to call
the fire into her dark eyes was another matter, and quite comprehensible;
for the girl was wonderfully handsome, with a bold, voluptuous beauty
which invited while it dared. But considered in any other light than
that of an animal, she repelled. At times when, for her ends, it seemed
worth the exertion, she would assume a certain wayward sweetness, but her
acting was always clumsy and exaggerated, capable of deceiving no one but
a fool. Cyril, at all events, was not taken in by it. One evening, at a Bohemian
gathering, the _entree_ to which was notoriety rather than character,
they had been talking together for some considerable time when, wishing
to speak to Cyril, I strolled up to join them. As I came towards them
she moved away, her dislike for me being equal to mine for her; a thing
which was, perhaps, well for me. "Miss Fawley prefers two as company to three," I observed, looking after
her retreating figure. "I am afraid she finds you what we should call an anti-sympathetic
element," he replied, laughing. "Do you like her?" I asked him, somewhat bluntly. His eyes rested upon her as she stood in the doorway, talking to a small,
black-bearded man who had just been introduced to her. After a few
moments she went out upon his arm, and then Cyril turned to me. "I think her," he replied, speaking, as was necessary, very low, "the
embodiment of all that is evil in womanhood. In old days she would have
been a Cleopatra, a Theodora, a Delilah. To-day, lacking opportunity,
she is the 'smart woman' grubbing for an opening into society--and old
Fawley's daughter. I'm tired; let us go home." His allusion to her parentage was significant. Few people thought of
connecting clever, handsome Geraldine Fawley with "Rogue Fawley," Jew
renegade, ex-gaol bird, and outside broker; who, having expectations from
his daughter, took care not to hamper her by ever being seen in her
company. But no one who had once met the father could ever forget the
relationship while talking to the daughter. The older face, with its
cruelty, its cunning, and its greed stood reproduced, feature for
feature, line for line. It was as though Nature, for an artistic freak,
had set herself the task of fashioning hideousness and beauty from
precisely the same materials. Between the leer of the man and the smile
of the girl, where lay the difference? It would have puzzled any student
of anatomy to point it out. Yet the one sickened, while to gain the
other most men would have given much. Cyril's answer to my question satisfied me for the time. He met the girl
often, as was natural. She was a singer of some repute, and our social
circle was what is commonly called "literary and artistic." To do her
justice, however, she made no attempt to fascinate him, nor even to be
particularly agreeable to him. Indeed, she seemed to be at pains to show
him her natural--in other words, her most objectionable side. Coming out of the theatre one first night, we met her in the lobby. I
was following Cyril at some little distance, but as he stopped to speak
to her the movement of the crowd placed me just behind them. "Will you be at Leightons' to-morrow?" I heard him ask her in a low tone. "Yes," she answered, "and I wish you wouldn't come." "Why not?" "Because you're a fool, and you bore me." Under ordinary circumstances I should have taken the speech for
badinage--it was the kind of wit the woman would have indulged in. But
Cyril's face clouded with anger and vexation. I said nothing. I did not
wish him to know that I had overheard. I tried to believe that he was
amusing himself, but my own explanation did not satisfy me. Next evening I went to Leightons' by myself. The Grants were in town,
and Cyril was dining with them. I found I did not know many people, and
cared little for those I did. I was about to escape when Miss Fawley's
name was announced. I was close to the door, and she had to stop and
speak to me. We exchanged a few commonplaces. She either made love to a
man or was rude to him. She generally talked to me without looking at
me, nodding and smiling meanwhile to people around. I have met many
women equally ill-mannered, and without her excuse. For a moment,
however, she turned her eyes to mine. "Where's your friend, Mr. Harjohn?" she asked. "I thought you were
inseparables." I looked at her in astonishment. "He is dining out to-night," I replied. "I do not think he will come." She laughed. I think it was the worst part about the woman, her laugh;
it suggested so much cruelty. "I think he will," she said. It angered me into an indiscretion. She was moving away. I stepped in
front of her and stopped her. "What makes you think so?" I asked, and my voice, I know, betrayed the
anxiety I felt as to her reply. She looked me straight in the face. There was one virtue she possessed--the virtue that animals hold above
mankind--truthfulness. She knew I disliked her--hate would be, perhaps,
a more exact expression, did not the word sound out of date, and she made
no pretence of not knowing it and returning the compliment. "Because I am here," she answered. "Why don't you save him? Have you no
influence over him? Tell the Saint to keep him; I don't want him. You
heard what I said to him last night. I shall only marry him for the sake
of his position, and the money he can earn if he likes to work and not
play the fool. Tell him what I have said; I shan't deny it." She passed on to greet a decrepit old lord with a languishing smile, and
I stood staring after her with, I fear, a somewhat stupid expression,
until some young fool came up grinning, to ask me whether I had seen a
ghost or backed a "wrong 'un." There was no need to wait; I felt no curiosity. Something told me the
woman had spoken the truth. It was mere want of motive that made me
linger. I saw him come in, and watched him hanging round her, like a
dog, waiting for a kind word, or failing that, a look. I knew she saw
me, and I knew it added to her zest that I was there. Not till we were
in the street did I speak to him. He started as I touched him. We were
neither of us good actors. He must have read much in my face, and I saw
that he had read it; and we walked side by side in silence, I thinking
what to say, wondering whether I should do good or harm, wishing that we
were anywhere but in these silent, life-packed streets, so filled with
the unseen. It was not until we had nearly reached the Albert Hall that
we broke the silence. Then it was he who spoke:

"Do you think I haven't told myself all that?" he said. "Do you think I
don't know I'm a damned fool, a cad, a liar! What the devil's the good
of talking about it?" "But I can't understand it," I said. "No," he replied, "because you're a fool, because you have only seen one
side of me. You think me a grand gentleman, because I talk big, and am
full of noble sentiment. Why, you idiot, the Devil himself could take
you in. _He_ has his fine moods, I suppose, talks like a saint, and says
his prayers with the rest of us. Do you remember the first night at old
Fauerberg's? You poked your silly head into the dormitory, and saw me
kneeling by the bedside, while the other fellows stood by grinning. You
closed the door softly--you thought I never saw you. I was not praying,
I was trying to pray." "It showed that you had pluck, if it showed nothing else," I answered. "Most boys would not have tried, and you kept it up." "Ah, yes," he answered, "I promised the Mater I would, and I did. 