



Produced by This etext was scanned by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk from the 1922 Macmillan and Co.
edition. Proofing was by David, Marc Davis and Andy
McLauchlan. SOME SHORT STORIES

BY HENRY JAMES




Contents:

Brooksmith

The Real Thing

The Story of It

Flickerbridge

Mrs. Medwin




BROOKSMITH


We are scattered now, the friends of the late Mr. Oliver Offord; but
whenever we chance to meet I think we are conscious of a certain
esoteric respect for each other. "Yes, you too have been in Arcadia," we
seem not too grumpily to allow. When I pass the house in Mansfield
Street I remember that Arcadia was there. I don't know who has it now,
and don't want to know; it's enough to be so sure that if I should ring
the bell there would be no such luck for me as that Brooksmith should
open the door. Mr. Offord, the most agreeable, the most attaching of
bachelors, was a retired diplomatist, living on his pension and on
something of his own over and above; a good deal confined, by his
infirmities, to his fireside and delighted to be found there any
afternoon in the year, from five o'clock on, by such visitors as
Brooksmith allowed to come up. Brooksmith was his butler and his most
intimate friend, to whom we all stood, or I should say sat, in the same
relation in which the subject of the sovereign finds himself to the
prime minister. By having been for years, in foreign lands, the most
delightful Englishman any one had ever known, Mr. Offord had in my
opinion rendered signal service to his country. But I suppose he had
been too much liked--liked even by those who didn't like IT--so that as
people of that sort never get titles or dotations for the horrid things
they've NOT done, his principal reward was simply that we went to see
him. Oh we went perpetually, and it was not our fault if he was not
overwhelmed with this particular honour. Any visitor who came once came
again; to come merely once was a slight nobody, I'm sure, had ever put
upon him. His circle therefore was essentially composed of habitues, who
were habitues for each other as well as for him, as those of a happy
salon should be. I remember vividly every element of the place, down to
the intensely Londonish look of the grey opposite houses, in the gap of
the white curtains of the high windows, and the exact spot where, on a
particular afternoon, I put down my tea-cup for Brooksmith, lingering an
instant, to gather it up as if he were plucking a flower. Mr. Offord's
drawing-room was indeed Brooksmith's garden, his pruned and tended human
parterre, and if we all flourished there and grew well in our places it
was largely owing to his supervision. Many persons have heard much, though most have doubtless seen little, of
the famous institution of the salon, and many are born to the depression
of knowing that this finest flower of social life refuses to bloom where
the English tongue is spoken. The explanation is usually that our women
have not the skill to cultivate it--the art to direct through a smiling
land, between suggestive shores, a sinuous stream of talk. My
affectionate, my pious memory of Mr. Offord contradicts this induction
only, I fear, more insidiously to confirm it. The sallow and slightly
smoked drawing-room in which he spent so large a portion of the last
years of his life certainly deserved the distinguished name; but on the
other hand it couldn't be said at all to owe its stamp to any
intervention throwing into relief the fact that there was no Mrs.
Offord. The dear man had indeed, at the most, been capable of one of
those sacrifices to which women are deemed peculiarly apt: he had
recognised--under the influence, in some degree, it is true, of physical
infirmity--that if you wish people to find you at home you must manage
not to be out. He had in short accepted the truth which many dabblers in
the social art are slow to learn, that you must really, as they say,
take a line, and that the only way as yet discovered of being at home is
to stay at home. Finally his own fireside had become a summary of his
habits. Why should he ever have left it?--since this would have been
leaving what was notoriously pleasantest in London, the compact charmed
cluster (thinning away indeed into casual couples) round the fine old
last-century chimney-piece which, with the exception of the remarkable
collection of miniatures, was the best thing the place contained. Mr.
Offord wasn't rich; he had nothing but his pension and the use for life
of the somewhat superannuated house. When I'm reminded by some opposed discomfort of the present hour how
perfectly we were all handled there, I ask myself once more what had
been the secret of such perfection. One had taken it for granted at the
time, for anything that is supremely good produces more acceptance than
surprise. I felt we were all happy, but I didn't consider how our
happiness was managed. And yet there were questions to be asked,
questions that strike me as singularly obvious now that there's nobody
to answer them. Mr. Offord had solved the insoluble; he had, without
feminine help--save in the sense that ladies were dying to come to him
and that he saved the lives of several--established a salon; but I might
have guessed that there was a method in his madness, a law in his
success. He hadn't hit it off by a mere fluke. There was an art in it
all, and how was the art so hidden? Who indeed if it came to that was
the occult artist? Launching this inquiry the other day I had already
got hold of the tail of my reply. I was helped by the very wonder of
some of the conditions that came back to me--those that used to seem as
natural as sunshine in a fine climate. How was it for instance that we never were a crowd, never either too
many or too few, always the right people WITH the right people--there
must really have been no wrong people at all--always coming and going,
never sticking fast nor overstaying, yet never popping in or out with an
indecorous familiarity? How was it that we all sat where we wanted and
moved when we wanted and met whom we wanted and escaped whom we wanted;
joining, according to the accident of inclination, the general circle or
falling in with a single talker on a convenient sofa? Why were all the
sofas so convenient, the accidents so happy, the talkers so ready, the
listeners so willing, the subjects presented to you in a rotation as
quickly foreordained as the courses at dinner? A dearth of topics would
have been as unheard of as a lapse in the service. These speculations
couldn't fail to lead me to the fundamental truth that Brooksmith had
been somehow at the bottom of the mystery. If he hadn't established the
salon at least he had carried it on. Brooksmith in short was the artist! We felt this covertly at the time, without formulating it, and were
conscious, as an ordered and prosperous community, of his even-handed
justice, all untainted with flunkeyism. He had none of that
vulgarity--his touch was infinitely fine. The delicacy of it was clear
to me on the first occasion my eyes rested, as they were so often to
rest again, on the domestic revealed, in the turbid light of the street,
by the opening of the house-door. I saw on the spot that though he had
plenty of school he carried it without arrogance--he had remained
articulate and human. L'Ecole Anglaise Mr. Offord used laughingly to
call him when, later on, it happened more than once that we had some
conversation about him. But I remember accusing Mr. Offord of not doing
him quite ideal justice. That he wasn't one of the giants of the school,
however, was admitted by my old friend, who really understood him
perfectly and was devoted to him, as I shall show; which doubtless poor
Brooksmith had himself felt, to his cost, when his value in the market
was originally determined. The utility of his class in general is
estimated by the foot and the inch, and poor Brooksmith had only about
five feet three to put into circulation. He acknowledged the inadequacy
of this provision, and I'm sure was penetrated with the everlasting
fitness of the relation between service and stature. If HE had been Mr.
Offord he certainly would have found Brooksmith wanting, and indeed the
laxity of his employer on this score was one of many things he had had
to condone and to which he had at last indulgently adapted himself. I remember the old man's saying to me: "Oh my servants, if they can live
with me a fortnight they can live with me for ever. But it's the first
fortnight that tries 'em." It was in the first fortnight for instance
that Brooksmith had had to learn that he was exposed to being addressed
as "my dear fellow" and "my poor child." Strange and deep must such a
probation have been to him, and he doubtless emerged from it tempered
and purified. This was written to a certain extent in his appearance; in
his spare brisk little person, in his cloistered white face and
extraordinarily polished hair, which told of responsibility, looked as
if it were kept up to the same high standard as the plate; in his small
clear anxious eyes, even in the permitted, though not exactly
encouraged, tuft on his chin. "He thinks me rather mad, but I've broken
him in, and now he likes the place, he likes the company," said the old
man. I embraced this fully after I had become aware that Brooksmith's
main characteristic was a deep and shy refinement, though I remember I
was rather puzzled when, on another occasion, Mr. Offord remarked: "What
he likes is the talk--mingling in the conversation." I was conscious I
had never seen Brooksmith permit himself this freedom, but I guessed in
a moment that what Mr. Offord alluded to was a participation more
intense than any speech could have represented--that of being
perpetually present on a hundred legitimate pretexts, errands,
necessities, and breathing the very atmosphere of criticism, the famous
criticism of life. "Quite an education, sir, isn't it, sir?" he said to
me one day at the foot of the stairs when he was letting me out; and
I've always remembered the words and the tone as the first sign of the
quickening drama of poor Brooksmith's fate. It was indeed an education,
but to what was this sensitive young man of thirty-five, of the servile
class, being educated? Practically and inevitably, for the time, to companionship, to the
perpetual, the even exaggerated reference and appeal of a person brought
to dependence by his time of life and his infirmities and always
addicted moreover--this was the exaggeration--to the art of giving you
pleasure by letting you do things for him. There were certain things Mr.
Offord was capable of pretending he liked you to do even when he
didn't--this, I mean, if he thought YOU liked them. If it happened that
you didn't either--which was rare, yet might be--of course there were
cross-purposes; but Brooksmith was there to prevent their going very
far. This was precisely the way he acted as moderator; he averted
misunderstandings or cleared them up. He had been capable, strange as it
may appear, of acquiring for this purpose an insight into the French
tongue, which was often used at Mr. Offord's; for besides being habitual
to most of the foreigners, and they were many, who haunted the place or
arrived with letters--letters often requiring a little worried
consideration, of which Brooksmith always had cognisance--it had really
become the primary language of the master of the house. I don't know if
all the malentendus were in French, but almost all the explanations
were, and this didn't a bit prevent Brooksmith's following them. I know
Mr. Offord used to read passages to him from Montaigne and Saint-Simon,
for he read perpetually when alone--when THEY were alone, that is--and
Brooksmith was always about. Perhaps you'll say no wonder Mr. Offord's
butler regarded him as "rather mad." However, if I'm not sure what he
thought about Montaigne I'm convinced he admired Saint-Simon. A certain
feeling for letters must have rubbed off on him from the mere handling
of his master's books, which he was always carrying to and fro and
putting back in their places. I often noticed that if an anecdote or a quotation, much more a lively
discussion, was going forward, he would, if busy with the fire or the
curtains, the lamp or the tea, find a pretext for remaining in the room
till the point should be reached. If his purpose was to catch it you
weren't discreet, you were in fact scarce human, to call him off, and I
shall never forget a look, a hard stony stare--I caught it in its
passage--which, one day when there were a good many people in the room,
he fastened upon the footman who was helping him in the service and who,
in an undertone, had asked him some irrelevant question. It was the only
manifestation of harshness I ever observed on Brooksmith's part, and I
at first wondered what was the matter. Then I became conscious that Mr.
Offord was relating a very curious anecdote, never before perhaps made
so public, and imparted to the narrator by an eye-witness of the fact,
bearing on Lord Byron's life in Italy. Nothing would induce me to
reproduce it here, but Brooksmith had been in danger of losing it. If I
ever should venture to reproduce it I shall feel how much I lose in not
having my fellow auditor to refer to. The first day Mr Offord's door was closed was therefore a dark date in
contemporary history. It was raining hard and my umbrella was wet, but
Brooksmith received it from me exactly as if this were a preliminary for
going upstairs. I observed however that instead of putting it away he
held it poised and trickling over the rug, and I then became aware that
he was looking at me with deep acknowledging eyes--his air of universal
responsibility. I immediately understood--there was scarce need of
question and answer as they passed between us. When I took in that our
good friend had given up as never before, though only for the occasion,
I exclaimed dolefully: "What a difference it will make--and to how many
people!" "I shall be one of them, sir!" said Brooksmith; and that was the
beginning of the end. Mr. Offord came down again, but the spell was broken, the great sign
being that the conversation was for the first time not directed. It
wandered and stumbled, a little frightened, like a lost child--it had
let go the nurse's hand. "The worst of it is that now we shall talk
about my health--C'EST LA FIN DE TOUT," Mr. Offord said when he
reappeared; and then I recognised what a note of change that would
be--for he had never tolerated anything so provincial. We "ran" to each
other's health as little as to the daily weather. The talk became ours,
in a word--not his; and as ours, even when HE talked, it could only be
inferior. In this form it was a distress to Brooksmith, whose attention
now wandered from it altogether: he had so much closer a vision of his
master's intimate conditions than our superficialities represented. There were better hours, and he was more in and out of the room, but I
could see he was conscious of the decline, almost of the collapse, of
our great institution. He seemed to wish to take counsel with me about
it, to feel responsible for its going on in some form or other. When for
the second period--the first had lasted several days--he had to tell me
that his employer didn't receive, I half expected to hear him say after
a moment "Do you think I ought to, sir, in his place?" --as he might have
asked me, with the return of autumn, if I thought he had better light
the drawing-room fire. He had a resigned philosophic sense of what his guests--our guests, as I
came to regard them in our colloquies--would expect. His feeling was
that he wouldn't absolutely have approved of himself as a substitute for
Mr. Offord; but he was so saturated with the religion of habit that he
would have made, for our friends, the necessary sacrifice to the
divinity. He would take them on a little further, till they could look
about them. I think I saw him also mentally confronted with the
opportunity to deal--for once in his life--with some of his own dumb
preferences, his limitations of sympathy, WEEDING a little in prospect
and returning to a purer tradition. It was not unknown to me that he
considered that toward the end of our host's career a certain laxity of
selection had crept in. At last it came to be the case that we all found the closed door more
often than the open one; but even when it was closed Brooksmith managed
a crack for me to squeeze through; so that practically I never turned
away without having paid a visit. The difference simply came to be that
the visit was to Brooksmith. It took place in the hall, at the familiar
foot of the stairs, and we didn't sit down, at least Brooksmith didn't;
moreover it was devoted wholly to one topic and always had the air of
being already over--beginning, so to say, at the end. But it was always
interesting--it always gave me something to think about. It's true that
the subject of my meditation was ever the same--ever "It's all very
well, but what WILL become of Brooksmith?" Even my private answer to
this question left me still unsatisfied. No doubt Mr. Offord would
provide for him, but WHAT would he provide?--that was the great point. He couldn't provide society; and society had become a necessity of
Brooksmith's nature. I must add that he never showed a symptom of what I
may call sordid solicitude--anxiety on his own account. He was rather
livid and intensely grave, as befitted a man before whose eyes the
"shade of that which once was great" was passing away. He had the
solemnity of a person winding up, under depressing circumstances, a
long-established and celebrated business; he was a kind of social
executor or liquidator. But his manner seemed to testify exclusively to
the uncertainty of OUR future. I couldn't in those days have afforded
it--I lived in two rooms in Jermyn Street and didn't "keep a man"; but
even if my income had permitted I shouldn't have ventured to say to
Brooksmith (emulating Mr. Offord) "My dear fellow, I'll take you on." The whole tone of our intercourse was so much more an implication that
it was I who should now want a lift. Indeed there was a tacit assurance
in Brooksmith's whole attitude that he should have me on his mind. One of the most assiduous members of our circle had been Lady Kenyon,
and I remember his telling me one day that her ladyship had in spite of
her own infirmities, lately much aggravated, been in person to inquire. In answer to this I remarked that she would feel it more than any one. Brooksmith had a pause before saying in a certain tone--there's no
reproducing some of his tones--"I'll go and see her." I went to see her
myself and learned he had waited on her; but when I said to her, in the
form of a joke but with a core of earnest, that when all was over some
of us ought to combine, to club together, and set Brooksmith up on his
own account, she replied a trifle disappointingly: "Do you mean in a
public-house?" I looked at her in a way that I think Brooksmith himself
would have approved, and then I answered: "Yes, the Offord Arms." What I
had meant of course was that for the love of art itself we ought to look
to it that such a peculiar faculty and so much acquired experience
shouldn't be wasted. I really think that if we had caused a few
black-edged cards to be struck off and circulated--"Mr. Brooksmith will
continue to receive on the old premises from four to seven; business
carried on as usual during the alterations"--the greater number of us
would have rallied. Several times he took me upstairs--always by his own proposal--and our
dear old friend, in bed (in a curious flowered and brocaded casaque
which made him, especially as his head was tied up in a handkerchief to
match, look, to my imagination, like the dying Voltaire) held for ten
minutes a sadly shrunken little salon. I felt indeed each time as if I
were attending the last coucher of some social sovereign. He was royally
whimsical about his sufferings and not at all concerned--quite as if the
Constitution provided for the case about his successor. He glided over
OUR sufferings charmingly, and none of his jokes--it was a gallant
abstention, some of them would have been so easy--were at our expense. Now and again, I confess, there was one at Brooksmith's, but so
pathetically sociable as to make the excellent man look at me in a way
that seemed to say: "Do exchange a glance with me, or I shan't be able
to stand it." What he wasn't able to stand was not what Mr. Offord said
about him, but what he wasn't able to say in return. His idea of
conversation for himself was giving you the convenience of speaking to
him; and when he went to "see" Lady Kenyon for instance it was to carry
her the tribute of his receptive silence. Where would the speech of his
betters have been if proper service had been a manifestation of sound? In that case the fundamental difference would have had to be shown by
their dumbness, and many of them, poor things, were dumb enough without
that provision. Brooksmith took an unfailing interest in the
preservation of the fundamental difference; it was the thing he had most
on his conscience. What had become of it however when Mr. Offord passed away like any
inferior person--was relegated to eternal stillness after the manner of
a butler above-stairs? His aspect on the event--for the several
successive days--may be imagined, and the multiplication by funereal
observance of the things he didn't say. When everything was over--it was
late the same day--I knocked at the door of the house of mourning as I
so often had done before. I could never call on Mr. Offord again, but I
had come literally to call on Brooksmith. I wanted to ask him if there
was anything I could do for him, tainted with vagueness as this inquiry
could only be. My presumptuous dream of taking him into my own service
had died away: my service wasn't worth his being taken into. My offer
could only be to help him to find another place, and yet there was an
indelicacy, as it were, in taking for granted that his thoughts would
immediately be fixed on another. I had a hope that he would be able to
give his life a different form--though certainly not the form, the
frequent result of such bereavements, of his setting up a little shop. That would have been dreadful; for I should have wished to forward any
enterprise he might embark in, yet how could I have brought myself to go
and pay him shillings and take back coppers, over a counter? My visit
then was simply an intended compliment. He took it as such, gratefully
and with all the tact in the world. He knew I really couldn't help him
and that I knew he knew I couldn't; but we discussed the situation--with
a good deal of elegant generality--at the foot of the stairs, in the
hall already dismantled, where I had so often discussed other situations
with him. The executors were in possession, as was still more apparent
when he made me pass for a few minutes into the dining-room, where
various objects were muffled up for removal. Two definite facts, however, he had to communicate; one being that he
was to leave the house for ever that night (servants, for some
mysterious reason, seem always to depart by night), and the other--he
mentioned it only at the last and with hesitation--that he was already
aware his late master had left him a legacy of eighty pounds. "I'm very
glad," I said, and Brooksmith was of the same mind: "It was so like him
to think of me." This was all that passed between us on the subject, and
I know nothing of his judgement of Mr. Offord's memento. Eighty pounds
are always eighty pounds, and no one has ever left ME an equal sum; but,
all the same, for Brooksmith, I was disappointed. I don't know what I
had expected, but it was almost a shock. Eighty pounds might stock a
small shop--a VERY small shop; but, I repeat, I couldn't bear to think
of that. I asked my friend if he had been able to save a little, and he
replied: "No, sir; I've had to do things." I didn't inquire what things
they might have been; they were his own affair, and I took his word for
them as assentingly as if he had had the greatness of an ancient house
to keep up; especially as there was something in his manner that seemed
to convey a prospect of further sacrifice. "I shall have to turn round a bit, sir--I shall have to look about me,"
he said; and then he added indulgently, magnanimously: "If you should
happen to hear of anything for me--"

I couldn't let him finish; this was, in its essence, too much in the
really grand manner. It would be a help to my getting him off my mind to
be able to pretend I COULD find the right place, and that help he wished
to give me, for it was doubtless painful to him to see me in so false a
position. I interposed with a few words to the effect of how well aware
I was that wherever he should go, whatever he should do, he would miss
our old friend terribly--miss him even more than I should, having been
with him so much more. This led him to make the speech that has remained
with me as the very text of the whole episode. "Oh sir, it's sad for YOU, very sad indeed, and for a great many
gentlemen and ladies; that it is, sir. But for me, sir, it is, if I may
say so, still graver even than that: it's just the loss of something
that was everything. For me, sir," he went on with rising tears, "he was
just ALL, if you know what I mean, sir. You have others, sir, I
daresay--not that I would have you understand me to speak of them as in
any way tantamount. But you have the pleasures of society, sir; if it's
only in talking about him, sir, as I daresay you do freely--for all his
blest memory has to fear from it--with gentlemen and ladies who have had
the same honour. That's not for me, sir, and I've to keep my
associations to myself. Mr. Offord was MY society, and now, you see, I
just haven't any. You go back to conversation, sir, after all, and I go
back to my place," Brooksmith stammered, without exaggerated irony or
dramatic bitterness, but with a flat unstudied veracity and his hand on
the knob of the street-door. He turned it to let me out and then he
added: "I just go downstairs, sir, again, and I stay there." "My poor child," I replied in my emotion, quite as Mr. Offord used to
speak, "my dear fellow, leave it to me: WE'LL look after you, we'll all
do something for you." "Ah if you could give me some one LIKE him! But there ain't two such in
the world," Brooksmith said as we parted. He had given me his address--the place where he would be to be heard of. For a long time I had no occasion to make use of the information: he
proved on trial so very difficult a case. The people who knew him and
had known Mr. Offord didn't want to take him, and yet I couldn't bear to
try to thrust him among strangers--strangers to his past when not to his
present. I spoke to many of our old friends about him and found them all
governed by the odd mixture of feelings of which I myself was
conscious--as well as disposed, further, to entertain a suspicion that
he was "spoiled," with which, I then would have nothing to do. In plain
terms a certain embarrassment, a sensible awkwardness when they thought
of it, attached to the idea of using him as a menial: they had met him
so often in society. Many of them would have asked him, and did ask him,
or rather did ask me to ask him, to come and see them, but a mere
visiting-list was not what I wanted for him. He was too short for people
who were very particular; nevertheless I heard of an opening in a
diplomatic household which led me to write him a note, though I was
looking much less for something grand than for something human. Five
days later I heard from him. The secretary's wife had decided, after
keeping him waiting till then, that she couldn't take a servant out of a
house in which there hadn't been a lady. The note had a P.S. : "It's a
good job there wasn't, sir, such a lady as some." A week later he came to see me and told me he was "suited," committed to
some highly respectable people--they were something quite immense in the
City--who lived on the Bayswater side of the Park. "I daresay it will be
rather poor, sir," he admitted; "but I've seen the fireworks, haven't I,
sir?--it can't be fireworks EVERY night. After Mansfield Street there
ain't much choice." There was a certain amount, however, it seemed; for
the following year, calling one day on a country cousin, a lady of a
certain age who was spending a fortnight in town with some friends of
her own, a family unknown to me and resident in Chester Square, the door
of the house was opened, to my surprise and gratification, by Brooksmith
in person. When I came out I had some conversation with him from which I
gathered that he had found the large City people too dull for endurance,
and I guessed, though he didn't say it, that he had found them vulgar as
well. I don't know what judgement he would have passed on his actual
patrons if my relative hadn't been their friend; but in view of that
connexion he abstained from comment. None was necessary, however, for before the lady in question brought her
visit to a close they honoured me with an invitation to dinner, which I
accepted. There was a largeish party on the occasion, but I confess I
thought of Brooksmith rather more than of the seated company. They
required no depth of attention--they were all referable to usual
irredeemable inevitable types. It was the world of cheerful commonplace
and conscious gentility and prosperous density, a full-fed material
insular world, a world of hideous florid plate and ponderous order and
thin conversation. There wasn't a word said about Byron, or even about a
minor bard then much in view. Nothing would have induced me to look at
Brooksmith in the course of the repast, and I felt sure that not even my
overturning the wine would have induced him to meet my eye. We were in
intellectual sympathy--we felt, as regards each other, a degree of
social responsibility. In short we had been in Arcadia together, and we
had both come to THIS! No wonder we were ashamed to be confronted. When
he had helped on my overcoat, as I was going away, we parted, for the
first time since the earliest days of Mansfield Street, in silence. I
thought he looked lean and wasted, and I guessed that his new place
wasn't more "human" than his previous one. There was plenty of beef and
beer, but there was no reciprocity. The question for him to have asked
before accepting the position wouldn't have been "How many footmen are
kept?" but "How much imagination?" The next time I went to the house--I confess it wasn't very soon--I
encountered his successor, a personage who evidently enjoyed the good
fortune of never having quitted his natural level. Could any be higher? he seemed to ask--over the heads of three footmen and even of some
visitors. He made me feel as if Brooksmith were dead; but I didn't dare
to inquire--I couldn't have borne his "I haven't the least idea, sir." I
despatched a note to the address that worthy had given me after Mr.
Offord's death, but I received no answer. Six months later however I was
favoured with a visit from an elderly dreary dingy person who introduced
herself to me as Mr. Brooksmith's aunt and from whom I learned that he
was out of place and out of health and had allowed her to come and say
to me that if I could spare half an hour to look in at him he would take
it as a rare honour. I went the next day--his messenger had given me a new address--and found
my friend lodged in a short sordid street in Marylebone, one of those
corners of London that wear the last expression of sickly meanness. The
room into which I was shown was above the small establishment of a dyer
and cleaner who had inflated kid gloves and discoloured shawls in his
shop-front. There was a great deal of grimy infant life up and down the
place, and there was a hot moist smell within, as of the "boiling" of
dirty linen. Brooksmith sat with a blanket over his legs at a clean
little window where, from behind stiff bluish-white curtains, he could
look across at a huckster's and a tinsmith's and a small greasy
public-house. He had passed through an illness and was convalescent, and
his mother, as well as his aunt, was in attendance on him. I liked the
nearer relative, who was bland and intensely humble, but I had my doubts
of the remoter, whom I connected perhaps unjustly with the opposite
public-house--she seemed somehow greasy with the same grease--and whose
furtive eye followed every movement of my hand as to see if it weren't
going into my pocket. It didn't take this direction--I couldn't,
unsolicited, put myself at that sort of ease with Brooksmith. Several
times the door of the room opened and mysterious old women peeped in and
shuffled back again. I don't know who they were; poor Brooksmith seemed
encompassed with vague prying beery females. He was vague himself, and evidently weak, and much embarrassed, and not
an allusion was made between us to Mansfield Street. The vision of the
salon of which he had been an ornament hovered before me however, by
contrast, sufficiently. He assured me he was really getting better, and
his mother remarked that he would come round if he could only get his
spirits up. The aunt echoed this opinion, and I became more sure that in
her own case she knew where to go for such a purpose. I'm afraid I was
rather weak with my old friend, for I neglected the opportunity, so
exceptionally good, to rebuke the levity which had led him to throw up
honourable positions--fine stiff steady berths in Bayswater and
Belgravia, with morning prayers, as I knew, attached to one of them. Very likely his reasons had been profane and sentimental; he didn't want
morning prayers, he wanted to be somebody's dear fellow; but I couldn't
be the person to rebuke him. He shuffled these episodes out of sight--I
saw he had no wish to discuss them. I noted further, strangely enough,
that it would probably be a questionable pleasure for him to see me
again: he doubted now even of my power to condone his aberrations. He
didn't wish to have to explain; and his behaviour was likely in future
to need explanation. When I bade him farewell he looked at me a moment
with eyes that said everything: "How can I talk about those exquisite
years in this place, before these people, with the old women poking
their heads in? It was very good of you to come to see me; it wasn't my
idea--SHE brought you. We've said everything; it's over; you'll lose all
patience with me, and I'd rather you shouldn't see the rest." I sent him
some money in a letter the next day, but I saw the rest only in the
light of a barren sequel. A whole year after my visit to him I became aware once, in dining out,
that Brooksmith was one of the several servants who hovered behind our
chairs. He hadn't opened the door of the house to me, nor had I
recognised him in the array of retainers in the hall. This time I tried
to catch his eye, but he never gave me a chance, and when he handed me a
dish I could only be careful to thank him audibly. Indeed I partook of
two ENTREES of which I had my doubts, subsequently converted into
certainties, in order not to snub him. He looked well enough in health,
but much older, and wore in an exceptionally marked degree the glazed
and expressionless mask of the British domestic DE RACE. I saw with
dismay that if I hadn't known him I should have taken him, on the
showing of his countenance, for an extravagant illustration of
irresponsive servile gloom. I said to myself that he had become a
reactionary, gone over to the Philistines, thrown himself into religion,
the religion of his "place," like a foreign lady SUR LE RETOUR. I
divined moreover that he was only engaged for the evening--he had become
a mere waiter, had joined the band of the white-waistcoated who "go
out." There was something pathetic in this fact--it was a terrible
vulgarisation of Brooksmith. It was the mercenary prose of butlerhood;
he had given up the struggle for the poetry. If reciprocity was what he
had missed where was the reciprocity now? Only in the bottoms of the
wine-glasses and the five shillings--or whatever they get--clapped into
his hand by the permanent man. However, I supposed he had taken up a
precarious branch of his profession because it after all sent him less
downstairs. His relations with London society were more superficial, but
they were of course more various. As I went away on this occasion I
looked out for him eagerly among the four or five attendants whose
perpendicular persons, fluting the walls of London passages, are
supposed to lubricate the process of departure; but he was not on duty. I asked one of the others if he were not in the house, and received the
prompt answer: "Just left, sir. Anything I can do for you, sir?" I
wanted to say "Please give him my kind regards"; but I abstained--I
didn't want to compromise him; and I never came across him again. Often and often, in dining out, I looked for him, sometimes accepting
invitations on purpose to multiply the chances of my meeting him. But
always in vain; so that as I met many other members of the casual class
over and over again I at last adopted the theory that he always procured
a list of expected guests beforehand and kept away from the banquets
which he thus learned I was to grace. At last I gave up hope, and one
day at the end of three years I received another visit from his aunt. She was drearier and dingier, almost squalid, and she was in great
tribulation and want. Her sister, Mrs. Brooksmith, had been dead a year,
and three months later her nephew had disappeared. He had always looked
after her a bit since her troubles; I never knew what her troubles had
been--and now she hadn't so much as a petticoat to pawn. She had also a
niece, to whom she had been everything before her troubles, but the
niece had treated her most shameful. These were details; the great and
romantic fact was Brooksmith's final evasion of his fate. He had gone
out to wait one evening as usual, in a white waistcoat she had done up
for him with her own hands--being due at a large party up Kensington
way. But he had never come home again and had never arrived at the large
party, nor at any party that any one could make out. No trace of him had
come to light--no gleam of the white waistcoat had pierced the obscurity
of his doom. This news was a sharp shock to me, for I had my ideas about
his real destination. His aged relative had promptly, as she said,
guessed the worst. Somehow, and somewhere he had got out of the way
altogether, and now I trust that, with characteristic deliberation, he
is changing the plates of the immortal gods. As my depressing visitant
also said, he never HAD got his spirits up. I was fortunately able to
dismiss her with her own somewhat improved. But the dim ghost of poor
Brooksmith is one of those that I see. He had indeed been spoiled. THE REAL THING




CHAPTER I


When the porter's wife, who used to answer the house-bell, announced "A
gentleman and a lady, sir," I had, as I often had in those days--the
wish being father to the thought--an immediate vision of sitters. Sitters my visitors in this case proved to be; but not in the sense I
should have preferred. There was nothing at first however to indicate
that they mightn't have come for a portrait. The gentleman, a man of
fifty, very high and very straight, with a moustache slightly grizzled
and a dark grey walking-coat admirably fitted, both of which I noted
professionally--I don't mean as a barber or yet as a tailor--would have
struck me as a celebrity if celebrities often were striking. It was a
truth of which I had for some time been conscious that a figure with a
good deal of frontage was, as one might say, almost never a public
institution. A glance at the lady helped to remind me of this
paradoxical law: she also looked too distinguished to be a
"personality." Moreover one would scarcely come across two variations
together. Neither of the pair immediately spoke--they only prolonged the
preliminary gaze suggesting that each wished to give the other a chance. They were visibly shy; they stood there letting me take them in--which,
as I afterwards perceived, was the most practical thing they could have
done. In this way their embarrassment served their cause. I had seen
people painfully reluctant to mention that they desired anything so
gross as to be represented on canvas; but the scruples of my new friends
appeared almost insurmountable. Yet the gentleman might have said "I
should like a portrait of my wife," and the lady might have said "I
should like a portrait of my husband." Perhaps they weren't husband and
wife--this naturally would make the matter more delicate. Perhaps they
wished to be done together--in which case they ought to have brought a
third person to break the news. "We come from Mr. Rivet," the lady finally said with a dim smile that
had the effect of a moist sponge passed over a "sunk" piece of painting,
as well as of a vague allusion to vanished beauty. She was as tall and
straight, in her degree, as her companion, and with ten years less to
carry. She looked as sad as a woman could look whose face was not
charged with expression; that is her tinted oval mask showed waste as an
exposed surface shows friction. The hand of time had played over her
freely, but to an effect of elimination. She was slim and stiff, and so
well-dressed, in dark blue cloth, with lappets and pockets and buttons,
that it was clear she employed the same tailor as her husband. The
couple had an indefinable air of prosperous thrift--they evidently got a
good deal of luxury for their money. If I was to be one of their
luxuries it would behove me to consider my terms. "Ah Claude Rivet recommended me?" I echoed and I added that it was very
kind of him, though I could reflect that, as he only painted landscape,
this wasn't a sacrifice. The lady looked very hard at the gentleman, and the gentleman looked
round the room. Then staring at the floor a moment and stroking his
moustache, he rested his pleasant eyes on me with the remark: "He said
you were the right one." "I try to be, when people want to sit." "Yes, we should like to," said the lady anxiously. "Do you mean together?" My visitors exchanged a glance. "If you could do anything with ME I
suppose it would be double," the gentleman stammered. "Oh yes, there's naturally a higher charge for two figures than for
one." "We should like to make it pay," the husband confessed. "That's very good of you," I returned, appreciating so unwonted a
sympathy--for I supposed he meant pay the artist. A sense of strangeness seemed to dawn on the lady. "We mean for the
illustrations--Mr. Rivet said you might put one in." "Put in--an illustration?" I was equally confused. "Sketch her off, you know," said the gentleman, colouring. It was only then that I understood the service Claude Rivet had rendered
me; he had told them how I worked in black-and-white, for magazines, for
story-books, for sketches of contemporary life, and consequently had
copious employment for models. These things were true, but it was not
less true--I may confess it now; whether because the aspiration was to
lead to everything or to nothing I leave the reader to guess--that I
couldn't get the honours, to say nothing of the emoluments, of a great
painter of portraits out of my head. My "illustrations" were my
pot-boilers; I looked to a different branch of art--far and away the
most interesting it had always seemed to me--to perpetuate my fame. There was no shame in looking to it also to make my fortune but that
fortune was by so much further from being made from the moment my
visitors wished to be "done" for nothing. I was disappointed; for in the
pictorial sense I had immediately SEEN them. I had seized their type--I
had already settled what I would do with it. Something that wouldn't
absolutely have pleased them, I afterwards reflected. "Ah you're--you're--a--?" I began as soon as I had mastered my surprise. I couldn't bring out the dingy word "models": it seemed so little to fit
the case. "We haven't had much practice," said the lady. "We've got to do something, and we've thought that an artist in your
line might perhaps make something of us," her husband threw off. He
further mentioned that they didn't know many artists and that they had
gone first, on the off-chance--he painted views of course, but sometimes
put in figures; perhaps I remembered--to Mr. Rivet, whom they had met a
few years before at a place in Norfolk where he was sketching. "We used to sketch a little ourselves," the lady hinted. "It's very awkward, but we absolutely must do something," her husband
went on. "Of course we're not so VERY young," she admitted with a wan smile. With the remark that I might as well know something more about them the
husband had handed me a card extracted from a neat new
pocket-book--their appurtenances were all of the freshest--and inscribed
with the words "Major Monarch." Impressive as these words were they
didn't carry my knowledge much further; but my visitor presently added:
"I've left the army and we've had the misfortune to lose our money. In
fact our means are dreadfully small." "It's awfully trying--a regular strain,", said Mrs. Monarch. They evidently wished to be discreet--to take care not to swagger
because they were gentlefolk. I felt them willing to recognise this as
something of a drawback, at the same time that I guessed at an
underlying sense--their consolation in adversity--that they HAD their
points. They certainly had; but these advantages struck me as
preponderantly social; such for instance as would help to make a
drawing-room look well. However, a drawing-room was always, or ought to
be, a picture. In consequence of his wife's allusion to their age Major Monarch
observed: "Naturally it's more for the figure that we thought of going
in. We can still hold ourselves up." On the instant I saw that the
figure was indeed their strong point. His "naturally" didn't sound vain,
but it lighted up the question. "SHE has the best one," he continued,
nodding at his wife with a pleasant after-dinner absence of
circumlocution. I could only reply, as if we were in fact sitting over
our wine, that this didn't prevent his own from being very good; which
led him in turn to make answer: "We thought that if you ever have to do
people like us we might be something like it. SHE particularly--for a
lady in a book, you know." I was so amused by them that, to get more of it, I did my best to take
their point of view; and though it was an embarrassment to find myself
appraising physically, as if they were animals on hire or useful blacks,
a pair whom I should have expected to meet only in one of the relations
in which criticism is tacit, I looked at Mrs. Monarch judicially enough
to be able to exclaim after a moment with conviction: "Oh yes, a lady in
a book!" She was singularly like a bad illustration. "We'll stand up, if you like," said the Major; and he raised himself
before me with a really grand air. I could take his measure at a glance--he was six feet two and a perfect
gentleman. It would have paid any club in process of formation and in
want of a stamp to engage him at a salary to stand in the principal
window. What struck me at once was that in coming to me they had rather
missed their vocation; they could surely have been turned to better
account for advertising purposes. I couldn't of course see the thing in
detail, but I could see them make somebody's fortune--I don't mean their
own. There was something in them for a waistcoat-maker, an hotel-keeper
or a soap-vendor. I could imagine "We always use it" pinned on their
bosoms with the greatest effect; I had a vision of the brilliancy with
which they would launch a table d'hote. Mrs. Monarch sat still, not from pride but from shyness, and presently
her husband said to her: "Get up, my dear, and show how smart you are." She obeyed, but she had no need to get up to show it. She walked to the
end of the studio and then came back blushing, her fluttered eyes on the
partner of her appeal. I was reminded of an incident I had accidentally
had a glimpse of in Paris--being with a friend there, a dramatist about
to produce a play, when an actress came to him to ask to be entrusted
with a part. She went through her paces before him, walked up and down
as Mrs. Monarch was doing. Mrs. Monarch did it quite as well, but I
abstained from applauding. It was very odd to see such people apply for
such poor pay. She looked as if she had ten thousand a year. Her husband
had used the word that described her: she was in the London current
jargon essentially and typically "smart." Her figure was, in the same
order of ideas, conspicuously and irreproachably "good." For a woman of
her age her waist was surprisingly small; her elbow moreover had the
orthodox crook. She held her head at the conventional angle, but why did
she come to ME? She ought to have tried on jackets at a big shop. I
feared my visitors were not only destitute but "artistic"--which would
be a great complication. When she sat down again I thanked her,
observing that what a draughtsman most valued in his model was the
faculty of keeping quiet. "Oh SHE can keep quiet," said Major Monarch. Then he added jocosely:
"I've always kept her quiet." "I'm not a nasty fidget, am I?" It was going to wring tears from me, I
felt, the way she hid her head, ostrich-like, in the other broad bosom. The owner of this expanse addressed his answer to me. "Perhaps it isn't
out of place to mention--because we ought to be quite business-like,
oughtn't we?--that when I married her she was known as the Beautiful
Statue." "Oh dear!" said Mrs. Monarch ruefully. "Of course I should want a certain amount of expression," I rejoined. "Of COURSE!" --and I had never heard such unanimity. "And then I suppose you know that you'll get awfully tired." "Oh we NEVER get tired!" they eagerly cried. "Have you had any kind of practice?" They hesitated--they looked at each other. "We've been
photographed--IMMENSELY," said Mrs. Monarch. "She means the fellows have asked us themselves," added the Major. "I see--because you're so good-looking." "I don't know what they thought, but they were always after us." "We always got our photographs for nothing," smiled Mrs. Monarch. "We might have brought some, my dear," her husband remarked. "I'm not sure we have any left. We've given quantities away," she
explained to me. "With our autographs and that sort of thing," said the Major. "Are they to be got in the shops?" I inquired as a harmless pleasantry. "Oh yes, HERS--they used to be." "Not now," said Mrs. Monarch with her eyes on the floor. CHAPTER II


I could fancy the "sort of thing" they put on the presentation copies of
their photographs, and I was sure they wrote a beautiful hand. It was
odd how quickly I was sure of everything that concerned them. If they
were now so poor as to have to cam shillings and pence they could never
have had much of a margin. Their good looks had been their capital, and
they had good-humouredly made the most of the career that this resource
marked out for them. It was in their faces, the blankness, the deep
intellectual repose of the twenty years of country-house visiting that
had given them pleasant intonations. I could see the sunny
drawing-rooms, sprinkled with periodicals she didn't read, in which Mrs.
Monarch had continuously sat; I could see the wet shrubberies in which
she had walked, equipped to admiration for either exercise. I could see
the rich covers the Major had helped to shoot and the wonderful garments
in which, late at night, he repaired to the smoking-room to talk about
them. I could imagine their leggings and waterproofs, their knowing
tweeds and rugs, their rolls of sticks and cases of tackle and neat
umbrellas; and I could evoke the exact appearance of their servants and
the compact variety of their luggage on the platforms of country
stations. They gave small tips, but they were liked; they didn't do anything
themselves, but they were welcome. They looked so well everywhere; they
gratified the general relish for stature, complexion and "form." They
knew it without fatuity or vulgarity, and they respected themselves in
consequence. They weren't superficial: they were thorough and kept
themselves up--it had been their line. People with such a taste for
activity had to have some line. I could feel how even in a dull house
they could have been counted on for the joy of life. At present
something had happened--it didn't matter what, their little income had
grown less, it had grown least--and they had to do something for
pocket-money. Their friends could like them, I made out, without liking
to support them. There was something about them that represented
credit--their clothes, their manners, their type; but if credit is a
large empty pocket in which an occasional chink reverberates, the chink
at least must be audible. What they wanted of me was help to make it so. Fortunately they had no children--I soon divined that. They would also
perhaps wish our relations to be kept secret: this was why it was "for
the figure"--the reproduction of the face would betray them. I liked them--I felt, quite as their friends must have done--they were
so simple; and I had no objection to them if they would suit. But
somehow with all their perfections I didn't easily believe in them. After all they were amateurs, and the ruling passion of my life was--the
detestation of the amateur. Combined with this was another
perversity--an innate preference for the represented subject over the
real one: the defect of the real one was so apt to be a lack of
representation. I liked things that appeared; then one was sure. Whether
they WERE or not was a subordinate and almost always a profitless
question. There were other considerations, the first of which was that I
already had two or three recruits in use, notably a young person with
big feet, in alpaca, from Kilburn, who for a couple of years had come to
me regularly for my illustrations and with whom I was still--perhaps
ignobly--satisfied. I frankly explained to my visitors how the case
stood, but they had taken more precautions than I supposed. They had
reasoned out their opportunity, for Claude Rivet had told them of the
projected EDITION DE LUXE of one of the writers of our day--the rarest
of the novelists--who, long neglected by the multitudinous vulgar, and
dearly prized by the attentive (need I mention Philip Vincent?) had had
the happy fortune of seeing, late in life, the dawn and then the full
light of a higher criticism; an estimate in which on the part of the
public there was something really of expiation. The edition preparing,
planned by a publisher of taste, was practically an act of high
reparation; the woodcuts with which it was to be enriched were the
homage of English art to one of the most independent representatives of
English letters. Major and Mrs. Monarch confessed to me they had hoped I
might be able to work THEM into my branch of the enterprise. They knew I
was to do the first of the books, Rutland Ramsay, but I had to make
clear to them that my participation in the rest of the affair--this
first book was to be a test--must depend on the satisfaction I should
give. If this should be limited my employers would drop me with scarce
common forms. It was therefore a crisis for me, and naturally I was
making special preparations, looking about for new people, should they
be necessary, and securing the best types. I admitted however that I
should like to settle down to two or three good models who would do for
everything. "Should we have often to--a--put on special clothes?" Mrs. Monarch
timidly demanded. "Dear yes--that's half the business." "And should we be expected to supply our own costumes? "Oh no; I've got a lot of things. A painter's models put on--or put
off--anything he likes." "And you mean--a--the same?" "The same?" Mrs. Monarch looked at her husband again. "Oh she was just wondering," he explained, "if the costumes are in
GENERAL use." I had to confess that they were, and I mentioned further
that some of them--I had a lot of, genuine greasy last-century
things--had served their time, a hundred years ago, on living,
world-stained men and women; on figures not perhaps so far removed, in
that vanished world, from THEIR type, the Monarchs', QUOI! of a breeched
and bewigged age. "We'll put, on anything that FITS," said the Major. "Oh I arrange that--they fit in the pictures." "I'm afraid I should do better for the modern books. I'd come as you
like," said Mrs. Monarch. "She has got a lot of clothes at home: they might do for contemporary
life," her husband continued. "Oh I can fancy scenes in which you'd be quite natural." And indeed I
could see the slipshod re-arrangements of stale properties--the stories
I tried to produce pictures for without the exasperation of reading
them--whose sandy tracts the good lady might help to people. But I had
to return to the fact that--for this sort of work--the daily mechanical
grind--I was already equipped: the people I was working with were fully
adequate. "We only thought we might be more like SOME characters," said Mrs.
Monarch mildly, getting up. Her husband also rose; he stood looking at me with a dim wistfulness
that was touching in so fine a man. "Wouldn't it be rather a pull
sometimes to have--a--to have--?" He hung fire; he wanted me to help him
by phrasing what he meant. But I couldn't--I didn't know. So he brought
it out awkwardly: "The REAL thing; a gentleman, you know, or a lady." I
was quite ready to give a general assent--I admitted that there was a
great deal in that. This encouraged Major Monarch to say, following up
his appeal with an unacted gulp: "It's awfully hard--we've tried
everything." The gulp was communicative; it proved too much for his
wife. Before I knew it Mrs. Monarch had dropped again upon a divan and
burst into tears. Her husband sat down beside her, holding one of her
hands; whereupon she quickly dried her eyes with the other, while I felt
embarrassed as she looked up at me. "There isn't a confounded job I
haven't applied for--waited for--prayed for. You can fancy we'd be
pretty bad first. Secretaryships and that sort of thing? You might as
well ask for a peerage. I'd be ANYTHING--I'm strong; a messenger or a
coalheaver. I'd put on a gold-laced cap and open carriage-doors in front
of the haberdasher's; I'd hang about a station to carry portmanteaux;
I'd be a postman. But they won't LOOK at you; there are thousands as
good as yourself already on the ground. GENTLEMEN, poor beggars, who've
drunk their wine, who've kept their hunters!" I was as reassuring as I knew how to be, and my visitors were presently
on their feet again while, for the experiment, we agreed on an hour. We
were discussing it when the door opened and Miss Churm came in with a
wet umbrella. Miss Churm had to take the omnibus to Maida Vale and then
walk half a mile. She looked a trifle blowsy and slightly splashed. I
scarcely ever saw her come in without thinking afresh how odd it was
that, being so little in herself, she should yet be so much in others. She was a meagre little Miss Churm, but was such an ample heroine of
romance. She was only a freckled cockney, but she could represent
everything, from a fine lady to a shepherdess, she had the faculty as
she might have had a fine voice or long hair. She couldn't spell and she
loved beer, but she had two or three "points," and practice, and a
knack, and mother-wit, and a whimsical sensibility, and a love of the
theatre, and seven sisters,--and not an ounce of respect, especially for
the H. The first thing my visitors saw was that her umbrella was wet,
and in their spotless perfection they visibly winced at it. The rain had
come on since their arrival. "I'm all in a soak; there WAS a mess of people in the 'bus. I wish you
lived near a stytion," said Miss Churm. I requested her to get ready as
quickly as possible, and she passed into the room in which she always
changed her dress. But before going out she asked me what she was to get
into this time. "It's the Russian princess, don't you know?" I answered; "the one with
the 'golden eyes,' in black velvet, for the long thing in the
CHEAPSIDE." "Golden eyes? I SAY!" cried Miss Churm, while my companions watched her
with intensity as she withdrew. She always arranged herself, when she
was late, before I could turn round; and I kept my visitors a little on
purpose, so that they might get an idea, from seeing her, what would be
expected of themselves. I mentioned that she was quite my notion of an
excellent model--she was really very clever. "Do you think she looks like a Russian princess?" Major Monarch asked
with lurking alarm. "When I make her, yes." "Oh if you have to MAKE her--!" he reasoned, not without point. "That's the most you can ask. There are so many who are not makeable." "Well now, HERE'S a lady"--and with a persuasive smile he passed his arm
into his wife's--"who's already made!" "Oh I'm not a Russian princess," Mrs. Monarch protested a little coldly. I could see she had known some and didn't like them. There at once was a
complication of a kind I never had to fear with Miss Churm. This young lady came back in black velvet--the gown was rather rusty and
very low on her lean shoulders--and with a Japanese fan in her red
hands. I reminded her that in the scene I was doing she had to look over
some one's head. "I forget whose it is but it doesn't matter. Just look
over a head." "I'd rather look over a stove," said Miss Churm and she took her station
near the fire. She fell into Position, settled herself into a tall
attitude, gave a certain backward inclination to her head and a certain
forward droop to her fan, and looked, at least to my prejudiced sense,
distinguished and charming, foreign and dangerous. We left her looking
so while I went downstairs with Major and Mrs. Monarch. "I believe I could come about as near it as that," said Mrs. Monarch. "Oh you think she's shabby, but you must allow for the alchemy of art." However, they went off with an evident increase of comfort founded on
their demonstrable advantage in being the real thing. I could fancy them
shuddering over Miss Churm. She was very droll about them when I went
back, for I told her what they wanted. "Well, if SHE can sit I'll tyke to bookkeeping," said my model. "She's very ladylike," I replied as an innocent form of aggravation. "So much the worse for YOU. That means she can't turn round." "She'll do for the fashionable novels." "Oh yes, she'll DO for them!" my model humorously declared. "Ain't they
bad enough without her?" I had often sociably denounced them to Miss
Churm. CHAPTER III


It was for the elucidation of a mystery in one of these works that I
first tried Mrs. Monarch. Her husband came with her, to be useful if
necessary--it was sufficiently clear that as a general thing he would
prefer to come with her. At first I wondered if this were for
"propriety's" sake--if he were going to be jealous and meddling. The
idea was too tiresome, and if it had been confirmed it would speedily
have brought our acquaintance to a close. But I soon saw there was
nothing in it and that if he accompanied Mrs. Monarch it was--in
addition to the chance of being wanted--simply because he had nothing
else to do. When they were separate his occupation was gone, and they
never HAD been separate. I judged rightly that in their awkward
situation their close union was their main comfort and that this union
had no weak spot. It was a real marriage, an encouragement to the
hesitating, a nut for pessimists to crack. Their address was humble--I
remember afterwards thinking it had been the only thing about them that
was really professional--and I could fancy the lamentable lodgings in
which the Major would have been left alone. He could sit there more or
less grimly with his wife--he couldn't sit there anyhow without her. He had too much tact to try and make himself agreeable when he couldn't
be useful; so when I was too absorbed in my work to talk he simply sat
and waited. But I liked to hear him talk--it made my work, when not
interrupting it, less mechanical, less special. To listen to him was to
combine the excitement of going out with the economy of staying at home. There was only one hindrance--that I seemed not to know any of the
people this brilliant couple had known. I think he wondered extremely,
during the term of our intercourse, whom the deuce I DID know. He hadn't
a stray sixpence of an idea to fumble for, so we didn't spin it very
fine; we confined ourselves to questions of leather and even of
liquor-saddlers and breeches-makers and how to get excellent claret
cheap--and matters like "good trains" and the habits of small game. His
lore on these last subjects was astonishing--he managed to interweave
the station-master with the ornithologist. When he couldn't talk about
greater things he could talk cheerfully about smaller, and since I
couldn't accompany him into reminiscences of the fashionable world he
could lower the conversation without a visible effort to my level. So earnest a desire to please was touching in a man who could so easily
have knocked one down. He looked after the fire and had an opinion on
the draught of the stove without my asking him, and I could see that he
thought many of my arrangements not half knowing. I remember telling him
that if I were only rich I'd offer him a salary to come and teach me how
to live. Sometimes he gave a random sigh of which the essence might have
been: "Give me even such a bare old-barrack as this, and I'd do
something with it!" When I wanted to use him he came alone; which was an
illustration of the superior courage of women. His wife could bear her
solitary second floor, and she was in general more discreet; showing by
various small reserves that she was alive to the propriety of keeping
our relations markedly professional--not letting them slide into
sociability. She wished it to remain clear that she and the Major were
employed, not cultivated, and if she approved of me as a superior, who
could be kept in his place, she never thought me quite good enough for
an equal. She sat with great intensity, giving the whole of her mind to it, and
was capable of remaining for an hour almost as motionless as before a
photographer's lens. I could see she had been photographed often, but
somehow the very habit that made her good for that purpose unfitted her
for mine. At first I was extremely pleased with her ladylike air, and it
was a satisfaction, on coming to follow her lines, to see how good they
were and how far they could lead the pencil. But after a little
skirmishing I began to find her too insurmountably stiff; do what I
would with it my drawing looked like a photograph or a copy of a
photograph. Her figure had no variety of expression--she herself had no
sense of variety. You may say that this was my business and was only a
question of placing her. Yet I placed her in every conceivable position
and she managed to obliterate their differences. She was always a lady
certainly, and into the bargain was always the same lady. She was the
real thing, but always the same thing. There were moments when I rather
writhed under the serenity of her confidence that she WAS the real
thing. All her dealings with me and all her husband's were an
implication that this was lucky for ME. Meanwhile I found myself trying
to invent types that approached her own, instead of making her own
transform itself--in the clever way that was not impossible for instance
to poor Miss Churm. Arrange as I would and take the precautions I would,
she always came out, in my pictures, too tall--landing me in the dilemma
of having represented a fascinating woman as seven feet high, which (out
of respect perhaps to my own very much scantier inches) was far from my
idea of such a personage. The case was worse with the Major--nothing I could do would keep HIM
down, so that he became useful only for the representation of brawny
giants. I adored variety and range, I cherished human accidents, the
illustrative note; I wanted to characterise closely, and the thing in
the world I most hated was the danger of being ridden by a type. I had
quarrelled with some of my friends about it; I had parted company with
them for maintaining that one HAD to be, and that if the type was
beautiful--witness Raphael and Leonardo--the servitude was only a gain. I was neither Leonardo nor Raphael--I might only be a presumptuous young
modern searcher; but I held that everything was to be sacrificed sooner
than character. When they claimed that the obsessional form could easily
BE character I retorted, perhaps superficially, "Whose?" It couldn't be
everybody's--it might end in being nobody's. After I had drawn Mrs. Monarch a dozen times I felt surer even than
before that the value of such a model as Miss Churm resided precisely in
the fact that she had no positive stamp, combined of course with the
other fact that what she did have was a curious and inexplicable talent
for imitation. Her usual appearance was like a curtain which--she could
draw up at request for a capital performance. This performance was
simply suggestive; but it was a word to the wise--it was vivid and
pretty. Sometimes even I thought it, though she was plain herself, too
insipidly pretty; I made it a reproach to her that the figures drawn
from her were monotonously (BETEMENT, as we used to say) graceful. Nothing made her more angry: it was so much her pride to feel she could
sit for characters that had nothing in common with each other. She would
accuse me at such moments of taking away her "reputytion." It suffered a certain shrinkage, this queer quantity, from the repeated
visits of my new friends. Miss Churm was greatly in demand, never in
want of employment, so I had no scruple in putting her off occasionally,
to try them more at my ease. It was certainly amusing at first to do the
real thing--it was amusing to do Major Monarch's trousers. They WERE the
real thing, even if he did come out colossal. It was amusing to do his
wife's back hair--it was so mathematically neat--and the particular
"smart" tension of her tight stays. She lent herself especially to
positions in which the face was somewhat averted or blurred, she
abounded in ladylike back views and PROFILS PERDUS. When she stood erect
she took naturally one of the attitudes in which court-painters
represent queens and princesses; so that I found myself wondering
whether, to draw out this accomplishment, I couldn't get the editor of
the CHEAPSIDE to publish a really royal romance, "A Tale of Buckingham
Palace." Sometimes however the real thing and the make-believe came into
contact; by which I mean that Miss Churm, keeping an appointment or
coming to make one on days when I had much work in hand, encountered her
invidious rivals. The encounter was not on their part, for they noticed
her no more than if she had been the housemaid; not from intentional
loftiness, but simply because as yet, professionally, they didn't know
how to fraternise, as I could imagine they would have liked--or at least
that the Major would. They couldn't talk about the omnibus--they always
walked; and they didn't know what else to try--she wasn't interested in
good trains or cheap claret. Besides, they must have felt--in the
air--that she was amused at them, secretly derisive of their ever
knowing how. She wasn't a person to conceal the limits of her faith if
she had had a chance to show them. On the other hand Mrs. Monarch didn't
think her tidy; for why else did she take pains to say to me--it was
going out of the way, for Mrs. Monarch--that she didn't like dirty
women? One day when my young lady happened to be present with my other
sitters--she even dropped in, when it was convenient, for a chat--I
asked her to be so good as to lend a hand in getting tea, a service with
which she was familiar and which was one of a class that, living as I
did in a small way, with slender domestic resources, I often appealed to
my models to render. They liked to lay hands on my property, to break
the sitting, and sometimes the china--it made them feel Bohemian. The
next time I saw Miss Churm after this incident she surprised me greatly
by making a scene about it--she accused me of having wished to humiliate
her. She hadn't resented the outrage at the time, but had seemed
obliging and amused, enjoying the comedy of asking Mrs. Monarch, who sat
vague and silent, whether she would have cream and sugar, and putting an
exaggerated simper into the question. She had tried intonations--as if
she too wished to pass for the real thing--till I was afraid my other
visitors would take offence. Oh they were determined not to do this, and their touching patience was
the measure of their great need. They would sit by the hour,
uncomplaining, till I was ready to use them; they would come back on the
chance of being wanted and would walk away cheerfully if it failed. I
used to go to the door with them to see in what magnificent order they
retreated. I tried to find other employment for them--I introduced them
to several artists. But they didn't "take," for reasons I could
appreciate, and I became rather anxiously aware that after such
disappointments they fell back upon me with a heavier weight. They did
me the honour to think me most their form. They weren't romantic enough
for the painters, and in those days there were few serious workers in
black-and-white. Besides, they had an eye to the great job I had mentioned to them--they
had secretly set their hearts on supplying the right essence for my
pictorial vindication of our fine novelist. They knew that for this
undertaking I should want no costume--effects, none of the frippery of
past ages--that it was a case in which everything would be contemporary
and satirical and presumably genteel. If I could work them into it their
future would be assured, for the labour would of course be long and the
occupation steady. One day Mrs. Monarch came without her husband--she explained his absence
by his having had to go to the City. While she sat there in her usual
relaxed majesty there came at the door a knock which I immediately
recognised as the subdued appeal of a model out of work. It was followed
by the entrance of a young man whom I at once saw to be a foreigner and
who proved in fact an Italian acquainted with no English word but my
name, which he uttered in a way that made it seem to include all others. I hadn't then visited his country, nor was I proficient in his tongue;
but as he was not so meanly constituted--what Italian is?--as to depend
only on that member for expression he conveyed to me, in familiar but
graceful mimicry, that he was in search of exactly the employment in
which the lady before me was engaged. I was not struck with him at
first, and while I continued to draw I dropped few signs of interest or
encouragement. He stood his ground however--not importunately, but with
a dumb dog-like fidelity in his eyes that amounted to innocent
impudence, the manner of a devoted servant--he might have been in the
house for years--unjustly suspected. Suddenly it struck me that this
very attitude and expression made a picture; whereupon I told him to sit
down and wait till I should be free. There was another picture in the
way he obeyed me, and I observed as I worked that there were others
still in the way he looked wonderingly, with his head thrown back, about
the high studio. He might have been crossing himself in Saint Peter's. Before I finished I said to myself "The fellow's a bankrupt
orange-monger, but a treasure." When Mrs. Monarch withdrew he passed across the room like a flash to
open the door for her, standing there with the rapt pure gaze of the
young Dante spellbound by the young Beatrice. As I never insisted, in
such situations, on the blankness of the British domestic, I reflected
that he had the making of a servant--and I needed one, but couldn't pay
him to be only that--as well as of a model; in short I resolved to adopt
my bright adventurer if he would agree to officiate in the double
capacity. He jumped at my offer, and in the event my rashness--for I had
really known nothing about him--wasn't brought home to me. He proved a
sympathetic though a desultory ministrant, and had in a wonderful degree
the SENTIMENT DE LA POSE. It was uncultivated, instinctive, a part of
the happy instinct that had guided him to my door and helped him to
spell out my name on the card nailed to it. He had had no other
introduction to me than a guess, from the shape of my high north window,
seen outside, that my place was a studio and that as a studio it would
contain an artist. He had wandered to England in search of fortune, like
other itinerants, and had embarked, with a partner and a small green
hand-cart, on the sale of penny ices. The ices had melted away and the
partner had dissolved in their train. My young man wore tight yellow
trousers with reddish stripes and his name was Oronte. He was sallow but
fair, and when I put him into some old clothes of my own he looked like
an Englishman. He was as good as Miss Churm, who could look, when
requested, like an Italian. CHAPTER IV


I thought Mrs. Monarch's face slightly convulsed when, on her coming
back with her husband, she found Oronte installed. It was strange to
have to recognise in a scrap of a lazzarone a competitor to her
magnificent Major. It was she who scented danger first, for the Major
was anecdotically unconscious. But Oronte gave us tea, with a hundred
eager confusions--he had never been concerned in so queer a process--and
I think she thought better of me for having at last an "establishment." They saw a couple of drawings that I had made of the establishment, and
Mrs. Monarch hinted that it never would have struck her he had sat for
them. "Now the drawings you make from US, they look exactly like us,"
she reminded me, smiling in triumph; and I recognised that this was
indeed just their defect. When I drew the Monarchs I couldn't anyhow get
away from them--get into the character I wanted to represent; and I
hadn't the least desire my model should be discoverable in my picture. Miss Churm never was, and Mrs. Monarch thought I hid her, very properly,
because she was vulgar; whereas if she was lost it was only as the dead
who go to heaven are lost--in the gain of an angel the more. By this time I had got a certain start with "Rutland Ramsay," the first
novel in the great projected series; that is I had produced a dozen
drawings, several with the help of the Major and his wife, and I had
sent them in for approval. My understanding with the publishers as I
have already hinted, had been that I was to be left to do my work, in
this particular case, as I liked, with the whole book committed to me;
but my connexion with the rest of the series was only contingent. There
were moments when, frankly, it WAS a comfort to have the real thing
under one's hand for there were characters in "Rutland Ramsay" that were
very much like it. There were people presumably as erect as the Major
and women of as good a fashion as Mrs. Monarch. There was a great deal
of country-house life-treated, it is true, in a fine fanciful ironical
generalised way--and there was a considerable implication of
knickerbockers and kilts. There were certain things I had to settle at
the outset; such things for instance as the exact appearance of the hero
and the particular bloom and figure of the heroine. The author of course
gave me a lead, but there was a margin for interpretation. I took the
Monarchs into my confidence, I told them frankly what I was about, I
mentioned my embarrassments and alternatives. "Oh take HIM!" Mrs.
Monarch murmured sweetly, looking at her husband; and "What could you
want better than my wife?" the Major inquired with the comfortable
candour that now prevailed between us. I wasn't obliged to answer these remarks--I was only obliged to place my
sitters. I wasn't easy in mind, and I postponed a little timidly perhaps
the solving of my question. The book was a large canvas, the other
figures were numerous, and I worked off at first some of the episodes in
which the hero and the heroine were not concerned. When once I had set
THEM up I should have to stick to them--I couldn't make my young man
seven feet high in one place and five feet nine in another. I inclined
on the whole to the latter measurement, though the Major more than once
reminded me that he looked about as young as any one. It was indeed
quite possible to arrange him, for the figure, so that it would have
been difficult to detect his age. After the spontaneous Oronte had been
with me a month, and after I had given him to understand several times
over that his native exuberance would presently constitute an
insurmountable barrier to our further intercourse, I waked to a sense of
his heroic capacity. He was only five feet seven, but the remaining
inches were latent. I tried him almost secretly at first, for I was
really rather afraid of the judgement my other models would pass on such
a choice. If they regarded Miss Churm as little better than a snare what
would they think of the representation by a person so little the real
thing as an Italian street-vendor of a protagonist formed by a public
school? If I went a little in fear of them it wasn't because they bullied me,
because they had got an oppressive foothold, but because in their really
pathetic decorum and mysteriously permanent newness they counted on me
so intensely. I was therefore very glad when Jack Hawley came home: he
was always of such good counsel. He painted badly himself, but there was
no one like him for putting his finger on the place. He had been absent
from England for a year; he had been somewhere--I don't remember
where--to get a fresh eye. I was in a good deal of dread of any such
organ, but we were old friends; he had been away for months and a sense
of emptiness was creeping into my life. I hadn't dodged a missile for a
year. He came back with a fresh eye, but with the same old black velvet
blouse, and the first evening he spent in my studio we smoked cigarettes
till the small hours. He had done no work himself, he had only got the
eye; so the field was clear for the production of my little things. He
wanted to see what I had produced for the CHEAPSIDE, but he was
disappointed in the exhibition. That at least seemed the meaning of two
or three comprehensive groans which, as he lounged on my big divan, his
leg folded under him, looking at my latest drawings, issued from his
lips with the smoke of the cigarette. "What's the matter with you?" I asked. "What's the matter with you?" "Nothing save that I'm mystified." "You are indeed. You're quite off the hinge. What's the meaning of this
new fad?" And he tossed me, with visible irreverence, a drawing in which
I happened to have depicted both my elegant models. I asked if he didn't
think it good, and he replied that it struck him as execrable, given the
sort of thing I had always represented myself to him as wishing to
arrive at; but I let that pass--I was so anxious to see exactly what he
meant. The two figures in the picture looked colossal, but I supposed
this was not what he meant, inasmuch as, for aught he knew to the
contrary, I might have been trying for some such effect. I maintained
that I was working exactly in the same way as when he last had done me
the honour to tell me I might do something some day. "Well, there's a
screw loose somewhere," he answered; "wait a bit and I'll discover it." I depended upon him to do so: where else was the fresh eye? But he
produced at last nothing more luminous than "I don't know--I don't like
your types." This was lame for a critic who had never consented to
discuss with me anything but the question of execution, the direction of
strokes and the mystery of values. "In the drawings you've been looking at I think my types are very
handsome." "Oh they won't do!" "I've been working with new models." "I see you have. THEY won't do." "Are you very sure of that?" "Absolutely--they're stupid." "You mean I am--for I ought to get round that." "You can't--with such people. Who are they?" I told him, so far as was necessary, and he concluded heartlessly: "CE
SONT DES GENS QU'IL FAUT METTRE A LA PORTE." "You've never seen them; they're awfully good"--I flew to their defence. "Not seen them? Why all this recent work of yours drops to pieces with
them. It's all I want to see of them." "No one else has said anything against it--the CHEAPSIDE people are
pleased." "Every one else is an ass, and the CHEAPSIDE people the biggest asses of
all. Come, don't pretend at this time of day to have pretty illusions
about the public, especially about publishers and editors. It's not for
SUCH animals you work--it's for those who know, COLORO CHE SANNO; so
keep straight for me if you can't keep straight for yourself. There was
a certain sort of thing you used to try for--and a very good thing it
was. But this twaddle isn't in it." When I talked with Hawley later
about "Rutland Ramsay" and its possible successors he declared that I
must get back into my boat again or I should go to the bottom. His voice
in short was the voice of warning. I noted the warning, but I didn't turn my friends out of doors. They
bored me a good deal; but the very fact that they bored me admonished me
not to sacrifice them--if there was anything to be done with
them--simply to irritation. As I look back at this phase they seem to me
to have pervaded my life not a little. I have a vision of them as most
of the time in my studio, seated against the wall on an old velvet bench
to be out of the way, and resembling the while a pair of patient
courtiers in a royal antechamber. I'm convinced that during the coldest
weeks of the winter they held their ground because it saved them fire. Their newness was losing its gloss, and it was impossible not to feel
them objects of charity. Whenever Miss Churm arrived they went away, and
after I was fairly launched in "Rutland Ramsay" Miss Churm arrived
pretty often. They managed to express to me tacitly that they supposed I
wanted her for the low life of the book, and I let them suppose it,
since they had attempted to study the work--it was lying about the
studio--without discovering that it dealt only with the highest circles. They had dipped into the most brilliant of our novelists without
deciphering many passages. I still took an hour from them, now and
again, in spite of Jack Hawley's warning: it would be time enough to
dismiss them, if dismissal should be necessary, when the rigour of the
season was over. Hawley had made their acquaintance--he had met them at
my fireside--and thought them a ridiculous pair. Learning that he was a
painter they tried to approach him, to show him too that they were the
real thing; but he looked at them across the big room, as if they were
miles away: they were a compendium of everything he most objected to in
the social system of his country. Such people as that, all convention
and patent-leather, with ejaculations that stopped conversation, had no
business in a studio. A studio was a place to learn to see, and how
could you see through a pair of feather-beds? The main inconvenience I suffered at their hands was that at first I was
shy of letting it break upon them that my artful little servant had
begun to sit to me for "Rutland Ramsay." They knew I had been odd
enough--they were prepared by this time to allow oddity to artists--to
pick a foreign vagabond out of the streets when I might have had a
person with whiskers and credentials; but it was some time before they
learned how high I rated his accomplishments. They found him in an
attitude more than once, but they never doubted I was doing him as an
organ-grinder. There were several things they never guessed, and one of
them was that for a striking scene in the novel, in which a footman
briefly figured, it occurred to me to make use of Major Monarch as the
menial. I kept putting this off, I didn't like to ask him to don the
livery--besides the difficulty of finding a livery to fit him. At last,
one day late in the winter, when I was at work on the despised Oronte,
who caught one's idea on the wing, and was in the glow of feeling myself
go very straight, they came in, the Major and his wife, with their
society laugh about nothing (there was less and less to laugh at); came
in like country-callers--they always reminded me of that--who have
walked across the park after church and are presently persuaded to stay
to luncheon. Luncheon was over, but they could stay to tea--I knew they
wanted it. The fit was on me, however, and I couldn't let my ardour cool
and my work wait, with the fading daylight, while my model prepared it. So I asked Mrs. Monarch if she would mind laying it out--a request which
for an instant brought all the blood to her face. Her eyes were on her
husband's for a second, and some mute telegraphy passed between them. Their folly was over the next instant; his cheerful shrewdness put an
end to it. So far from pitying their wounded pride, I must add, I was
moved to give it as complete a lesson as I could. They bustled about
together and got out the cups and saucers and made the kettle boil. I
know they felt as if they were waiting on my servant, and when the tea
was prepared I said: "He'll have a cup, please--he's tired." Mrs.
Monarch brought him one where he stood, and he took it from her as if he
had been a gentleman at a party squeezing a crush-hat with an elbow. Then it came over me that she had made a great effort for me--made it
with a kind of nobleness--and that I owed her a compensation. Each time
I saw her after this I wondered what the compensation could be. I
couldn't go on doing the wrong thing to oblige them. Oh it WAS the wrong
thing, the stamp of the work for which they sat--Hawley was not the only
person to say it now. I sent in a large number of the drawings I had
made for "Rutland Ramsay," and I received a warning that was more to the
point than Hawley's. The artistic adviser of the house for which I was
working was of opinion that many of my illustrations were not what had
been looked for. Most of these illustrations were the subjects in which
the Monarchs had figured. Without going into the question of what HAD
been looked for, I had to face the fact that at this rate I shouldn't
get the other books to do. I hurled myself in despair on Miss Churm--I
put her through all her paces. I not only adopted Oronte publicly as my
hero, but one morning when the Major looked in to see if I didn't
require him to finish a CHEAPSIDE figure for which he had begun to sit
the week before, I told him I had changed my mind--I'd do the drawing
from my man. At this my visitor turned pale and stood looking at me. "Is
HE your idea of an English gentleman?" he asked. I was disappointed, I was nervous, I wanted to get on with my work; so. I replied with irritation: "Oh my dear Major--I can't be ruined for
YOU!" It was a horrid speech, but he stood another moment--after which,
without a word, he quitted the studio. I drew a long breath, for I said
to myself that I shouldn't see him again. I hadn't told him definitely
that I was in danger of having my work rejected, but I was vexed at his
not having felt the catastrophe in the air, read with me the moral of
our fruitless collaboration, the lesson that in the deceptive atmosphere
of art even the highest respectability may fail of being plastic. I didn't owe my friends money, but I did see them again. They reappeared
together three days later, and, given all the other facts, there was
something tragic in that one. It was a clear proof they could find
nothing else in life to do. They had threshed the matter out in a dismal
conference--they had digested the bad news that they were not in for the
series. If they weren't useful to me even for the CHEAPSIDE their
function seemed difficult to determine, and I could only judge at first
that they had come, forgivingly, decorously, to take a last leave. This
made me rejoice in secret that I had little leisure for a scene; for I
had placed both my other models in position together and I was pegging
away at a drawing from which I hoped to derive glory. It had been
suggested by the passage in which Rutland Ramsay, drawing up a chair to
Artemisia's piano-stool, says extraordinary things to her while she
ostensibly fingers out a difficult piece of music. I had done Miss Churm
at the piano before--it was an attitude in which she knew how to take on
an absolutely poetic grace. I wished the two figures to "compose"
together with intensity, and my little Italian had entered perfectly
into my conception. The pair were vividly before me, the piano had been
pulled out; it was a charming show of blended youth and murmured love,
which I had only to catch and keep. My visitors stood and looked at it,
and I was friendly to them over my shoulder. They made no response, but I was used to silent company and went on with
my work, only a little disconcerted--even though exhilarated by the
sense that this was at least the ideal thing--at not having got rid of
them after all. Presently I heard Mrs. Monarch's sweet voice beside or
rather above me: "I wish her hair were a little better done." I looked
up and she was staring with a strange fixedness at Miss Churm, whose
back was turned to her. "Do you mind my just touching it?" she went
on--a question which made me spring up for an instant as with the
instinctive fear that she might do the young lady a harm. But she
quieted me with a glance I shall never forget--I confess I should like
to have been able to paint that--and went for a moment to my model. She
spoke to her softly, laying a hand on her shoulder and bending over her;
and as the girl, understanding, gratefully assented, she disposed her
rough curls, with a few quick passes, in such a way as to make Miss
Churm's head twice as charming. It was one of the most heroic personal
services I've ever seen rendered. Then Mrs. Monarch turned away with a
low sigh and, looking about her as if for something to do, stooped to
the floor with a noble humility and picked up a dirty rag that had
dropped out of my paint-box. The Major meanwhile had also been looking for something to do, and,
wandering to the other end of the studio, saw before him my
breakfast-things neglected, unremoved. "I say, can't I be useful HERE?" he called out to me with an irrepressible quaver. I assented with a
laugh that I fear was awkward, and for the next ten minutes, while I
worked, I heard the light clatter of china and the tinkle of spoons and
glass. Mrs. Monarch assisted her husband--they washed up my crockery,
they put it away. They wandered off into my little scullery, and I
afterwards found that they had cleaned my knives and that my slender
stock of plate had an unprecedented surface. When it came over me, the
latent eloquence of what they were doing, I confess that my drawing was
blurred for a moment--the picture swam. They had accepted their failure,
but they couldn't accept their fate. They had bowed their heads in
bewilderment to the perverse and cruel law in virtue of which the real
thing could be so much less precious than the unreal; but they didn't
want to starve. If my servants were my models, then my models might be
my servants. They would reverse the parts--the others would sit for the
ladies and gentlemen and THEY would do the work. They would still be in
the studio--it was an intense dumb appeal to me not to turn them out. "Take us on," they wanted to say--"we'll do ANYTHING." My pencil dropped from my hand; my sitting was spoiled and I got rid of
my sitters, who were also evidently rather mystified and awestruck. Then, alone with the Major and his wife I had a most uncomfortable
moment. He put their prayer into a single sentence: "I say, you
know--just let US do for you, can't you?" I couldn't--it was dreadful to
see them emptying my slops; but I pretended I could, to oblige them, for
about a week. Then I gave them a sum of money to go away, and I never
saw them again. I obtained the remaining books, but my friend Hawley
repeats that Major and Mrs. Monarch did me a permanent harm, got me into
false ways. If it be true I'm content to have paid the price--for the
memory. THE STORY OF IT




CHAPTER I


The weather had turned so much worse that the rest of the day was
certainly lost. The wind had risen and the storm gathered force; they
gave from time to time a thump at the firm windows and dashed even
against those protected by the verandah their vicious splotches of rain. Beyond the lawn, beyond the cliff, the great wet brush of the sky dipped
deep into the sea. But the lawn, already vivid with the touch of May,
showed a violence of watered green; the budding shrubs and trees
repeated the note as they tossed their thick masses, and the cold
troubled light, filling the pretty saloon, marked the spring afternoon
as sufficiently young. The two ladies seated there in silence could
pursue without difficulty--as well as, clearly, without
interruption--their respective tasks; a confidence expressed, when the
noise of the wind allowed it to be heard, by the sharp scratch of Mrs.
Dyott's pen at the table where she was busy with letters. Her visitor, settled on a small sofa that, with a palm-tree, a screen, a
stool, a stand, a bowl of flowers and three photographs in silver
frames, had been arranged near the light wood-fire as a choice
"corner"--Maud Blessingbourne, her guest, turned audibly, though at
intervals neither brief nor regular, the leaves of a book covered in
lemon-coloured paper and not yet despoiled of a certain fresh crispness. This effect of the volume, for the eye, would have made it, as
presumably the newest French novel--and evidently, from the attitude of
the reader, "good"--consort happily with the special tone of the room, a
consistent air of selection and suppression, one of the finer aesthetic
evolutions. If Mrs. Dyott was fond of ancient French furniture and
distinctly difficult about it, her inmates could be fond--with whatever
critical cocks of charming dark-braided heads over slender sloping
shoulders--of modern French authors. Nothing had passed for half an
hour--nothing at least, to be exact, but that each of the companions
occasionally and covertly intermitted her pursuit in such a manner as to
ascertain the degree of absorption of the other without turning round. What their silence was charged with therefore was not only a sense of
the weather, but a sense, so to speak, of its own nature. Maud
Blessingbourne, when she lowered her book into her lap, closed her eyes
with a conscious patience that seemed to say she waited; but it was
nevertheless she who at last made the movement representing a snap of
their tension. She got up and stood by the fire, into which she looked a
minute; then came round and approached the window as if to see what was
really going on. At this Mrs. Dyott wrote with refreshed intensity. Her
little pile of letters had grown, and if a look of determination was
compatible with her fair and slightly faded beauty, the habit of
attending to her business could always keep pace with any excursion of
her thought. Yet she was the first who spoke. "I trust your book has been interesting." "Well enough; a little mild." A louder throb of the tempest had blurred the sound of the words. "A
little wild?" "Dear no--timid and tame; unless I've quite lost my sense." "Perhaps you have," Mrs. Dyott placidly suggested--"reading so many." Her companion made a motion of feigned despair. "Ah you take away my
courage for going to my room, as I was just meaning to, for another." "Another French one?" "I'm afraid." "Do you carry them by the dozen--?" "Into innocent British homes?" Maud tried to remember. "I believe I
brought three--seeing them in a shop-window as I passed through town. It
never rains but it pours! But I've already read two." "And are they the only ones you do read?" "French ones?" Maud considered. "Oh no. D'Annunzio." "And what's that?" Mrs. Dyott asked as she affixed a stamp. "Oh you dear thing!" Her friend was amused, yet almost showed pity. "I
know you don't read," Maud went on; "but why should you? YOU live!" "Yes--wretchedly enough," Mrs. Dyott returned, getting her letters
together. She left her place, holding them as a neat achieved handful,
and came over to the fire, while Mrs. Blessingbourne turned once more to
the window, where she was met by another flurry. Maud spoke then as if moved only by the elements. "Do you expect him
through all this?" Mrs. Dyott just waited, and it had the effect, indescribably, of making
everything that had gone before seem to have led up to the question. This effect was even deepened by the way she then said "Whom do you
mean?" "Why I thought you mentioned at luncheon that Colonel Voyt was to walk
over. Surely he can't." "Do you care very much?" Mrs. Dyott asked. Her friend now hesitated. "It depends on what you call 'much.' If you
mean should I like to see him--then certainly." "Well, my dear, I think he understands you're here." "So that as he evidently isn't coming," Maud laughed, "it's particularly
flattering! Or rather," she added, giving up the prospect again, "it
would be, I think, quite extraordinarily flattering if he did. Except
that of course," she threw in, "he might come partly for you." "'Partly' is charming. Thank you for 'partly.' If you ARE going
upstairs, will you kindly," Mrs Dyott pursued, "put these into the box
as you pass?" The younger woman, taking the little pile of letters, considered them
with envy. "Nine! You ARE good. You're always a living reproach!" Mrs. Dyott gave a sigh. "I don't do it on purpose. The only thing, this
afternoon," she went on, reverting to the other question, "would be
their not having come down." "And as to that you don't know." "No--I don't know." But she caught even as she spoke a rat-tat-tat of
the knocker, which struck her as a sign. "Ah there!" "Then I go." And Maud whisked out. Mrs. Dyott, left alone, moved with an air of selection to the window,
and it was as so stationed, gazing out at the wild weather, that the
visitor, whose delay to appear spoke of the wiping of boots and the
disposal of drenched mackintosh and cap, finally found her. He was tall
lean fine, with little in him, on the whole, to confirm the titular in
the "Colonel Voyt" by which he was announced. But he had left the army,
so that his reputation for gallantry mainly depended now on his fighting
Liberalism in the House of Commons. Even these facts, however, his
aspect scantily matched; partly, no doubt, because he looked, as was
usually said, un-English. His black hair, cropped close, was lightly
powdered with silver, and his dense glossy beard, that of an emir or a
caliph, and grown for civil reasons, repeated its handsome colour and
its somewhat foreign effect. His nose had a strong and shapely arch, and
the dark grey of his eyes was tinted with blue. It had been said of
him--in relation to these signs--that he would have struck you as a Jew
had he not, in spite of his nose, struck you so much as an Irishman. Neither responsibility could in fact have been fixed upon him, and just
now, at all events, he was only a pleasant weather-washed wind-battered
Briton, who brought in from a struggle with the elements that he
appeared quite to have enjoyed a certain amount of unremoved mud and an
unusual quantity of easy expression. It was exactly the silence ensuing
on the retreat of the servant and the closed door that marked between
him and his hostess the degree of this ease. They met, as it were,
twice: the first time while the servant was there and the second as soon
as he was not. The difference was great between the two encounters,
though we must add in justice to the second that its marks were at first
mainly negative. This communion consisted only in their having drawn
each other for a minute as close as possible--as possible, that is, with
no help but the full clasp of hands. Thus they were mutually held, and
the closeness was at any rate such that, for a little, though it took
account of dangers, it did without words. When words presently came the
pair were talking by the fire and she had rung for tea. He had by this
time asked if the note he had despatched to her after breakfast had been
safely delivered. "Yes, before luncheon. But I'm always in a state when--except for some
extraordinary reason--you send such things by hand. I knew, without it,
that you had come. It never fails. I'm sure when you're there--I'm sure
when you're not." He wiped, before the glass, his wet moustache. "I see. But this morning
I had an impulse." "It was beautiful. But they make me as uneasy, sometimes, your impulses,
as if they were calculations; make me wonder what you have in reserve." "Because when small children are too awfully good they die? Well, I AM a
small child compared to you--but I'm not dead yet. I cling to life." He had covered her with his smile, but she continued grave. "I'm not
half so much afraid when you're nasty." "Thank you! What then did you do," he asked, "with my note?" "You deserve that I should have spread it out on my dressing-table--or
left it, better still, in Maud Blessingbourne's room." He wondered while he laughed. "Oh but what does SHE deserve?" It was her gravity that continued to answer. "Yes--it would probably
kill her." "She believes so in you?" "She believes so in YOU. So don't be TOO nice to her." He was still looking, in the chimney-glass, at the state of his
beard--brushing from it, with his handkerchief, the traces of wind and
wet. "If she also then prefers me when I'm nasty it seems to me I ought
to satisfy her. Shall I now at any rate see her?" "She's so like a pea on a pan over the possibility of it that she's
pulling herself together in her room." "Oh then we must try and keep her together. But why, graceful, tender,
pretty too--quite or almost as she is--doesn't she re-marry?" Mrs. Dyott appeared--and as if the first time--to look for the reason. "Because she likes too many men." It kept up his spirits. "And how many MAY a lady like--?" "In order not to like any of them too much? Ah that, you know, I never
found out--and it's too late now. When," she presently pursued, "did you
last see her?" He really had to think. "Would it have been since last November or
so?--somewhere or other where we spent three days." "Oh at Surredge? I know all about that. I thought you also met
afterwards." He had again to recall. "So we did! Wouldn't it have been somewhere at
Christmas? But it wasn't by arrangement!" he laughed, giving with his
forefinger a little pleasant nick to his hostess's chin. Then as if
something in the way she received this attention put him back to his
question of a moment before: "Have you kept my note?" She held him with her pretty eyes. "Do you want it back?" "Ah don't speak as if I did take things--!" She dropped her gaze to the fire. "No, you don't; not even the hard
things a really generous nature often would." She quitted, however, as
if to forget that, the chimney-place. "I put it THERE!" "You've burnt it? Good!" It made him easier, but he noticed the next
moment on a table the lemon-coloured volume left there by Mrs.
Blessingbourne, and, taking it up for a look, immediately put it down. "You might while you were about it have burnt that too." "You've read it?" "Dear yes. And you?" "No," said Mrs. Dyott; "it wasn't for me Maud brought it." It pulled her visitor up. "Mrs. Blessingbourne brought it?" "For such a day as this." But she wondered. "How you look! Is it so
awful?" "Oh like his others." Something had occurred to him; his thought was
already far. "Does she know?" "Know what?" "Why anything." But the door opened too soon for Mrs. Dyott, who could only murmur
quickly--"Take care!" CHAPTER II


It was in fact Mrs. Blessingbourne, who had under her arm the book she
had gone up for--a pair of covers showing this time a pretty, a candid
blue. She was followed next minute by the servant, who brought in tea,
the consumption of which, with the passage of greetings, inquiries and
other light civilities between the two visitors, occupied a quarter of
an hour. Mrs. Dyott meanwhile, as a contribution to so much amenity,
mentioned to Maud that her fellow guest wished to scold her for the
books she read--a statement met by this friend with the remark that he
must first be sure about them. But as soon as he had picked up the new,
the blue volume he broke out into a frank "Dear, dear!" "Have you read that too?" Mrs. Dyott inquired. "How much you'll have to
talk over together! The other one," she explained to him, "Maud speaks
of as terribly tame." "Ah I must have that out with her! You don't feel the extraordinary
force of the fellow?" Voyt went on to Mrs. Blessingbourne. And so, round the hearth, they talked--talked soon, while they warmed
their toes, with zest enough to make it seem as happy a chance as any of
the quieter opportunities their imprisonment might have involved. Mrs.
Blessingbourne did feel, it then appeared, the force of the fellow, but
she had her reserves and reactions, in which Voyt was much interested. Mrs. Dyott rather detached herself, mainly gazing, as she leaned back,
at the fire; she intervened, however, enough to relieve Maud of the
sense of being listened to. That sense, with Maud, was too apt to convey
that one was listened to for a fool. "Yes, when I read a novel I mostly
read a French one," she had said to Voyt in answer to a question about
her usual practice; "for I seem with it to get hold more of the real
thing--to get more life for my money. Only I'm not so infatuated with
them but that sometimes for months and months on end I don't read any
fiction at all." The two books were now together beside them. "Then when you begin again
you read a mass?" "Dear no. I only keep up with three or four authors." He laughed at this over the cigarette he had been allowed to light. "I
like your 'keeping up,' and keeping up in particular with 'authors.'" "One must keep up with somebody," Mrs. Dyott threw off. "I daresay I'm ridiculous," Mrs. Blessingbourne conceded without heeding
it; "but that's the way we express ourselves in my part of the country." "I only alluded," said Voyt, "to the tremendous conscience of your sex. It's more than mine can keep up with. You take everything too hard. But
if you can't read the novel of British and American manufacture, heaven
knows I'm at one with you. It seems really to show our sense of life as
the sense of puppies and kittens." "Well," Maud more patiently returned, "I'm told all sorts of people are
now doing wonderful things; but somehow I remain outside." "Ah it's THEY, it's our poor twangers and twaddlers who remain outside. They pick up a living in the street. And who indeed would want them in?" Mrs. Blessingbourne seemed unable to say, and yet at the same time to
have her idea. The subject, in truth, she evidently found, was not so
easy to handle. "People lend me things, and I try; but at the end of
fifty pages--"

"There you are! Yes--heaven help us!" "But what I mean," she went on, "isn't that I don't get woefully weary
of the eternal French thing. What's THEIR sense of life?" "AH VOILA!" Mrs. Dyott softly sounded. "Oh but it IS one; you can make it out," Voyt promptly declared. "They
do what they feel, and they feel more things than we. They strike so
many more notes, and with so different a hand. When it comes to any
account of a relation say between a man and a woman--I mean an intimate
or a curious or a suggestive one--where are we compared to them? They
don't exhaust the subject, no doubt," he admitted; "but we don't touch
it, don't even skim it. It's as if we denied its existence, its
possibility. You'll doubtless tell me, however," he went on, "that as
all such relations ARE for us at the most much simpler we can only have
all round less to say about them." She met this imputation with the quickest amusement. "I beg your pardon. I don't think I shall tell you anything of the sort. I don't know that I
even agree with your premiss." "About such relations?" He looked agreeably surprised. "You think we
make them larger?--or subtler?" Mrs. Blessingbourne leaned back, not looking, like Mrs. Dyott, at the
fire, but at the ceiling. "I don't know what I think." 