



Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









ONCE A WEEK


BY THE SAME AUTHOR

    THE DAY'S PLAY
    THE HOLIDAY ROUND
    THE SUNNY SIDE
    ONCE ON A TIME
    NOT THAT IT MATTERS
    IF I MAY
    FIRST PLAYS
    SECOND PLAYS
    MR. PIM




               ONCE A WEEK


                   BY

               A. A. MILNE

                AUTHOR OF
 "THE DAY'S PLAY" AND "THE HOLIDAY ROUND"


              THIRD EDITION


            METHUEN & CO LTD.
           36 ESSEX STREET W.C.
                 LONDON




 _First Published_        _October 15th, 1914_
 _Second Edition_         _March   ...   1917_
 _Third Edition_                  _1922_




Transcriber's Note

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. An
    expanded table of contents, in addition to the one originally
    published, has been provided below:

      THE HEIR
      WINTER SPORT
      A BAKER'S DOZEN
        A TRAGEDY IN LITTLE
        THE FINANCIER
        THE DOUBLE
        A BREATH OF LIFE
        "UNDER ENTIRELY NEW MANAGEMENT"
        A FAREWELL TOUR
        THE TRUTH ABOUT HOME RAILS
        THE KING'S SONS
        DISAPPOINTMENT
        AMONG THE ANIMALS
        A TRAGEDY OF THE SEA
        OLD FRIENDS
      GETTING MARRIED
      HOME AFFAIRS
        AN INSURANCE ACT
        BACHELOR RELICS
        LORDS TEMPORAL
        THE MISSING CARD
        SILVER LININGS
        THE ORDER OF THE BATH
        A TRUNK CALL
      OTHER PEOPLE'S HOUSES
        THE PARTING GUEST
        THE LANDSCAPE GARDENER
        THE SAME OLD STORY
        THE SPREADING WALNUT TREE
        DEFINITIONS
        A BILLIARD LESSON
      BURLESQUES
        THE SEASIDE NOVELETTE
        THE SECRET OF THE ARMY AEROPLANE
        THE HALO THEY GAVE THEMSELVES
        A DIDACTIC NOVEL
      MERELY PLAYERS
        ON THE BAT'S BACK
        UNCLE EDWARD
        THE RENASCENCE OF BRITAIN
        THE BIRTHDAY PRESENT
        ONE OF OUR SUFFERERS
        IN THE SWIM
      THE MEN WHO SUCCEED
        THE HEIR
        THE STATESMAN
        THE MAGNATE
        THE DOCTOR
        THE NEWSPAPER PROPRIETOR
        THE COLLECTOR
        THE ADVENTURER
        THE EXPLORER




                     TO

               MY COLLABORATOR

         WHO BUYS THE INK AND PAPER
                   LAUGHS
 AND, IN FACT, DOES ALL THE REALLY DIFFICULT
            PART OF THE BUSINESS
      THIS BOOK IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED
       IN MEMORY OF A WINTER'S MORNING
               IN SWITZERLAND




CONTENTS


                           PAGE
 THE HEIR                     1

 WINTER SPORT                29

 A BAKER'S DOZEN             61

 GETTING MARRIED            127

 HOME AFFAIRS               149

 OTHER PEOPLE'S HOUSES      183

 BURLESQUES                 215

 MERELY PLAYERS             251

 THE MEN WHO SUCCEED        281




NOTE


These sketches have previously appeared in _Punch_, to whose proprietors
I am much indebted for permission to reprint. THE HEIR




THE HEIR


I.--HE INTRODUCES HIMSELF

"In less refined circles than ours," I said to Myra, "your behaviour
would be described as swank. Really, to judge from the airs you put on,
you might be the child's mother." "He's jealous because he's not an aunt himself. Isn't he, ducksey
darling?" "I do wish you wouldn't keep dragging the baby into the conversation; we
can make it go quite well as a duologue. As to being jealous--why, it's
absurd. True, I'm not an aunt, but in a very short time I shall be an
uncle by marriage, which sounds to me much superior. That is," I added,
"if you're still equal to it." Myra blew me a kiss over the cradle. "Another thing you've forgotten," I went on, "is that I'm down for a
place as a godfather. Archie tells me that it isn't settled yet, but
that there's a good deal of talk about it in the clubs. Who's the other
going to be? Not Thomas, I suppose? That would be making the thing
rather a farce." "Hasn't Dahlia broken it to you?" said Myra anxiously. "Simpson?" I asked, in an awed whisper. Myra nodded. "And, of course, Thomas," she said. "Heavens! Not three of us? What a jolly crowd we shall be. Thomas can
play our best ball. We might----"

"But of course there are only going to be two godfathers," she said, and
leant over the cradle again. I held up my three end fingers. "Thomas," I said, pointing to the
smallest, "me," I explained, pointing to the next, "and Simpson, the
tall gentleman in glasses. One, two, three." "Oh, baby," sighed Myra, "what a very slow uncle by marriage you're
going to have!" I stood and gazed at my three fingers for some time. "I've got it," I said at last, and I pulled down the middle one. "The
rumour in the clubs was unauthorized. I don't get a place after all." "_Don't_ say you mind," pleaded Myra. "You see, Dahlia thought that as
you were practically one of the family already, an uncle-elect by
marriage, and as she didn't want to choose between Thomas and
Samuel----"

"Say no more. I was only afraid that she might have something against my
moral character. Child," I went on, rising and addressing the
unresponsive infant, "England has lost a godfather this day, but the
world has gained a----what? I don't know. I want my tea." Myra gave the baby a last kiss and got up. "Can I trust him with you while I go and see about Dahlia?" "I'm not sure. It depends how I feel. I may change him with some poor
baby in the village. Run away, aunt, and leave us men to ourselves. We
have several matters to discuss." When the child and I were alone together, I knelt by his cradle and
surveyed his features earnestly. I wanted to see what it was he had to
offer Myra which I could not give her. "This," I said to myself, "is the
face which has come between her and me," for it was unfortunately true
that I could no longer claim Myra's undivided attention. But the more I
looked at him the more mysterious the whole thing became to me. "Not a bad kid?" said a voice behind me. I turned and saw Archie. "Yours, I believe," I said, and I waved him to the cradle. Archie bent down and tickled the baby's chin, making appropriate noises
the while--one of the things a father has to learn to do. "Who do you think he's like?" he asked proudly. "The late Mr. Gladstone," I said, after deep thought. "Wrong. Hallo, here's Dahlia coming out. I hope, for your sake, that the
baby's all right. If she finds he's caught measles or anything, you'll
get into trouble." By a stroke of bad luck the child began to cry as soon as he saw the
ladies. Myra rushed up to him. "Poor little darling," she said soothingly. "Did his uncle by marriage
frighten him, then?" "Don't listen to her, Dahlia," I said. "I haven't done anything to him. We were chatting together quite amicably until he suddenly caught sight
of Myra and burst into tears." "He's got a little pain," said Dahlia gently taking him up and patting
him. "I think the trouble is mental," suggested Archie. "He looks to me as if
he had something on his conscience. Did he say anything to you about it
when you were alone?" "He didn't say much," I confessed, "but he seemed to be keeping
something back. I think he wants a bit of a run, really." "Poor little lamb," said Dahlia. "There, he's better now, thank you." She looked up at Archie and me. "I don't believe you two love him a
bit." Archie smiled at his wife and went over to the tea-table to pour out. I
sat on the grass and tried to analyse my feelings to my nephew by
marriage. "As an acquaintance," I said, "he is charming; I know no one who is
better company. If I cannot speak of his more solid qualities, it is
only because I do not know him well enough. But to say whether I love
him or not is difficult; I could tell you better after our first
quarrel. However, there is one thing I must confess. I am rather jealous
of him." "You envy his life of idleness?" "No, I envy him the amount of attention he gets from Myra. The love she
wastes on him which might be better employed on me is a heartrending
thing to witness. As her betrothed I should expect to occupy the premier
place in her affections, but, really, I sometimes think that if the baby
and I both fell into the sea she would jump in and save the baby first." "Don't talk about his falling into the sea," said Dahlia, with a
shudder; "I can't a-bear it." "I think it will be all right," said Archie, "I was touching wood all
the time." "What a silly godfather he nearly had!" whispered Myra at the cradle. "It quite makes you smile, doesn't it, baby? Oh, Dahlia, he's just like
Archie when he smiles!" "Oh, yes, he's the living image of Archie," said Dahlia confidently. I looked closely at Archie and then at the baby. "I should always know them apart," I said at last. "That," and I pointed
to the one at the tea-table, "is Archie, and this," and I pointed to the
one in the cradle, "is the baby. But then I've such a wonderful memory
for faces." "Baby," said Myra, "I'm afraid you're going to know some very foolish
people." II.--HE MEETS HIS GODFATHERS

Thomas and Simpson arrived by the twelve-thirty train, and Myra and I
drove down in the wagonette to meet them. Myra handled the ribbons
("handled the ribbons"--we must have that again) while I sat on the
box-seat and pointed out any traction-engines and things in the road. I
am very good at this. "I suppose," I said, "there will be some sort of ceremony at the
station? The station-master will read an address while his little
daughter presents a bouquet of flowers. You don't often get two
godfathers travelling by the same train. Look out," I said, as we swung
round a corner, "there's an ant coming." "What did you say? I'm so sorry, but I listen awfully badly when I'm
driving." "As soon as I hit upon anything really good I'll write it down. So far I
have been throwing off the merest trifles. When we are married,
Myra----"

"Go on; I love that." "When we are married we shan't be able to afford horses, so we'll keep a
couple of bicycles, and you'll be able to hear everything I say. How
jolly for you." "All right," said Myra quietly. There was no formal ceremony on the platform, but I did not seem to feel
the want of it when I saw Simpson stepping from the train with an
enormous Teddy-bear under his arm. "Hallo, dear old chap," he said, "here we are! You're looking at my
bear. I quite forgot it until I'd strapped up my bags, so I had to bring
it like this. It squeaks," he added, as if that explained it. "Listen,"
and the piercing roar of the bear resounded through the station. "Very fine. Hallo, Thomas!" "Hallo!" said Thomas, and went to look after his luggage. "I hope he'll like it," Simpson went on. "Its legs move up and down." He
put them into several positions, and then squeaked it again. "Jolly,
isn't it?" "Ripping," I agreed. "Who's it for?" He looked at me in astonishment for a moment. "My dear old chap, for the baby." "Oh, I see. That's awfully nice of you. He'll love it." I wondered if
Simpson had ever seen a month-old baby. "What's its name?" "I've been calling it Duncan in the train, but, of course, he will want
to choose his own name for it." "Well, you must talk it over with him to-night after the ladies have
gone to bed. How about your luggage? We mustn't keep Myra waiting." "Hallo, Thomas!" said Myra, as we came out. "Hallo, Samuel! Hooray!" "Hallo, Myra!" said Thomas. "All right?" "Myra, this is Duncan," said Simpson, and the shrill roar of the bear
rang out once more. Myra, her mouth firm, but smiles in her eyes, looked down lovingly at
him. Sometimes I think that she would like to be Simpson's mother. Perhaps, when we are married, we might adopt him. "For baby?" she said, stroking it with her whip. "But he won't be
allowed to take it into church with him, you know. No, Thomas, I won't
have the luggage next to me; I want some one to talk to. You come." Inside the wagonette Simpson squeaked his bear at intervals, while I
tried to prepare him for his coming introduction to his godson. Having
known the baby for nearly a week, and being to some extent in Myra's
confidence, I felt quite the family man beside Simpson. "You must try not to be disappointed with his looks," I said. "Anyway,
don't let Dahlia think you are. And if you want to do the right thing
say that he's just like Archie. Archie doesn't mind this for some
reason." "Is he tall for his age?" "Samuel, pull yourself together. He isn't tall at all. If he is anything
he is long, but how long only those can say who have seen him in his
bath. You do realize that he is only a month old?" "My dear old boy, of course. One can't expect much from him. I suppose
he isn't even toddling about yet?" "No--no. Not actually toddling." "Well, we can teach him later on. And I'm going to have a lot of fun
with him. I shall show him my watch--babies always love that." There was a sudden laugh from the front, which changed just a little too
late into a cough. The fact is I had bet Myra a new golf-ball that
Simpson would show the baby his watch within two minutes of meeting him. Of course, it wasn't a certainty yet, but I thought there would be no
harm in mentioning the make of ball I preferred. So I changed the
conversation subtly to golf. Amidst loud roars from the bear we drove up to the house and were
greeted by Archie. "Hallo, Thomas! how are you? Hallo, Simpson! Good heavens! I know that
face. Introduce me, Samuel." "This is Duncan. I brought him down for your boy to play with." "Duncan, of course. The boy will love it. He's tired of me already. He
proposes to meet his godfathers at four p.m. precisely. So you'll have
nearly three hours to think of something genial to say to him." We spent the last of the three hours playing tennis, and at four p.m.
precisely the introduction took place. By great good luck Duncan was
absent; Simpson would have wasted his whole two minutes in making it
squeak. "Baby," said Dahlia, "this is your Uncle Thomas." "Hallo!" said Thomas, gently kissing the baby's hand. "Good old boy,"
and he felt for his pipe. "Baby," said Dahlia, "this is your Uncle Samuel." As he leant over the child I whipped out my watch and murmured, "Go!" 4
hrs. 1 min. 25 sec. I wished Myra had not taken my "two minutes" so
literally, but I felt that the golf-ball was safe. Simpson looked at the baby as if fascinated, and the baby stared back at
him. It was a new experience for both of them. "He's _just_ like Archie," he said at last, remembering my advice. "Only
smaller," he added. 4 hrs. 2 min. 7 sec. "I can see you, baby," he said. "Goo-goo." Myra came and rested her chin on my shoulder. Silently I pointed to the
finishing place on my watch, and she gave a little gurgle of excitement. There was only one minute left. "I wonder what you're thinking about," said Simpson to the baby. "Is it
my glasses you want to play with?" "Help!" I murmured. "This will never do." "He just looks and looks. Ah! but his Uncle Samuel knows what baby wants
to see." (I squeezed Myra's arm. 4 hrs. 3 mins. 10 secs. There was just
time.) "I wonder if it's anything in his uncle's waistcoat?" "No!" whispered Myra to me in agony. "_Certainly_ not." "He _shall_ see it if he wants to," said Simpson soothingly, and put his
hand to his waistcoat pocket. I smiled triumphantly at Myra. He had five
seconds to get the watch out--plenty of time. "Bother!" said Simpson. "I left it upstairs." III.--HE CHOOSES A NAME

The afternoon being wet we gathered round the billiard-room fire and
went into committee. "The question before the House," said Archie, "is what shall the baby be
called, and why. Dahlia and I have practically decided on his names, but
it would amuse us to hear your inferior suggestions and point out how
ridiculous they are." Godfather Simpson looked across in amazement at Godfather Thomas. "Really, you are taking a good deal upon yourself, Archie," he said
coldly. "It is entirely a matter for my colleague and myself to decide
whether the ground is fit for--to decide, I should say, what the child
is to be called. Unless this is quite understood we shall hand in our
resignations." "We've been giving a lot of thought to it," said Thomas, opening his
eyes for a moment. "And our time is valuable." He arranged the cushions
at his back and closed his eyes again. "Well, as a matter of fact, the competition isn't quite closed," said
Archie. "Entries can still be received." "We haven't really decided at all," put in Dahlia gently. "It _is_ so
difficult." "In that case," said Samuel, "Thomas and I will continue to act. It is
my pleasant duty to inform you that we had a long consultation
yesterday, and finally agreed to call him--er--Samuel Thomas." "Thomas Samuel," said Thomas sleepily. "How did you think of those names?" I asked. "It must have taken you a
tremendous time." "With a name like Samuel Thomas Mannering," went on Simpson ["Thomas
Samuel Mannering," murmured Thomas], "your child might achieve almost
anything. In private life you would probably call him Sam." "Tom," said a tired voice. "Or, more familiarly, Sammy." "Tommy," came in a whisper from the sofa. "What do you think of it?" asked Dahlia. "I mustn't say," said Archie; "they're my guests. But I'll tell you
privately some time." There was silence for a little, and then a thought occurred to me. "You know, Archie," I said, "limited as their ideas are, you're rather
in their power. Because I was looking through the service in church on
Sunday, and there comes a point when the clergyman says to the
godfathers, 'Name this child.' Well, there you are, you know. They've
got you. You may have fixed on Montmorency Plantagenet, but they've only
to say 'Bert,' and the thing is done." "You all forget," said Myra, coming over to sit on the arm of my chair,
"that there's a godmother too. I shall forbid the Berts." "Well, that makes it worse. You'll have Myra saying 'Montmorency
Plantagenet,' and Samuel saying 'Samuel Thomas,' and Thomas saying
'Thomas Samuel.'" "It will sound rather well," said Archie, singing it over to himself. "Thomas, you take the tenor part, of course: 'Thomas Samuel, Thomas
Samuel, Thom-as Sam-u-el.' We must have a rehearsal." For five minutes Myra, Thomas, and Simpson chanted in harmony, being
assisted after the first minute by Archie, who took the alto part of
"Solomon Joel." He explained that as this was what he and his wife
really wanted the child christened ("Montmorency Plantagenet" being only
an invention of the godmother's) it would probably be necessary for him
to join in too. "Stop!" cried Dahlia, when she could bear it no longer; "you'll wake
baby." There was an immediate hush. "Samuel," said Archie in a whisper, "if you wake the baby I'll kill
you." The question of his name was still not quite settled, and once more we
gave ourselves up to thought. "Seeing that he's the very newest little Rabbit," said Myra, "I do think
he might be called after some very great cricketer." "That was the idea in christening him 'Samuel,'" said Archie. "Gaukrodger Carkeek Butt Bajana Mannering," I suggested--"something like
that?" "Silly; I meant 'Charles,' after Fry." "'Schofield,' after Haigh," murmured Thomas. "'Warren,' after Bardsley, would be more appropriate to a Rabbit," said
Simpson, beaming round at us. There was, however, no laughter. We had
all just thought of it ourselves. "The important thing in christening a future first-class cricketer,"
said Simpson, "is to get the initials right. What could be better than
'W. G.' as a nickname for Grace? But if 'W. G.'s' initials had been 'Z. Z.,' where would you have been?" "Here," said Archie. The shock of this reply so upset Simpson that his glasses fell off. He
picked them out of the fender and resumed his theme. "Now, if the baby were christened 'Samuel Thomas' his initials would be
'S. T.,' which are perfect. And the same as Coleridge's." "Is that Coleridge the wicket-keeper, or the fast bowler?" Simpson opened his mouth to explain, and then, just in time, decided not
to. "I forgot to say," said Archie, "that anyhow he's going to be called
Blair, after his mamma." "If his name's Blair Mannering," I said at once, "he'll have to write a
book. You can't waste a name like that. _The Crimson Spot_, by Blair
Mannering. Mr. Blair Mannering, the well-known author of _The Gash_. Our
new serial, _The Stain on the Bath Mat_, has been specially written for
us by Mr. and Mrs. Blair Mannering. It's simply asking for it." "Don't talk about his wife yet, please," smiled Dahlia. "Let me have him
a little while." "Well, he can be a writer _and_ a cricketer. Why not? There are others. I need only mention my friend, S. Simpson." "But the darling still wants another name," said Myra. "Let's call him
John to-day, and William to-morrow, and Henry the next day, and so on
until we find out what suits him best." "Let's all go upstairs now and call him Samuel," said Samuel. "Thomas," said Thomas. We looked at Dahlia. She got up and moved to the door. In single file we
followed her on tip-toe to the nursery. The baby was fast asleep. "Thomas," we all said in a whisper, "Thomas, Thomas." There was no reply. "Samuel!" Dead silence. "I think," said Dahlia, "we'll call him Peter." IV.--HE IS CHRISTENED

On the morning of the christening, as I was on my way to the bathroom, I
met Simpson coming out of it. There are people who have never seen
Simpson in his dressing-gown; people also who have never waited for the
sun to rise in glory above the snow-capped peaks of the Alps; who have
never stood on Waterloo Bridge and watched St. Paul's come through the
mist of an October morning. Well, well, one cannot see everything. "Hallo, old chap!" he said. "I was just coming to talk to you. I want
your advice." "A glass of hot water the last thing at night," I said, "no sugar or
milk, a Turkish bath once a week and plenty of exercise. You'll get it
down in no time." "Don't be an ass. I mean about the christening. I've been to a wedding,
of course, but that isn't quite the same thing." "A moment, while I turn on the tap." I turned it on and came back to
him. "Now then, I'm at your service." "Well, what's the--er--usual costume for a christening?" "Leave that to the mother," I said. "She'll see that the baby's dressed
properly." "I mean for a godfather." Dahlia has conveniently placed a sofa outside the bathroom door. I
dropped into it and surveyed the dressing-gown thoughtfully. "Go like that," I said at last. "What I want to know is whether it's a top-hat affair or not?" "Have you brought a top-hat?" "Of course." "Then you must certainly---- I say! Come out of it, Myra!" I jumped up from the sofa, but it was too late. She had stolen my bath. "Well, of all the cheek----"

The door opened and Myra's head appeared round the corner. "Hush! you'll wake the baby," she said. "Oh, Samuel, what a dream! _Why_
haven't I seen it before?" "You have, Myra. I've often dressed up in it." "Then I suppose it looks different with a sponge. Because----"

"Really!" I said as I took hold of Simpson and led him firmly away; "if
the baby knew that you carried on like this of a morning he'd be
shocked." Thomas is always late for breakfast. Simpson on this occasion was
delayed by his elaborate toilet. They came in last together, by opposite
doors, and stood staring at each other. Simpson wore a frock-coat,
dashing double-breasted waistcoat, perfectly creased trousers, and a
magnificent cravat; Thomas had on flannels and an old blazer. "By Jove!" said Archie, seeing Simpson first, "you _are_ a----" and then
he caught sight of Thomas. "Hul-_lo_!" His eyes went from one to the
other, and at last settled on the toast. He went on with his breakfast. "The two noble godfathers," he murmured. Meanwhile the two godfathers continued to gaze at each other as if
fascinated. At last Simpson spoke. "We can't _both_ be right," he said slowly to himself. Thomas woke up. "Is it the christening to-day? I quite forgot." "It is, Thomas. The boat-race is to-morrow." "Well, I can change afterwards. You don't expect me to wear anything
like that?" he said, pointing to Simpson. "Don't change," said Archie. "Both go as you are. Mick and Mack, the
Comedy Duo. Simpson does the talking while Thomas falls over the pews." Simpson collected his breakfast and sat down next to Myra. "Am I all right?" he asked her doubtfully. "Your tie's up at the back of your neck," I said. "Because if Dahlia would prefer it," he went on, ignoring me, "I could
easily wear a plain dark tweed." "You're beautiful, Samuel," said Myra. "I hope you'll look as nice at my
wedding." "You don't think I shall be mistaken for the father?" he asked
anxiously. "By Peter? Well, that _is_ just possible. Perhaps if----"

"I think you're right," said Simpson, and after breakfast he changed
into the plain dark tweed. As the hour approached we began to collect in the hall, Simpson reading
the service to himself for the twentieth time. "Do we have to say anything?" asked Thomas, as he lit his third pipe. Simpson looked at him in horror. "Say anything? Of course we do! Haven't you studied it? Here, you'll
just have time to read it through." "Too late now. Better leave it to the inspiration of the moment," I
suggested. "Does anybody know if there's a collection, because if so I
shall have to go and get some money." "There will be a collection for the baby afterwards," said Archie. "I
hope you've all been saving up." "Here he comes!" said Simpson, and Peter Blair Mannering came down the
stairs with Dahlia and Myra. "Good morning, everybody," said Dahlia. "Good morning. Say 'Good morning,' baby." "He's rather nervous," said Myra. "He says he's never been christened
before, and what's it like?" "I expect he'll be all right with two such handsome godfathers," said
Dahlia. "_Isn't_ Mr. Simpson looking well?" said Myra in a society voice. "And
do you know, dear, that's the _third_ suit I've seen him in to-day." "Well, are we all ready?" "You're quite sure about his name?" said Archie to his wife. "This is
your last chance, you know. Say the word to Thomas before it's too
late." "I think Peter is rather silly," I said. "Why Blair?" said Myra. "I ask you." Dahlia smiled sweetly at us and led the way with P. B. Mannering to the
car. We followed ... and Simpson on the seat next the driver read the
service to himself for the last time. . . . . . "I feel very proud," said Archie as we came out of the church. "I'm not
only a father, but my son has a name. And now I needn't call him 'er'
any more." "He _was_ a good boy, wasn't he?" said Myra. "Thomas, say at once that your godson was a good boy." But Thomas was quiet. He looked years older. "I've never read the service before," he said. "I didn't quite know what
we were in for. It seems that Simpson and I have undertaken a heavy
responsibility; we are practically answerable for the child's education. We are supposed to examine him every few years and find out if he is
being taught properly." "You can bowl to him later on if you like." "No, no. It means more than that." He turned to Dahlia. "I think," he
said, "Simpson and I will walk home. We must begin at once to discuss
the lines on which we shall educate our child." V.--HE SEES LIFE

There was no one in sight. If 'twere done well, 'twere well done
quickly. I gripped the perambulator, took a last look round, and then
suddenly rushed it across the drive and down a side path, not stopping
until we were well concealed from the house. Panting, I dropped into a
seat, having knocked several seconds off the quarter-mile record for
babies under one. "Hallo!" said Myra. "Dash it, are there people everywhere to-day? I can't get a moment to
myself. 'O solitude, where----'"

"What are you going to do with baby?" "Peter and I are going for a walk." My eyes rested on her for more than
a moment. She was looking at me over an armful of flowers ...
and--well--"You can come too if you like," I said. "I've got an awful lot to do," she smiled doubtfully. "Oh, if you'd rather count the washing." She sat down next to me. "Where's Dahlia?" "I don't know. We meant to have left a note for her, but we came away in
rather a hurry. '_Back at twelve. Peter._'"

"'_I am quite happy. Pursuit is useless_,'" suggested Myra. "Poor
Dahlia, she'll be frightened when she sees the perambulator gone." "My dear, what _could_ happen to it? Is this Russia?" "Oh, what happens to perambulators in Russia?" asked Myra eagerly. "They spell them differently," I said, after a little thought. "Anyhow,
Dahlia's all right." "Well, I'll just take these flowers in and then I'll come back. If you
and Peter will have me?" "I think so," I said. Myra went in and left me to my reflections, which were mainly that Peter
had the prettiest aunt in England, and that the world was very good. But
my pleased and fatuous smile over these thoughts was disturbed by her
announcement on her return. "Dahlia says," she began, "that we may have Peter for an hour, but he
must come in at once if he cries." I got up in disgust. "You've spoilt my morning," I said. "Oh, _no_!" "I had a little secret from Dahlia, or rather Peter and I had a little
secret together; at least, you and I and Peter had a secret. Anyhow, it
was a secret. And I was feeling very wicked and happy--Peter and I both
were; and we were going to let you feel wicked too. And now Dahlia knows
all about the desperate deed we were planning, and, to make it worse,
all she says is, 'Certainly! By all means! Only don't get his feet wet.' Peter," I said, as I bent over the sleeping innocent, "we are betrayed." "Miss Mannering will now relate her experiences," said Myra. "I went
into the hall to put down the flowers, and just as I was coming out I
saw Dahlia in the corner with a book. And she said, 'Tell your young
man----'"

"How vulgar!" I interrupted. "'Do be careful with my baby.' And I said in great surprise, 'What
baby?' And she said, 'He was very kindly running him up and down the
drive just now. Peter loves it, but don't let them go on too long or
there may be an accident.' And then she gave a few more instructions,
and--here we are." "Peter," I said to the somnolent one, "you can't deceive a woman. Also
men are pigs. Wake up, and we will apologize to your aunt for doubting
her. Sorry, Myra." Myra pinned a flower in my coat and forgave me, and we walked off
together with the perambulator. "Peter is seeing a bit of life this morning," I said. "What shall we
show him now?" "Thomas and Samuel are playing golf," said Myra casually. I looked at her doubtfully. "Is that quite suitable?" "I think if we didn't let him stay too long it would be all right. Dahlia wouldn't like him to be overexcited." "Well, he can't be introduced to the game too early. Come on, Peter." And we pushed into more open country. The 9-hole course which Simpson planned a year ago is not yet used for
the Open Championship, though it is certainly better than it was last
summer. But it is short and narrow and dog-legged, and, particularly
when Simpson is playing on it, dangerous. "We are now in the zone of fire," I said. "Samuel's repainted ninepenny
may whiz past us at any moment. Perhaps I had better go first." I tied
my handkerchief to Myra's sunshade and led the way with the white flag. A ball came over the barn and rolled towards us, just reaching one of
the wheels. I gave a yell. "Hallo!" bellowed Simpson from behind the barn. "You're firing on the ambulance," I shouted. He hurried up, followed leisurely by Thomas. "I say," he said excitedly, "have I hurt him?" "You have not even waked him. He has the special gift of--was it
Wellington or Napoleon?--that of being able to sleep through the
heaviest battle." "Hallo!" said Thomas. "Good old boy! What's he been learning to-day?" he
added, with godfatherly interest. "We're showing him life to-day. He has come to see Simpson play golf." "Doesn't he ever sit up?" asked Simpson, looking at him with interest. "I don't see how he's going to see anything if he's always on his back. Unless it were something in the air." "Don't you ever get the ball in the air?" said Myra innocently. "What will his Uncle Samuel show him if he does sit up?" I asked. "Let's
decide first if it's going to be anything worth watching. Which hole are
you for? The third?" "The eighth. My last shot had a bit of a slice." "A slice! It had about the whole joint. I doubt," I said to Myra, "if we
shall do much good here; let's push on." But Myra had put down the hood and taken some of the clothes off Peter. Peter stirred slightly. He seemed to know that something was going on. Then suddenly he woke up, just in time to see Simpson miss the ball
completely. Instantly he gave a cry. "Now you've done it," said Myra. "He's got to go in. And I'm afraid
he'll go away with quite a wrong idea of the game." But I was not thinking of the baby. Although I am to be his uncle by
marriage I had forgotten him. "If that's about Simpson's form to-day," I said to Myra, "you and I
could still take them on and beat them." Myra looked up eagerly. "What about Peter?" she asked; but she didn't ask it very firmly. "We promised Dahlia to take him in directly he cried," I said. "She'd be
very upset if she thought she couldn't trust us. And we've got to go in
for our clubs, anyway," I added. Peter was sleeping peacefully again, but a promise is a promise. After
all, we had done a good deal for his education that morning. We had
shown him human nature at work, and the position of golf in the
universe. "We'll meet you on the first tee," said Myra to Thomas. VI.--HE SLEEPS

"It's sad to think that to-morrow we shall be in London," said Simpson,
with a sigh. "Rotten," agreed Thomas, and took another peach. There was a moment's silence. "We shall miss you," I said, after careful thought. I waited in vain for
Dahlia to say something, and then added, "You must both come again next
year." "Thank you very much." "Not at all." I hate these awkward pauses. If my host or hostess doesn't
do anything to smooth them over, I always dash in. "It's been delightful
to have you," I went on. "Are you sure you can't stay till Wednesday?" "I'm so sorry," said Dahlia, "but you took me by surprise. I had simply
no idea. Are you really going?" "I'm afraid so." "Are _you_ really staying?" said Archie to me. "Help!" "What about Peter?" asked Myra. "Isn't he too young to be taken from his
godfathers?" "We've been talking that over," said Simpson, "and I think it will be
all right. We've mapped his future out very carefully and we shall
unfold it to you when the coffee comes." "Thomas is doing it with peach-stones," I said. "Have another, and make
him a sailor, Thomas," and I passed the plate. "Sailor indeed," said Dahlia. "He's going to be a soldier." "It's too late. Thomas has begun another one. Well, he'll have to
swallow the stone." "A trifle hard on the Admiralty," said Archie. "It loses both Thomas and
Peter at one gulp. My country, what of thee?" However, when Thomas had peeled the peach, I cleverly solved the
difficulty by taking it on to my plate while he was looking round for
the sugar. "No, no sugar, thanks," I said, and waved it away. With the coffee and cigars Simpson unfolded his scheme of education for
Peter. "In the first place," he said, "it is important that even as a child he
should always be addressed in rational English and not in that
ridiculous baby-talk so common with young mothers." "Oh dear," said Dahlia. "My good Samuel," I broke in, "this comes well from you. Why, only
yesterday I heard you talking to him. I think you called him his
nunkey's ickle petsy wetsy lambkin." "You misunderstood me," said Simpson quickly. "I was talking to _you_." "Oh!" I said, rather taken aback. "Well--well, I'm not." I lit a cigar. "And I shall be annoyed if you call me so again." "At the age of four," Simpson went on, "he shall receive his first
lesson in cricket. Thomas will bowl to him----"

"I suppose that means that Thomas will have to be asked down here
again," said Archie. "Bother! Still, it's not for four years." "Thomas will bowl to him, Archie will keep wicket, and I shall field." "And where do I come in?" I asked. "You come in after Peter. Unless you would rather have your lesson
first." "That's the second time I've been sat on," I said to Myra, "Why is
Simpson so unkind to me to-night?" "I suppose he's jealous because you're staying on another week." "Probably; still, I don't like it. Could you turn your back on him, do
you think, to indicate our heavy displeasure?" Myra moved her chair round and rested her elbow on the table. "Go on, Samuel," said Dahlia. "You're lovely to-night. I suppose these
are Thomas's ideas as well as your own?" "His signature is duly appended to them." "I didn't read 'em all," said Thomas. "That's very rash of you," said Archie. "You don't know what you
mightn't let yourself in for. You may have promised to pay the child
threepence a week pocket-money." "No, there's nothing like that," said Simpson, to Archie's evident
disappointment. "Well, then, at the age of ten he goes to a preparatory
school." "Has he learnt to read yet?" asked Dahlia. "I didn't hear anything about
it." "He can read at six. I forgot to say that I am giving him a book which I
shall expect him to read aloud to Thomas and me on his sixth birthday." "Thomas has got _another_ invitation," said Archie. "Dash it!" "At fourteen he goes to a public school. The final decision as to which
public school he goes to will be left to you, but, of course, we shall
expect to be consulted on the subject." "I'll write and tell you what we decide on," said Archie hastily;
"there'll be no need for you to come down and be told aloud." "So far we have not arranged anything for him beyond the age of
fourteen. I now propose to read out a few general rules about his
upbringing which we must insist on being observed." "The great question whether Simpson is kicked out of the house to-night,
or leaves unobtrusively by the milk train to-morrow morning, is about to
be settled," I murmured. "'RULE ONE.--He must be brought up to be ambidextrous.' It will be very
useful," explained Simpson, "when he fields cover for England." "Or when he wants to shake hands with two people at once," said Archie. "'RULE TWO.--He must be taught from the first to speak French and German
fluently.' He'll thank you for that later on when he goes abroad." "Or when he goes to the National Liberal Club," said Archie. "'RULE THREE.--He should be surrounded as far as possible with beautiful
things.' Beautiful toys, beautiful wall-paper, beautiful scenery----"

"Beautiful godfathers?" I asked doubtfully. Simpson ignored me and went on hurriedly with the rest of his rules. "Well," said Archie, at the end of them, "they're all fairly futile, but
if you like to write them out neatly and frame them in gold I don't mind
hanging them up in the bathroom. Has anybody else got anything fatuous
to say before the ladies leave us?" I filled my glass. "I've really got a lot to say," I began, "because I consider that I've
been rather left out of things. If you come to think of it, I'm the only
person here who isn't anything important, all the rest of you being
godfathers, or godmothers, or mothers, or fathers, or something. However, I won't dwell on that now. But there's one thing I must say,
and here it is." I raised my glass. "Peter Blair Mannering, and may he
grow up to be a better man than any of us!" Upstairs, in happy innocence of the tremendous task in front of him, the
child slept. Poor baby! We drank solemnly, but without much hope. WINTER SPORT




WINTER SPORT


I.--AN INTRODUCTION

"I had better say at once," I announced as I turned over the wine list,
"that I have come out here to enjoy myself, and enjoy myself I shall. Myra, what shall we drink?" "You had three weeks' honeymoon in October," complained Thomas, "and
you're taking another three weeks now. Don't you ever do any work?" Myra and I smiled at each other. Coming from Thomas, who spends his busy
day leaning up against the wireless installation at the Admiralty, the
remark amused us. "We'll have champagne," said Myra, "because it's our opening night. Archie, after you with the head-waiter." It was due to Dahlia, really, that the Rabbits were hibernating at the
Hotel des Angeliques, Switzerland (central-heated throughout); for she
had been ordered abroad, after an illness, to pull herself together a
little, and her doctor had agreed with Archie that she might as well do
it at a place where her husband could skate. On the point that Peter
should come and skate too, however, Archie was firm. While admitting
that he loved his infant son, he reminded Dahlia that she couldn't
possibly get through Calais and Pontarlier without declaring Peter, and
that the duty on this class of goods was remarkably heavy. Peter,
therefore, was left behind. He had an army of nurses to look after him,
and a stenographer to take down his more important remarks. With a
daily bulletin and a record of his table-talk promised her, Dahlia was
prepared to be content. As for Myra and me, we might have hesitated to take another holiday so
soon, had it not been for a letter I received one morning at breakfast. "Simpson is going." I said. "He has purchased a pair of skis." "That does it," said Myra decisively. And, gurgling happily to herself,
she went out and bought a camera. For Thomas I can find no excuses. At a moment of crisis he left his
country's Navy in jeopardy and, the Admiralty yacht being otherwise
engaged, booked a first return from Cook's. And so it was that at four
o'clock one day we arrived together at the Hotel des Angeliques, and
some three hours later were settling down comfortably to dinner. "I've had a busy time," said Archie. "I've hired a small bob, a luge and
a pair of skis for myself, a pair of snow-shoes and some skates for
Dahlia, a--a tricycle horse for Simpson, and I don't know what else. All
in French." "What _is_ the French for a pair of snow-shoes?" asked Myra. "I pointed to them in French. The undersized Robert I got at a bargain. The man who hired it last week broke his leg before his fortnight was
up, and so there was a reduction of several centimes." "I've been busy too," I said. "I've been watching Myra unpack, and
telling her where not to put my things." "I packed jolly well--except for the accident." "An accident to the boot-oil," I explained. "If I get down to my last
three shirts you will notice it." We stopped eating for a moment in order to drink Dahlia's health. It was
Dahlia's health which had sent us there. "Who's your friend, Samuel?" said Archie, as Simpson caught somebody's
eye at another table and nodded. "A fellow I met in the lift," said Simpson casually. "Samuel, beware of elevator acquaintances," said Myra in her most solemn
manner. "He's rather a good chap. He was at Peterhouse with a friend of mine. He
was telling me quite a good story about a 'wine' my friend gave there
once, when----"

"Did you tell him about your 'ginger-beers' at Giggleswick?" I
interrupted. "My dear old chap, he's rather a man to be in with. He knows the
President." "I thought nobody knew the President of the Swiss Republic," said Myra. "Like the Man in the Iron Mask." "Not _that_ President, Myra. The President of the Angeliques Sports
Club." "Never heard of it," we all said. Simpson polished his glasses and prepared delightedly to give an
explanation. "The Sports Club runs everything here," he began. "It gives you prizes
for fancy costumes and skating and so on." "Introduce me to the President at once," cooed Myra, patting her hair
and smoothing down her frock. "Even if you were the Treasurer's brother," said Archie, "you wouldn't
get a prize for skating, Simpson." "You've never seen him do a rocking seventeen, sideways." Simpson looked at us pityingly. "There's a lot more in it than that," he said. "The President will
introduce you to anybody. One might see--er--somebody one rather liked
the look of, and--er---- Well, I mean in an hotel one wants to enter
into the hotel life and--er--meet other people." "Who is she?" said Myra. "Anybody you want to marry must be submitted to Myra for approval
first," I said. "We've told you so several times." Simpson hastily disclaimed any intention of marrying anybody, and helped
himself lavishly to champagne. It so happened that I was the first of our party to meet the President,
an honour which, perhaps, I hardly deserved. While Samuel was seeking
tortuous introductions to him through friends of Peterhouse friends of
his, the President and I fell into each other's arms in the most natural
way. It occurred like this. There was a dance after dinner; and Myra, not
satisfied with my appearance, sent me upstairs to put some gloves on. (It is one of the penalties of marriage that one is always being sent
upstairs.) With my hands properly shod I returned to the ball-room, and
stood for a moment in a corner while I looked about for her. Suddenly I
heard a voice at my side. "Do you want a partner?" it said. I turned, and knew that I was face to face with the President. "Well----" I began. "You are a new-comer, aren't you? I expect you don't know many people. If there is anybody you would like to dance with----"

I looked round the room. It was too good a chance to miss. "I wonder," I said. "That girl over there--in the pink frock--just
putting up her fan----"

He almost embraced me. "I congratulate you on your taste," he said. "Excellent! Come with me." He went over to the girl in the pink dress, I at his heels. "Er--may I introduce?" he said. "Mr.--er--er--yes, this is
Miss--er--yes. H'r'm." Evidently he didn't know her name. "Thank you," I said to him. He nodded and left us. I turned to the girl
in the pink frock. She was very pretty. "May I have this dance?" I asked. "I've got my gloves on," I added. She looked at me gravely, trying hard not to smile. "You may," said Myra. II.--THE OPENING RUN

With a great effort Simpson strapped his foot securely into a ski and
turned doubtfully to Thomas. "Thomas," he said, "how do you know which foot is which?" "It depends whose," said Thomas. He was busy tying a large rucksack of
lunch on to himself, and was in no mood for Samuel's ball-room chatter. "You've got one ski on one foot," I said. "Then the other ski goes on
the foot you've got over. I should have thought you would have seen
that." "But I may have put the first one on wrong." "You ought to know, after all these years, that you are certain to have
done so," I said severely. Having had my own hired skis fixed on by the
_concierge_ I felt rather superior. Simpson, having bought his in
London, was regarded darkly by that gentleman, and left to his own
devices. "Are we all ready?" asked Myra, who had kept us waiting for twenty
minutes. "Archie, what about Dahlia?" "Dahlia will join us at lunch. She is expecting a letter from Peter by
the twelve o'clock post and refuses to start without it. Also she
doesn't think she is up to ski-ing just yet. Also she wants to have a
heart-to-heart talk with the girl in red, and break it to her that
Thomas is engaged to several people in London already." "Come on," growled Thomas, and he led the way up the hill. We followed
him in single file. It was a day of colour, straight from heaven. On either side the
dazzling whiteness of the snow; above, the deep blue of the sky; in
front of me the glorious apricot of Simpson's winter suiting. London
seemed a hundred years away. It was impossible to work up the least
interest in the Home Rule Bill, the Billiard Tournament, or the state of
St. Paul's Cathedral. "I feel extremely picturesque," said Archie. "If only we had a wolf or
two after us, the illusion would be complete. The Boy Trappers, or
Half-Hours among the Rocky Mountains." "It is a pleasant thought, Archie," I said, "that in any wolf trouble
the bachelors of the party would have to sacrifice themselves for us. Myra dear, the loss of Samuel in such circumstances would draw us very
close together. There might be a loss of Thomas too, perhaps--for if
there was not enough of Simpson to go round, if there was a hungry wolf
left over, would Thomas hesitate?" "No," said Thomas, "I should run like a hare." Simpson said nothing. His face I could not see; but his back looked
exactly like the back of a man who was trying to look as if he had been
brought up on skis from a baby and was now taking a small party of
enthusiastic novices out for their first lesson. "What an awful shock it would be," I said, "if we found that Samuel
really did know something about it after all; and, while we were
tumbling about anyhow, he sailed gracefully down the steepest slopes. I
should go straight back to Cricklewood." "My dear chap, I've read a _lot_ about it." "Then we're quite safe." "With all his faults," said Archie, "and they are many--Samuel is a
gentleman. He would never take an unfair advantage of us. Hallo, here we
are!" We left the road and made our way across the snow to a little wooden hut
which Archie had noticed the day before. Here we were to meet Dahlia
for lunch; and here, accordingly, we left the rucksack and such garments
as the heat of the sun suggested. Then, at the top of a long snow-slope,
steep at first, more gentle later, we stood and wondered. "Who's going first?" said Archie. "What do you do?" asked Myra. "You don't. It does it for you." "But how do you stop?" "Don't bother about that, dear," I said. "That will be arranged for you
all right. Take two steps to the brink of the hill and pick yourself up
at the bottom. Now then, Simpson! Be a man. The lady waits, Samuel. The---- Hallo! Hi! Help!" I cried, as I began to move off slowly. It was
too late to do anything about it. "Good-bye," I called. And then things
moved more quickly.... Very quickly.... Suddenly there came a moment when I realized that I wasn't keeping up
with my feet.... I shouted to my skis to stop. It was no good. They went on.... I decided to stop without them.... The ensuing second went by too swiftly for me to understand rightly what
happened. I fancy that, rising from my sitting position and travelling
easily on my head, I caught my skis up again and passed them....

Then it was their turn. They overtook me.... But I was not to be beaten. Once more I obtained the lead. This time I
took the inside berth, and kept it.... There seemed to be a lot more snow than I really wanted.... I struggled
bravely with it....

And then the earthquake ceased, and suddenly I was in the outer air. My
first ski-run, the most glorious run of modern times, was over. "Ripping!" I shouted up the hill to them. "But there's rather a nasty
bump at the bottom," I added kindly, as I set myself to the impossible
business of getting up....

"Jove," said Archie, coming to rest a few yards off, "that's splendid!" He had fallen in a less striking way than myself, and he got to his feet
without difficulty. "Why do you pose like that?" he asked, as he picked
up his stick. "I'm a fixture," I announced. "Myra," I said, as she turned a somersault
and arrived beaming at my side, "I'm here for some time; you'll have to
come out every morning with crumbs for me. In the afternoon you can
bring a cheering book and read aloud to your husband. Sometimes I shall
dictate little things to you. They will not be my best little things;
for this position, with my feet so much higher than my head, is not the
one in which inspiration comes to me most readily. The flow of blood to
the brain impairs reflection. But no matter." "Are you really stuck?" asked Myra in some anxiety. "I should hate to
have a husband who lived by himself in the snow," she said thoughtfully. "Let us look on the bright side," said Archie. "The snow will have
melted by April, and he will then be able to return to you. Hallo,
here's Thomas! Thomas will probably have some clever idea for restoring
the family credit." Thomas got up in a businesslike manner and climbed slowly back to us. "Thomas," I said, "you see the position. Indeed," I added, "it is
obvious. None of the people round me seems inclined--or, it may be,
able--to help. There is a feeling that if Myra lives in the hotel alone
while I remain here--possibly till April--people will talk. You know how
ready they are. There is also the fact that I have only hired the skis
for three weeks. Also--a minor point, but one that touches me
rather--that I shall want my hair cut long before March is out. Thomas,
imagine me to be a torpedo-destroyer on the Maplin Sands, and tell me
what on earth to do." "Take your skis off." "Oh, brilliant!" said Myra. "Take my skis off?" I cried. "Never! Is it not my duty to be the last to
leave my skis? Can I abandon---- Hallo! is that Dahlia on the sky-line? Hooray, lunch! Archie, take my skis off, there's a good fellow. We
mustn't keep Dahlia waiting." III.--A TYPICAL MORNING

"You take lunch out to-day--no?" said Josef, the head-waiter, in his
invariable formula. Myra and I were alone at breakfast, the first down. I was just putting
some honey on to my seventh roll, and was not really in the mood for
light conversation with Josef about lunch. By the way, I must say I
prefer the good old English breakfast. With eggs and bacon and porridge
you do know when you want to stop; with rolls and honey you hardly
notice what you are doing, and there seems no reason why you should not
go on for ever. Indeed, once ... but you would never believe me. "We take lunch out to-day, _yes_, Josef. Lunch for--let me see----"

"Six?" suggested Myra. "What are we all going to do? Archie said something about skating. I'm
off that." "But whatever we do we must lunch, and it's much nicer outdoors. Six,
Josef." Josef nodded and retired. I took my eighth roll. "Do let's get off quickly to-day," I said. "There's always so much chat
in the morning before we start." "I've just got one swift letter to write," said Myra, as she got up,
"and then I shall be pawing the ground." Half an hour later I was in the lounge, booted, capped, gloved, and
putteed--the complete St. Bernard. The lounge seemed to be entirely full
of hot air and entirely empty of anybody I knew. I asked for letters;
and, getting none, went out and looked at the thermometer. To my
surprise I discovered that there were thirty-seven degrees of frost. A
little alarmed, I tapped the thing impatiently. "Come, come," I said,
"this is not the time for persiflage." However, it insisted on remaining
at five degrees below zero. What I should have done about it I cannot
say, but at that moment I remembered that it was a Centigrade
thermometer with the freezing point in the wrong place. Slightly
disappointed that there were only five degrees of frost (Centigrade) I
returned to the lounge. "Here you are at last," said Archie impatiently. "What are we all going
to do?" "Where's Dahlia?" asked Myra. "Let's wait till she comes and then we can
all talk at once." "Here she is. Dahlia, for Heaven's sake come and tell us the
arrangements for the day. Start with the idea fixed in your mind that
Myra and I have ordered lunch for six." Dahlia shepherded us to a quiet corner of the lounge and we all sat
down. "By the way," said Simpson, "are there any letters for me?" "No; it's your turn to write," said Archie. "But, my dear chap, there _must_ be one, because----"

"But you never acknowledged the bed-socks," I pointed out. "She can't
write till you---- I mean, it was rather forward of her to send them at
all; and if you haven't even----"

"Well," said Dahlia, "what does anybody want to do?" Thomas was the first to answer the question. A girl in red came in from
the breakfast-room and sat down near us. She looked up in our direction
and met Thomas's eye. "Good morning," said Thomas, with a smile, and he left us and moved
across to her. "That's the girl he danced with all last night," whispered Myra. "I
can't think what's come over him. Is this our reserved Thomas--Thomas
the taciturn, whom we know and love so well? I don't like the way she
does her hair." "She's a Miss Aylwyn," said Simpson in a loud voice. "I had one dance
with her myself." "The world," said Archie, "is full of people with whom Samuel has had
one dance." "Well, that washes Thomas out, anyway. He'll spend the day teaching her
something. What are the rest of us going to do?" There was a moment's silence. "Oh, Archie," said Dahlia, "did you get those nails put in my boots?" I looked at Myra ... and sighed. "Sorry, dear," he said. "I'll take them down now. The man will do them
in twenty minutes." He walked over to the lift at the same moment that
Thomas returned to us. "I say," began Thomas, a little awkwardly, "if you're arranging what to
do, don't bother about me. I rather thought of--er--taking it quietly
this morning. 