



Produced by Bryan Ness, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.) VIKING TALES


[Decoration]


[Illustration: _A map showing the journeys of the Vikings_]




          VIKING TALES
              _by_
          JENNIE HALL
 _The Francis W. Parker School_
          _Chicago_


         [Illustration]


          ILLUSTRATED
              _by_
           VICTOR R.
            LAMBDIN


       RAND McNALLY & CO

      _Chicago_ _New York_
            _London_




 _Copyright, 1902,_
   By JENNIE HALL

      [Device]
   Made in U.S.A.




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Diacritical marks, found in the _Pronouncing Index_, are represented
    as follows:

      [=x] any character with upper macron
      [)x] ... with upper breve
      [.x] ... with upper dot
      [x:] ... with lower diaeresis
      [~x] ... with upper tilde
      [+x] ... with upper up tack




_The_ Table _of_ Contents


                                     PAGE
 _A List of the Illustrations_          8
 _What the Sagas Were_                  9


PART I. _IN NORWAY_

 The Baby                              15
 The Tooth Thrall                      19
 Olaf's Farm                           27
 Olaf's Fight with Havard              40
 Foes'-fear                            47
 Harald is King                        53
 Harald's Battle                       62
 Gyda's Saucy Message                  71
 The Sea Fight                         81
 King Harald's Wedding                 89
 King Harald Goes West-Over-Seas       95


PART II. _WEST-OVER-SEAS_

 Homes in Iceland                     103
 Eric the Red                         143
 Leif and His New Land                161
 Wineland the Good                    174

 _Descriptive Notes_                  194
 _Suggestions to Teachers_            200
 _A Reading List_                     204
 _A Pronouncing Index_                207




A List of the Illustrations


                                                                    PAGE

 _A map showing the journeys of the Vikings_                Frontispiece

 "_I own this baby for my son. He shall be called Harald_"            17

 "_He threw back his cape and drew a little dagger from his
     belt_"                                                           22

 "_I struck my shield against the door so that it made a
     great clanging_"                                                 31

 "_Then he turned to the shore and sang out loudly_"                  45

 "_He drove it into the wolf's neck_"                                 51

 "_I vow that I will grind my father's foes under my heel_"           59

 "_King Haki fell dead under 'Foes'-fear'_"                           68

 "_I will not be his wife unless he puts all of Norway
     under him for my sake_"                                          73

 "_Then he leaped into King Arnvid's boat_"                           87

 "_I, Harald, King of Norway, take you, Gyda, for my wife_"           91

 "_In Norway they left burning houses and weeping women_"             97

 "_Then he saw that Leif's ship was being driven afar off_"          125

 "_Those Icelanders clapped them on the shoulders_"                  137

 "_He looked straight ahead of him and scowled_"                     145

 "_More than half the men in the hall jumped to their feet_"         147

 "_It is a bigger boat than I ever saw before_"                      153

 "_He pointed to the woods and laughed and rolled his eyes_"         167

 "_The chief held them out to Thorfinn and hugged the cloak
     to him_"                                                        187




What _the_ Sagas Were


Iceland is a little country far north in the cold sea. Men found it and
went there to live more than a thousand years ago. During the warm
season they used to fish and make fish-oil and hunt sea-birds and gather
feathers and tend their sheep and make hay. But the winters were long
and dark and cold. Men and women and children stayed in the house and
carded and spun and wove and knit. A whole family sat for hours around
the fire in the middle of the room. That fire gave the only light. Shadows flitted in the dark corners. Smoke curled along the high beams
in the ceiling. The children sat on the dirt floor close by the fire. The grown people were on a long narrow bench that they had pulled up to
the light and warmth. Everybody's hands were busy with wool. The work
left their minds free to think and their lips to talk. What was there to
talk about? The summer's fishing, the killing of a fox, a voyage to
Norway. But the people grew tired of this little gossip. Fathers looked
at their children and thought:

"They are not learning much. What will make them brave and wise? What
will teach them to love their country and old Norway? Will not the
stories of battles, of brave deeds, of mighty men, do this?" So, as the family worked in the red fire-light, the father told of the
kings of Norway, of long voyages to strange lands, of good fights. And
in farmhouses all through Iceland these old tales were told over and
over until everybody knew them and loved them. Some men could sing and
play the harp. This made the stories all the more interesting. People
called such men "skalds," and they called their songs "sagas." Every midsummer there was a great meeting. Men from all over Iceland
came to it and made laws. During the day there were rest times, when no
business was going on. Then some skald would take his harp and walk to a
large stone or a knoll and stand on it and begin a song of some brave
deed of an old Norse hero. At the first sound of the harp and the
voice, men came running from all directions, crying out:

"The skald! The skald! A saga!" They stood about for hours and listened. They shouted applause. When the
skald was tired, some other man would come up from the crowd and sing or
tell a story. As the skald stepped down from his high position, some
rich man would rush up to him and say:

"Come and spend next winter at my house. Our ears are thirsty for song." So the best skalds traveled much and visited many people. Their songs
made them welcome everywhere. They were always honored with good seats
at a feast. They were given many rich gifts. Even the King of Norway
would sometimes send across the water to Iceland, saying to some famous
skald:

"Come and visit me. You shall not go away empty-handed. Men say that the
sweetest songs are in Iceland. I wish to hear them." These tales were not written. Few men wrote or read in those days. Skalds learned songs from hearing them sung. At last people began to
write more easily. Then they said:

"These stories are very precious. We must write them down to save them
from being forgotten." After that many men in Iceland spent their winters in writing books. They wrote on sheepskin; vellum, we call it. Many of these old vellum
books have been saved for hundreds of years, and are now in museums in
Norway. Some leaves are lost, some are torn, all are yellow and
crumpled. But they are precious. They tell us all that we know about
that olden time. There are the very words that the men of Iceland wrote
so long ago--stories of kings and of battles and of ship-sailing. Some
of those old stories I have told in this book. _PART I_

[Illustration]

_IN_ NORWAY


[Decoration]




[Illustration]

The Baby


King Halfdan lived in Norway long ago. One morning his queen said to
him:

"I had a strange dream last night. I thought that I stood in the grass
before my bower. [1] I pulled a thorn from my dress. As I held it in my
fingers, it grew into a tall tree. The trunk was thick and red as blood,
but the lower limbs were fair and green, and the highest ones were
white. I thought that the branches of this great tree spread so far that
they covered all Norway and even more." "A strange dream," said King Halfdan. "Dreams are the messengers of the
gods. I wonder what they would tell us," and he stroked his beard in
thought. Some time after that a serving-woman came into the feast hall where King
Halfdan was. She carried a little white bundle in her arms. "My lord," she said, "a little son is just born to you." "Ha!" cried the king, and he jumped up from the high seat and hastened
forward until he stood before the woman. "Show him to me!" he shouted, and there was joy in his voice. The serving-woman put down her bundle on the ground and turned back the
cloth. There was a little naked baby. The king looked at it carefully. "It is a goodly youngster," he said, and smiled. "Bring Ivar and
Thorstein. "[2]

They were captains of the king's soldiers. Soon they came. "Stand as witnesses," Halfdan said. Then he lifted the baby in his arms, while the old serving-woman brought
a silver bowl of water. The king dipped his hand into it and sprinkled
the baby, saying:

"I own this baby for my son. He shall be called Harald. My naming gift
to him is ten pounds of gold." Then the woman carried the baby back to the queen's room. [Illustration: "_I own this baby for my son. He shall be called
Harald_"]

"My lord owns him for his son," she said. "And no wonder! He is perfect
in every limb." The queen looked at him and smiled and remembered her dream and thought:

"That great tree! Can it be this little baby of mine?" [Decoration]


FOOTNOTES:

[1] See note about house on page 194. [2] See note about names on page 194. [Illustration]

The Tooth Thrall


When Harald was seven months old he cut his first tooth. Then his father
said:

"All the young of my herds, lambs and calves and colts, that have been
born since this baby was born I this day give to him. I also give to him
this thrall, Olaf. These are my tooth-gifts to my son." The boy grew fast, for as soon as he could walk about he was out of
doors most of the time. He ran in the woods and climbed the hills and
waded in the creek. He was much with his tooth thrall, for the king had
said to Olaf:

"Be ever at his call." Now this Olaf was full of stories, and Harald liked to hear them. "Come out to Aegir's Rock, Olaf, and tell me stories," he said almost
every day. So they started off across the hills. The man wore a long, loose coat of
white wool, belted at the waist with a strap. He had on coarse shoes
and leather leggings. Around his neck was an iron collar welded together
so that it could not come off. On it were strange marks, called runes,
that said:

"Olaf, thrall of Halfdan." But Harald's clothes were gay. A cape of gray velvet hung from his
shoulders. It was fastened over his breast with great gold buckles. When
it waved in the wind, a scarlet lining flashed out, and the bottom of a
little scarlet jacket showed. His feet and legs were covered with gray
woolen tights. Gold lacings wound around his legs from his shoes to his
knees. A band of gold held down his long, yellow hair. It was a wild country that these two were walking over. They were
climbing steep, rough hills. Some of them seemed made all of rock, with
a little earth lying in spots. Great rocks hung out from them, with
trees growing in their cracks. Some big pieces had broken off and rolled
down the hill. "Thor broke them," Olaf said. "He rides through the sky and hurls his
hammer at clouds and at mountains. That makes the thunder and the
lightning and cracks the hills. His hammer never misses its aim, and it
always comes back to his hand and is eager to go again." When they reached the top of the hill they looked back. Far below was a
soft, green valley. In front of it the sea came up into the land and
made a fiord. On each side of the fiord high walls of rock stood up and
made the water black with shadow. All around the valley were high hills
with dark pines on them. Far off were the mountains. In the valley were
Halfdan's houses around their square yard. "How little our houses look down there!" Harald said. "But I can
almost--yes, I can see the red dragon on the roof of the feast hall. Do
you remember when I climbed up and sat on his head, Olaf?" He laughed and kicked his heels and ran on. [Illustration: "_He threw back his cape and drew a little dagger from
his belt_"]

At last they came to Aegir's Rock and walked up on its flat top. Harald
went to the edge and looked over. A ragged wall of rock reached down,
and two hundred feet below was the black water of the fiord. Olaf
watched him for a while, then he said:

"No whitening of your cheek, Harald? Good! A boy that can face the fall
of Aegir's Rock will not be afraid to face the war flash when he is a
man." "Ho, I am not afraid of the war flash now," cried Harald. He threw back his cape and drew a little dagger from his belt. "See!" he cried; "does this not flash like a sword? And I am not afraid. But after all, this is a baby thing! When I am eight years old I will
have a sword, a sharp tooth of war." He swung his dagger as though it were a long sword. Then he ran and sat
on a rock by Olaf. "Why is this Aegir's Rock?" he asked. "You know that Asgard is up in the sky," Olaf said. "It is a wonderful
city where the golden houses of the gods are in the golden grove. A
high wall runs all around it. In the house of Odin, the All-father,
there is a great feast hall larger than the whole earth. Its name is
Valhalla. It has five hundred doors. The rafters are spears. The roof is
thatched with shields. Armor lies on the benches. In the high seat sits
Odin, a golden helmet on his head, a spear in his hand. Two wolves lie
at his feet. At his right hand and his left sit all the gods and
goddesses, and around the hall sit thousands and thousands of men, all
the brave ones that have ever died. "Now it is good to be in Valhalla; for there is mead there better than
men can brew, and it never runs out. And there are skalds that sing
wonderful songs that men never heard. And before the doors of Valhalla
is a great meadow where the warriors fight every day and get glorious
and sweet wounds and give many. And all night they feast, and their
wounds heal. But none may go to Valhalla except warriors that have died
bravely in battle. Men who die from sickness go with women and children
and cowards to Niflheim. There Hela, who is queen, always sneers at
them, and a terrible cold takes hold of their bones, and they sit down
and freeze. "Years ago Aegir was a great warrior. Aegir the Big-handed, they called
him. In many a battle his sword had sung, and he had sent many warriors
to Valhalla. Many swords had bit into his flesh and left marks there,
but never a one had struck him to death. So his hair grew white and his
arms thin. There was peace in that country then, and Aegir sorrowed,
saying:

"'I am old. Battles are still. Must I die in bed like a woman? Shall I
not see Valhalla?' "Now thus did Odin say long ago:

"'If a man is old and is come near death and cannot die in fight, let
him find death in some brave way and he shall feast with me in
Valhalla.' "So one day Aegir came to this rock. "'A deed to win Valhalla!' he cried. "Then he drew his sword and flashed it over his head and held his shield
high above him, and leaped out into the air and died in the water of
the fiord." "Ho!" cried Harald, jumping to his feet. "I think that Odin stood up
before his high seat and welcomed that man gladly when he walked through
the door of Valhalla." "So the songs say," replied Olaf, "for skalds still sing of that deed
all over Norway." [Decoration]




[Illustration]

Olaf's Farm


At another time Harald asked:

"What is your country, Olaf? Have you always been a thrall?" The thrall's eyes flashed. "When you are a man," he said, "and go a-viking to Denmark, ask men
whether they ever heard of Olaf the Crafty. There, far off, is my
country, across the water. My father was Gudbrand the Big. Two hundred
warriors feasted in his hall and followed him to battle. Ten sons sat at
meat with him, and I was the youngest. One day he said:

"'You are all grown to be men. There is not elbow-room here for so many
chiefs. The eldest of you shall have my farm when I die. The rest of
you, off a-viking!' "He had three ships. These he gave to three of my brothers. But I stayed
that spring and built me a boat. I made her for only twenty oars because
I thought few men would follow me; for I was young, fifteen years old. I made her in the likeness of a dragon. At the prow I carved the head
with open mouth and forked tongue thrust out. I painted the eyes red for
anger. "'There, stand so!' I said, 'and glare and hiss at my foes.' "In the stern I curved the tail up almost as high as the head. There I
put the pilot's seat and a strong tiller for the rudder. On the breast
and sides I carved the dragon's scales. Then I painted it all black and
on the tip of every scale I put gold. I called her 'Waverunner.' There
she sat on the rollers, as fair a ship as I ever saw. "The night that it was finished I went to my father's feast. After the
meats were eaten and the mead-horns came round, I stood up from my bench
and raised my drinking-horn[3] high and spoke with a great voice:

"'This is my vow: I will sail to Norway and I will harry the coast and
fill my boat with riches. Then I will get me a farm and will winter in
that land. Now who will follow me?' "'He is but a boy,' the men said. 'He has opened his mouth wider than he
can do.' "But others jumped to their feet with their mead-horns in their hands. Thirty men, one after another, raised their horns and said:

"'I will follow this lad, and I will not turn back so long as he and I
live!' "On the next morning we got into my dragon and started. I sat high in
the pilot's seat. As our boat flashed down the rollers into the water I
made this song and sang it:

    "'The dragon runs. Where will she steer? Where swords will sing,
    Where spears will bite,
    Where I shall laugh.' "So we harried the coast of Norway. We ate at many men's tables
uninvited. Many men we found overburdened with gold. Then I said:

"'My dragon's belly is never full,' and on board went the gold. "Oh! it is better to live on the sea and let other men raise your crops
and cook your meals. A house smells of smoke, a ship smells of frolic. From a house you see a sooty roof, from a ship you see Valhalla. "Up and down the water we went to get much wealth and much frolic. After
a while my men said:

"'What of the farm, Olaf?' "'Not yet,' I answered. 'Viking is better for summer. When the ice
comes, and our dragon cannot play, then we will get our farm and sit
down.' "At last the winter came, and I said to my men:

"'Now for the farm. I have my eye on one up the coast a way in King
Halfdan's country.' "So we set off for it. We landed late at night and pulled our boat up on
shore and walked quietly to the house. It was rather a wealthy farm, for
there were stables and a storehouse and a smithy at the sides of the
house. There was but one door to the house. We went to it, and I struck
it with my spear. [Illustration: "_I struck my shield against the door so that it made a
great clanging_"]

"'Hello! Ho! Hello!' I shouted, and my men made a great din. "At last some one from inside said:

"'Who calls?' "'I call,' I answered. 'Open! or you will think it Thor who calls,' and
I struck my shield against the door so that it made a great clanging. "The door opened only a little, but I pushed it wide and leaped into the
room. It was so dark that I could see nothing but a few sparks on the
hearth. I stood with my back to the wall; for I wanted no sword reaching
out of the dark for me. "'Now start up the fire,' I said. "'Come, come!' I called, when no one obeyed. 'A fire! This is cold
welcome for your guests.' "My men laughed. "'Yes, a stingy host! He acts as though he had not expected us.' "But now the farmer was blowing on the coals and putting on fresh wood. Soon it blazed up, and we could see about us. We were in a little feast
hall,[4] with its fire down the middle of it. There were benches for
twenty men along each side. The farmer crouched by the fire, afraid to
move. On a bench in a far corner were a dozen people huddled together. "'Ho, thralls!' I called to them. 'Bring in the table. We are hungry.' "Off they ran through a door at the back of the hall. My men came in and
lay down by the fire and warmed themselves, but I set two of them as
guards at the door. "'Well, friend farmer,' laughed one, 'why such a long face? Do you not
think we shall be merry company?' "'We came only to cheer you,' said another. 'What man wants to spend the
winter with no guests?' "'Ah!' another then cried out, sitting up. 'Here comes something that
will be a welcome guest to my stomach.' "The thralls were bringing in a great pot of meat. They set up a crane
over the fire and hung the pot upon it, and we sat and watched it boil
while we joked. At last the supper began. The farmer sat gloomily on the
bench and would not eat, and you cannot wonder; for he saw us putting
potfuls of his good beef and basket-loads of bread into our big mouths. When the tables were taken out and the mead-horns came round, I stood up
and raised my horn and said to the farmer:

"'You would not eat with us. You cannot say no to half of my ale. I
drink this to your health.' "Then I drank half of the hornful and sent the rest across the fire to
the farmer. He took it and smiled, saying:

"'Since it is to my health, I will drink it. I thought that all this
night's work would be my death.' "'Oh, do not fear that!' I laughed, 'for a dead man sets no tables.' "So we drank and all grew merrier. At last I stood up and said:

"'I like this little taste of your hospitality, friend farmer. I have
decided to accept more of it.' "My men roared with laughter. "'Come,' they cried, 'thank him for that, farmer. Did you ever have such
a lordly guest before?' "I went on:

"'Now there is no fun in having guests unless they keep you company and
make you merry. So I will give out this law: that my men shall never
leave you alone. Hakon there shall be your constant companion, friend
farmer. He shall not leave you day or night, whether you are working or
playing or sleeping. Leif and Grim shall be the same kind of friends to
your two sons.' "I named nine others and said:

"'And these shall follow your thralls in the same way. Now, am I not
careful to make your time go merrily?' "So I set guards over every one in that house. Not once all that winter
did they stir out of sight of some of us. So no tales got out to the
neighbors. Besides, it was a lonely place, and by good luck no one came
that way. Oh! that was fat and easy living. "Well, after we had been there for a long time, Hakon came in to the
feast one night and said:

"'I heard a cuckoo to-day!' "'It is the call to go a-viking,' I said. "All my men put their hands to their mouths and shouted. Their eyes
danced. Big Thorleif stood up and stretched himself. "'I am stiff with long sitting,' he said. 'I itch for a fight.' "I turned to the farmer. "'This is our last feast with you,' I said. "'Well,' he laughed, 'this has been the busiest winter I ever spent, and
the merriest. May good luck go with you!' "'By the beard of Odin!' I cried; 'you have taken our joke like a man.' "My men pounded the table with their fists. "'By the hammer of Thor!' shouted Grim. 'Here is no stingy coward. He is
a man fit to carry my drinking-horn, the horn of a sea-rover and a
sword-swinger. Here, friend, take it,' and he thrust it into the
farmer's hand. 'May you drink heart's-ease from it for many years. And
with it I leave you a name, Sif the Friendly. I shall hope to drink with
you sometime in Valhalla.' "Then all my men poured around that farmer and clapped him on the
shoulder and piled things upon him, saying:

"'Here is a ring for Sif the Friendly.' "'And here is a bracelet.' "'A sword would not be ashamed to hang at your side.' "I took five great bracelets of gold from our treasure chest and gave
them to him. "The old man's eyes opened wide at all these things, and at the same
time he laughed. "'May Odin send me such guests every winter!' he said. "Early next morning we shook hands with our host and boarded the
'Waverunner' and sailed off. "'Where shall we go?' my men asked. "'Let the gods decide,' I said, and tossed up my spear. "When it fell on the deck it pointed up-shore, so I steered in that
direction. That is the best way to decide, for the spear will always
point somewhere, and one thing is as good as another. That time it
pointed us into your father's ships. They closed in battle with us and
killed my men and sunk my ship and dragged me off a prisoner. They were
three against one, or they might have tasted something more bitter at
our hands. They took me before King Halfdan. "'Here,' they said, 'is a rascal who has been harrying our coasts. We
sunk his ship and men, but him we brought to you.' "'A robber viking?' said the king, and scowled at me. "I threw back my head and laughed. "'Yes. And with all your fingers it took you a year to catch me.' "The king frowned more angrily. "'Saucy, too?' he said. 'Well, thieves must die. Take him out, Thorkel,
and let him taste your sword.' "Your mother, the queen, was standing by. Now she put her hand on his
arm and smiled and said:

"'He is only a lad. Let him live. And would he not be a good gift for
our baby?' "Your father thought a moment, then looked at your mother and smiled. "'Soft heart!' he said gently to her; then to Thorkel, 'Well, let him
go, Thorkel!' "Then he turned to me again, frowning. "'But, young sharp-tongue, now that we have caught you we will put you
into a trap that you cannot get out of. Weld an iron collar on his
neck.' "So I lived and now am your tooth thrall. Well, it is the luck of war. But by the chair of Odin, I kept my vow!" "Yes!" cried Harald, jumping to his feet. "And had a joke into the
bargain. Ah! sometime I will make a brave vow like that." [Decoration]


FOOTNOTES:

[3] See note about drinking-horns on page 195. [4] See note about feast hall on page 196. [Illustration]

Olaf's Fight With Havard


At another time Harald said:

"Tell me of a fight, Olaf. I want to hear about the music of swords." Olaf's eyes blazed. "I will tell you of our fight with King Havard," he said. "One dark night we had landed at a farm. We left our 'Waverunner' in the
water with three men to guard her. The rest of us went into the house. The farmer met us at the door, but he died by Thorkel's sword. The
others we shut into their beds. [5] The door at each end of the hall we
had barred on the inside so that nobody could surprise us. We were busy
going through the cupboards and shouting at our good luck. But suddenly
we heard a shout outside:

"'Thor and Havard!' "Then there was a great beating at the doors. "'He has two hundred fighters with him,' said Grim; 'for we saw his
ships last night. Thirty against two hundred! We shall all drink in
Valhalla to-night.' "'Well,' I cried, 'Odin shall have no unwilling guest in me.' "'Nor in me,' cried Hakon. "'Nor in me,' shouted Thorkel. "And that shout went all around, and we drew out our swords and caught
up our shields. "'Hot work is ahead of us,' said Hakon. 'Besides, we must leave none of
this mead for Havard. Lend a hand, some one.' "Then he and another pulled out a great tub that sat on the floor of the
cupboard. "'I drink to Valhalla to-night,' cried Thorkel the Thirsty, and he
plunged his horn deep into the tub. "When he brought it up, his sleeve was dripping and the sweet mead was
running over from the horn. "'Sloven!' cried Hakon, and he struck Thorkel with his fist and knocked
him over into the cupboard. "He fell against the wooden wall at the back, and a carved panel swung
open behind him. He dropped down head first. In a minute he put his head
out of the hole again. We all stood staring. "'I think it is a secret passage,' he said. "'We will try it,' I answered in a whisper. 'Throw dirt on the fire. It
must be dark.' "So we dug up dirt from the earth floor and smothered the fire. All this
time there was a terrible shouting and hammering at the doors, but they
were of heavy logs and stood. "'I with four more will guard this door,' I said, pointing to the east
end. "Immediately four men stepped to my side. "'And I will guard the other,' Hakon said, and four went with him. "'The rest of you, down the hole!' I said. 'Close the door after you. If
luck is with us we will meet at the ships. Now Thor and our good swords
help us! Quick! The doors are giving way.' "So we ten men stood at the doors and held back the king's soldiers. It
was dark in the room, and the people out of doors could not tell how
many were inside. Few were eager to be the first in. "'Thirty swords are waiting in there to eat up the first man,' we heard
some one say. "We chuckled at that. "But the king stood in the very doorway and fought. Our five swords held
him back for a long time, but at last he pushed in, and his men poured
after him. We ran back and hid behind some tubs in a dark corner. The
king's men went groping about and calling, but they did not find us. The
room was full of shouting and running and sword-clashing; for in the
dark and the noise the men could not tell their own soldiers. More than
one fell by his friend's sword. When it was less crowded about the
doorway, I whispered:

"'Follow me in double line. We will make for the ships. Keep close
together.' "So that double line of men, with swords swinging from both sides, ran
out through the dark. Swords struck out at us, and we struck back. Men
ran after us shouting, but our legs were as good as theirs. But I and
Hakon and one other were all that reached the ship. There we saw our
'Waverunner' with sail up and bow pointing to open sea. We swam out to
her and climbed aboard. Then the men swung the sail to the wind, and we
moved off. Even as we went, a spear whizzed through the air, and Hakon
fell dead; for the king and all his men were running to the shore. "'After them!' they were shouting. "Then we heard the king call to the men in his boats lying out in the
water:

"'Row to shore and take us in.' "Thorkel was standing by my side. At that he laughed and said:

"'They do not answer. He left but a handful to guard his ships. They
tasted our swords. And we went aboard and broke the oars and threw the
sails into the water. It will be slow going for Havard to-night.' [Illustration: "_Then he turned to the shore and sang out loudly_"]

"Then he turned to the shore and sang out loudly:

    "'King Havard's ships are dead:
    Olaf's dragon flies. King Havard stamps the shore:
    Olaf skims the waves. King Havard shakes his fist. Olaf turns and laughs.' "That was the end of our meeting with King Havard." [Decoration]


FOOTNOTES:

[5] See note about beds on page 196. [Illustration]

Foes'-fear


Every day the boy Harald heard some such story of war or of the gods,
until he could see Thor riding among the storm-clouds and throwing his
hammer, until he knew that a brave man has many wounds, but never a one
on his back. Many nights he dreamed that he himself walked into
Valhalla, and that all the heroes stood up and shouted:

"Welcome! Harald Halfdanson!" "Ah! the bite of the sword is sweeter than the kiss of your mother," he
said to Olaf one day. "When shall I stand in the prow of a dragon and
feast on the fight? I am hungry to see the world. Ivar the Far-goer
tells me of the strange countries he has seen. Ah! we vikings are great
folk. There is no water that has not licked our boats' sides. This cape
of mine came in a viking boat from France. These cloak-pins came from a
far country called Greece. In my father's house are golden cups from
Rome, away on the southern sea. Every land pours rich things into our
treasure-chest. Ivar has been to a strange country where it is all sand
and is very hot. The people call their country Arabia. They have never
heard of Thor or Odin. Ivar brought beautiful striped cloth from there,
and wonderful, sweet-smelling waters. Oh! when shall the white horses of
the sea lead me out to strange lands and glorious battles?" But Harald did something besides listen to stories. Every morning he was
up at sunrise and went with a thrall to feed the hunting dogs. Thorstein
taught him to swim in the rough waters of the fiord. Often he went with
the men a-hunting in the woods and learned to ride a horse and pull a
bow and throw a lance. Ivar taught him to play the harp and to make up
songs. He went much to the smithy, where the warriors mended their
helmets and made their spears and swords of iron and bronze. At first he
only watched the men or worked the bellows, but soon he could handle the
tongs and hold the red-hot iron, and after a long time he learned to
use the hammer and to shape metal. One day he made himself a spear-head. It was two feet long and sharp on both edges. While the iron was hot he
beat into it some runes. When the men in the smithy saw the runes they
opened their eyes wide and looked at the boy, for few Norsemen could
read. "What does it say?" they asked. "It is the name of my spear-point, and it says, 'Foes'-fear,'" Harald
said. "But now for a handle." It was winter and the snow was very deep. So Harald put on his skees and
started for a wood that was back from shore. Down the mountains he went,
twenty, thirty feet at a slide, leaping over chasms a hundred feet
across. In his scarlet cloak he looked like a flash of fire. The wind
shot past him howling. His eyes danced at the fun. "It is like flying," he thought and laughed. "I am an eagle. Now I
soar," as he leaped over a frozen river. He saw a slender ash growing on top of a high rock. "That is the handle for 'Foes'-fear,'" he said. The rock stood up like a ragged tower, but he did not stop because of
the steep climb. He threw off his skees and thrust his hands and feet
into holes of the rock and drew himself up. He tore his jacket and cut
his leather leggings and scratched his face and bruised his hands, but
at last he was on the top. Soon he had chopped down the tree and had cut
a straight pole ten feet long and as big around as his arm. He went
down, sliding and jumping and tearing himself on the sharp stones. With
a last leap he landed near his skees. As he did so a lean wolf jumped
and snapped at him, snarling. Harald shouted and swung his pole. The
wolf dodged, but quickly jumped again and caught the boy's arm between
his sharp teeth. Harald thought of the spear-point in his belt. In a
wink he had it out and was striking with it. He drove it into the wolf's
neck and threw him back on the snow, dead. "You are the first to feel the tooth of 'Foes'-fear,'" he said, "but I
think you will not be the last." [Illustration: "_He drove it into the wolf's neck_"]

Then without thinking of his torn arm he put on his skees and went
leaping home. He went straight to the smithy and smoothed his pole and
drove it into the haft of the spear-point. He hammered out a gold band
and put it around the joining place. He made nails with beautiful heads
and drove them into the pole in different places. "If it is heavy it will strike hard," he said. Then he weighed the spear in his hand and found the balancing point and
put another gold band there to mark it. Thorstein came in while he was working. "A good spear," he said. Then he saw the torn sleeve and the red wound beneath. "Hello!" he cried. "Your first wound?" "Oh, it is only a wolf-scratch," Harald answered. "By Thor!" cried Thorstein, "I see that you are ready for better wounds. You bear this like a warrior." "I think it will not be my last," Harald said. [Illustration]

Harald is King


Now when Harald was ten years old his father, King Halfdan, died. An old
book that tells about Harald says that then "he was the biggest of all
men, the strongest, and the fairest to look upon." That about a boy ten
years old! But boys grew fast in those days for they were out of doors
all the time, running, swimming, leaping on skees, and hunting in the
forest. All that makes big, manly boys. So now King Halfdan was dead and buried, and Harald was to be king. But
first he must drink his father's funeral ale. "Take down the gay tapestries that hang in the feast hall," he said to
the thralls. "Put up black and gray ones. Strew the floor with pine
branches. Brew twenty tubs of fresh ale and mead. Scour every dish until
it shines." Then Harald sent messengers all over that country to his kinsmen and
friends. "Bid them come in three months' time to drink my father's funeral ale,"
he said. "Tell them that no one shall go away empty-handed." So in three months men came riding up at every hour. Some came in boats. But many had ridden far through mountains, swimming rivers; for there
were few roads or bridges in Norway. On account of that hard ride no
women came to the feast. At nine o'clock in the night the feast began. The men came walking in at
the west end of the hall. [6] The great bonfires down the middle of the
room were flashing light on everything. The clean smell of this
wood-smoke and of the pine branches on the floor was pleasant to the
guests. Down each side of the hall stretched long, backless benches,
with room for three hundred men. In the middle of each side rose the
high seat, a great carved chair on a platform. All along behind the
benches were the black and gray draperies. Here hung the shields of the
guests; for every man, when he was given his place, turned and hung his
shield behind him and set his tall spear by it. So on each wall there
was a long row of gay shields, red and green and yellow, and all shining
with gold or bronze trimmings. And higher up there was another row of
gleaming spear-points. Above the hall the rafters were carved and gaily
painted, so that dragons seemed to be crawling across, or eagles seemed
to be swooping down. The guests walked in laughing and talking with their big voices so that
the rafters rang. They made the hall look all the brighter with their
clothes of scarlet and blue and green, with their flashing golden
bracelets and head-bands and sword-scabbards, with their flying hair of
red or yellow. Across the east end of the hall was a bench. When the men were all in,
the queen, Harald's mother, and the women who lived with her, walked in
through the east door and sat upon this bench. Then thralls came running in and set up the long tables[7] before the
benches. Other thralls ran in with large steaming kettles of meat. They
put big pieces of this meat into platters of wood and set it before the
men. They had a few dishes of silver. These they put before the guests
at the middle of the tables; for the great people sat here near the high
seats. When the meat came, the talking stopped; for Norsemen ate only twice a
day, and these men had had long rides and were hungry. Three or four
persons ate from one platter and drank from the same big bowl of milk. They had no forks, so they ate from their fingers and threw the bones
under the table among the pine branches. Sometimes they took knives from
their belts to cut the meat. When the guests sat back satisfied, Harald called to the thralls:

"Carry out the tables." So they did and brought in two great tubs of mead and set one at each
end of the hall. Then the queen stood up and called some of her women. They went to the mead tubs. They took the horns, when the thralls had
filled them, and carried them to the men with some merry word. Perhaps
one woman said as she handed a man his horn:

"This horn has no feet to be set down upon. You must drink it at one
draught." Perhaps another said:

"Mead loves a merry face." The women were beautiful, moving about the hall. The queen wore a
trailing dress of blue velvet with long flowing sleeves. She had a short
apron of striped Arabian silk with gold fringe along the bottom. From
her shoulders hung a long train of scarlet wool embroidered in gold. White linen covered her head. Her long yellow hair was pulled around at
the sides and over her breast and was fastened under the belt of her
apron. As she walked, her train made a pleasant rustle among the pine
branches. She was tall and straight and strong. Some of her younger
women wore no linen on their heads and had their white arms bare, with
bracelets shining on them. They, too, were tall and strong. All the time men were calling across the fire to one another asking news
or telling jokes and laughing. An old man, Harald's uncle, sat in the high seat on the north side. That
was the place of honor. But the high seat on the south side was empty;
for that was the king's seat. Harald sat on the steps before it. The feast went merrily until long after midnight. Then the thralls took
some of the guests to the guest house to sleep, and some to the beds
around the sides of the feast hall. But some men lay down on the benches
and drew their cloaks over themselves. On the next night there was another feast. Still Harald sat on the step
before the high seat. But when the tables were gone and the horns were
going around, he stood up and raised high a horn of ale and said loudly:

"This horn of memory I drink in honor of my father, Halfdan, son of
Gudrod, who sits now in Valhalla. And I vow that I will grind my
father's foes under my heel." Then he drank the ale and sat down in the king's high seat, while all
the men stood up and raised their horns and shouted:

"King Harald!" And some cried:

"That was a brave vow." [Illustration: "_I vow that I will grind my father's foes under my
heel_"]

And Harald's uncle called out:

"A health to King Harald!" And they all drank it. Then a man stood up and said:

"Hear my song of King Halfdan!" for this man was a skald. "Yes, the song!" shouted the men, and Harald nodded his head. So the skald took down his great harp from the wall behind him and went
and stood before Harald. The bottom of the harp rested on the floor, but
the top reached as high as the skald's shoulders. The brass frame shone
in the light. The strings were some of gold and some of silver. The man
struck them with his hand and sang of King Halfdan, of his battles, of
his strong arm and good sword, of his death, and of how men loved him. When he had finished, King Harald took a bracelet from his arm and gave
it to him, saying:

"Take this as thanks for your good song." The guests stayed the next day and at night there was another feast. When the mead horns were going around, King Harald stood up and spoke:

"I said that no man should go away empty-handed from drinking my
father's funeral ale." He beckoned the thralls, and they brought in a great treasure-chest and
set it down by the high seat. King Harald opened it and took out rich
gifts--capes and sword-belts and beautiful cloth and bracelets and gold
cloak-pins. These he sent about the hall and gave something to every
man. The guests wondered at the richness of his gifts. "This young king has an open hand," they said, "and deep
treasure-chests." After breakfast the next morning the guests went out and stood by their
horses ready to go, but before they mounted, thralls brought a horn of
mead to each man. That was called the stirrup-horn, because after they
drank it the men put their feet to the stirrups and sprang upon their
horses and started. King Harald and his people rode a little way with
them. All men said that that was the richest funeral feast that ever was
held. FOOTNOTES:

[6] See note about feast hall on page 196. [7] See note about tables on page 196. [Illustration]

Harald's Battle


Now King Halfdan had many foes. When he was alive they were afraid to
make war upon him, for he was a mighty warrior. But when Harald became
king, they said:

"He is but a lad. We will fight with him and take his land." So they began to make ready. King Harald heard of this and he laughed
and said:

"Good! 'Foes'-fear' is thirsty, and my legs are stiff with much
sitting." He called three men to him. To one he gave an arrow, saying:

"Run and carry this arrow north. Give it into the hands of the master of
the next farm, and say that all men are to meet here within two weeks
from this day. They must come ready for war and mounted on horses. Say
also that if a man does not obey this call, or if he receives this arrow
and does not carry it on to his next neighbor, he shall be outlawed
from this country, and his land shall be taken from him." He gave arrows to the other two men and told them to run south and east
with the same message. So all through King Harald's country men were soon busy mending helmets
and polishing swords and making shields. There was blazing of forges and
clanging of anvils all through the land. On the day set, the fields about King Harald's house were full of men
and horses. After breakfast a horn blew. Every man snatched his weapons
and jumped upon his horse. Men of the same neighborhood stood together,
and their chief led them. They waited for the starting horn. This did
not look like our army. There were no uniforms. Some men wore helmets,
some did not. Some wore coats of mail, but others wore only their
jackets and tights of bright-colored wool. But at each man's left side
hung a great shield. Over his right shoulder went his sword-belt and
held his long sword under his left hand. Above most men's heads shone
the points of their tall spears. Some men carried axes in their belts. Some carried bows and arrows. Many had ram's horns hanging from their
necks. King Harald rode at the front of his army with his standard-bearer
beside him. Chain-armor covered the king's body. A red cloak was thrown
over his shoulders. On his head was a gold helmet with a dragon standing
up from it. He carried a round shield on his left arm. The king had made
that shield himself. It was of brass. The rivets were of silver, with
strangely shaped heads. On the back of Harald's horse was a red cloth
trimmed with the fur of ermine. King Harald looked up at his standard and laughed aloud. "Oh, War-lover," he cried, "you and I ride out on a gay journey." A horn blew again and the army started. The men shouted as they went,
and blew their ram's horns. "Now we shall taste something better than even King Harald's ale,"
shouted one. Another rose in his stirrups and sniffed the air. "Ah! I smell a battle," he cried. "It is sweeter than those strange
waters of Arabia." So the army went merrily through the land. They carried no tents, they
had no provision wagons. "The sky is a good enough tent for a soldier," said the Norsemen. "Why
carry provisions when they lie in the farms beside you?" After two days King Harald saw another army on the hills. "Thorstein," he shouted, "up with the white shield and go tell King Haki
to choose his battle-field. We will wait but an hour. I am eager for the
frolic." So Thorstein raised a white shield on his spear as a sign that he came
on an errand of peace. He rode near King Haki, but he could not wait
until he came close before he shouted out his message and then turned
and rode back. "Tell your boy king that we will not hang back," Haki called after
Thorstein. King Harald's men waited on the hillside and watched the other army
across the valley. They saw King Haki point and saw twenty men ride off
as he pointed. They stopped in a patch of hazel and hewed with their
axes. "They are getting the hazels," said Thorstein. "Audun," said King Harald to a man near him, "stay close to my standard
all day. You must see the best of the fight. I want to hear a song about
it after it is over." This Audun was the skald who sang at the drinking of King Halfdan's
funeral ale. King Haki's men rode down into the valley. They drove down stakes all
about a great field. They tied the hazel twigs to the stakes in a
string. But they left an open space toward King Harald's army and one
toward King Haki's. Then a man raised a white shield and galloped toward
King Harald. "We are ready!" he shouted. At the same time King Haki raised a red shield. King Harald's men put
their shields before their mouths and shouted into them. It made a great
roaring war-cry. "Up with the war shield!" shouted King Harald. "Horns blow!" There was a blowing of horns on both sides. The two armies galloped down
into the field and ran together. The fight had begun. All that day long swords were flashing, spears flying, men shouting, men
falling from their horses, swords clashing against shields. "Victory flashes from that dragon," Harald's men said, pointing to the
king's helmet. "No one stands before it." And, surely, before night came, King Haki fell dead under "Foes'-fear." When he fell, a great shout went up from his warriors, and they turned
and fled. King Harald's men chased them far, but during the night came
back to camp. Many brought swords and helmets and bracelets or
silver-trimmed saddles and bridles with them. "Here is what we got from the foe," they said. The next morning King Harald spoke to his men:

"Let us go about and find our dead." [Illustration: "_King Haki fell dead under 'Foes'-fear'_"]

So they went over all the battle-field. They put every man on his shield
and carried him and laid him on a hill-top. They hung his sword over his
shoulder and laid his spear by his side. So they laid all the dead
together there on the hill-top. Then King Harald said, looking about:

"This is a good place to lie. It looks far over the country. The sound
of the sea reaches it. The wind sweeps here. It is a good grave for
Norsemen and Vikings. But it is a long road and a rough road to Valhalla
that these men must travel. Let the nearest kinsman of each man come and
tie on his hell-shoes. Tie them fast, for they will need them much on
that hard road." So friends tied shoes on the dead men's feet. Then King Harald said:

"Now let us make the mound." Every man set to work with what tools he had and heaped earth over the
dead until a great mound stood up. They piled stones on the top. On one
of these stones King Harald made runes telling how these men had died. After that was done King Harald said:

"Now set up the pole, Thorstein. Let every man bring to that pole all
that he took from the foe." So they did, and there was a great hill of things around it. Harald
divided it into piles. "This pile we will give to Thor in thanks for the victory," he said. "This pile is mine because I am king. Here are the piles for the chiefs,
and these things go to the other men of the army." So every man went away from that battle richer than he was before, and
Thor looked down from Valhalla upon his full temple and was pleased. The next morning King Harald led his army back. But on the way he met
other foes and had many battles and did not lose one. The kings either
died in battle or ran away, and Harald had their lands. "He has kept his vow," men said, "and ground his father's foes under his
heel." So King Harald sat in peace for a while. [Illustration]

Gyda's Saucy Message


Now Harald heard men talk of Gyda, the daughter of King Eric. "She is very beautiful," they said, "but she is very proud, too. She can
both read and make runes. No other woman in the world knows so much
about herbs as she does. She can cure any sickness. And she is proud of
all this!" Now when King Harald heard that, he thought to himself:

"Fair and proud. I like them both. I will have her for my wife." So he called his uncle, Guthorm, and said:

"Take rich gifts and go to Gyda's foster-father[8] and tell him that I
will marry Gyda." So Guthorm and his men came to that house and they told the king's
message to the foster-father. Gyda was standing near, weaving a rich
cloak. She heard the speech. She came up and said, holding her head
high and curling her lip:

"I will not waste myself on a king of so few people. Norway is a strange
country. There is a little king here and a little king there--hundreds
of them scattered about. Now in Denmark there is but one great king over
the whole land. And it is so in Sweden. Is no one brave enough to make
all of Norway his own?" She laughed a scornful laugh and walked away. The men stood with open
mouths and stared after her. Could it be that she had sent that saucy
message to King Harald? They looked at her foster-father. He was
chuckling in his beard and said nothing to them. They started out of the
house in anger. When they were at the door, Gyda came up to them again
and said:

"Give this message to your King Harald for me: I will not be his wife
unless he puts all of Norway under him for my sake." [Illustration: "_I will not be his wife unless he puts all of Norway
under him for my sake_"]

So Guthorm and his men rode homeward across the country. They did not
talk. They were all thinking. At last one said:

"How shall we give this message to the king?" "I have been thinking of that," Guthorm said; "his anger is no little
thing." It was late when they rode into the king's yard; for they had ridden
slowly, trying to make some plan for softening the message, but they had
thought of none. "I see light through the wind's-eyes of the feast hall," one said. "Yes, the king keeps feast," Guthorm said. "We must give our message
before all his guests." So they went in with very heavy hearts. There sat King Harald in the
high seat. The benches on both sides were full of men. The tables had
been taken out, and the mead-horns were going round. "Oh, ho!" cried King Harald. "Our messengers! What news?" Then Guthorm said:

"This Gyda is a bold and saucy girl, King Harald. My tongue refuses to
give her message." The king stamped his foot. "Out with it!" he cried. "What does she say?" "She says that she will not marry so little a king," Guthorm answered. Harald jumped to his feet. His face flushed red. Guthorm stretched out
his hand. "They are not my words, O King; they are the words of a silly girl." "Is there any more?" the king shouted. "Go on!" "She said: 'There is one king in Denmark and one king in Sweden. Is
there no man brave enough to make himself king of all Norway? Tell King
Harald that I will not marry him unless he puts all of Norway under him
for my sake.'" The guests sat speechless, staring at Guthorm. All at once the king
broke into a roar of laughter. "By the hammer of Thor!" he cried, "that is a good message. I thank you,
Gyda. Did you hear it, friends? King of all Norway! Why, we are all
stupids. Why did we not think of that?" Then he raised his horn high. "Now hear my vow. I say that I will not cut my hair or comb it until I
am king of all Norway. That I will be or I will die." Then he drank off the horn of mead, and while he drank it, all the men
in the hall stood up and waved their swords and shouted and shouted. That old hall in all its two hundred years of feasts had not heard such
a noise before. "Ah, Harald!" Guthorm cried, "surely Thor in Valhalla smiled when he
heard that vow." The men sat all night talking of that wonderful vow. On the very next day King Harald sent out his war-arrows. Soon a great
army was gathered. They marched through the country north and south and
east and west, burning houses and fighting battles as they went. People
fled before them, some to their own kings, some inland to the deep woods
and hid there. But some went to King Harald and said:

"We will be your men." "Then take the oath, and I will be friends with you," he said. The men took off their swords and laid them down and came one by one and
knelt before the king. They put their heads between his knees and said:

"From this day, Harald Halfdanson, I am your man. I will serve you in
war. For my land I will pay you taxes. I will be faithful to you as my
king." Then Harald said:

"I am your king, and I will be faithful to you." Many kings took that oath and thousands of common men. Of all the
battles that Harald fought, he did not lose one. Now for a long time the king's hair and beard had not been combed or
cut. They stood out around his head in a great bushy mat of yellow. At a
feast one day when the jokes were going round, Harald's uncle said:

"Harald, I will give you a new name. After this you shall be called
Harald Shockhead. As my naming gift I give you this drinking-horn." "It is a good name," laughed all the men. After that all people called him Harald Shockhead. During these wars, whenever King Harald got a country for his own, this
is what he did. He said:

"All the marshland and the woodland where no people live is mine. For
his farm every man shall pay me taxes." Over every country he put some brave, wise man and called him Earl. He
said to the earls:

"You shall collect the taxes and pay them to me. But some you shall keep
for yourselves. You shall punish any man who steals or murders or does
any wicked thing. When your people are in trouble they shall come to
you, and you shall set the thing right. You must keep peace in the land. I will not have my people troubled with robber vikings." The earls did all these things as best they could; for they were good
strong men. The farmers were happy. They said:

"We can work on our farms with peace now. Before King Harald came,
something was always wrong. The vikings would come and steal our gold
and our grain and burn our houses, or the king would call us to war. Those little kings are always fighting. It is better under King Harald." But the chiefs, who liked to fight and go a-viking, hated King Harald
and his new ways. One of these chiefs was Solfi. He was a king's son. Harald had killed his father in battle. Solfi had been in that battle. At the end of it he fled away with two hundred men and got into ships. "We will make that Shockhead smart," he said. So they harried the coast of King Harald's country. They filled their
ships with gold. They ate other men's meals. They burned farmhouses
behind them. The people cried out to the earls for help. So the earls
had out their ships all the time trying to catch Solfi, but he was too
clever for them. In the spring he went to a certain king, Audbiorn, and said to him:

"Now, there are two things that we can do. We can become this Shockhead
Harald's thralls, we can kneel before him and put our heads between his
knees. Or else we can fight. My father thought it better to die in
battle than to be any man's thrall. How is it? Will you join with my
cousin Arnvid and me against this young Shockhead?" "Yes, I will do it," said the king. [Decoration]


FOOTNOTES:

[8] See note about foster-father on page 197. [Illustration]

The Sea Fight


Many men felt as Solfi did. So when King Audbiorn and King Arnvid sent
out their war arrows, a great host gathered. All men came by sea. Two
hundred ships lay at anchor in the fiord, looking like strange swimming
animals because of their high carved prows and bright paint. There were
red and gold dragons with long necks and curved tails. Sea-horses reared
out of the water. Green and gold snakes coiled up. Sea-hawks sat with
spread wings ready to fly. And among all these curved necks stood up the
tall, straight masts with the long yardarms swinging across them holding
the looped-up sails. When the starting horn blew, and their sails were let down, it was like
the spreading of hundreds of curious flags. Some were striped black and
yellow or blue and gold. Some were white with a black raven or a brown
bear embroidered on them, or blue with a white sea-hawk, or black with
a gold sun. Some were edged with fur. As the wind filled the gaudy
sails, and the ships moved off, the men waved their hands to the women
on shore and sang:

    "To the sea! To the sea! The wind in our sail,
    The sea in our face,
    And the smell of the fight. After ship meets ship,
    In the quarrel of swords
    King Harald shall lie
    In the caves under sea
    And Norsemen shall laugh." In the prow stood men leaning forward and sniffing the salt air with
joy. Some were talking of King Harald. "Yesterday he had a hard fight," they said. "To-day he will be lying
still, dressing his wounds and mending his ships. We shall take him by
surprise." They sailed near the coast. Solfi in his "Sea-hawk" was ahead leading
the way. Suddenly men saw his sail veer and his oars flash out. He had
quickly turned his boat and was rowing back. He came close to King
Arnvid and called:

"He is there, ahead. His boats are ready in line of battle. The fox has
not been asleep." King Arnvid blew his horn. Slowly his boats came into line with his
"Sea-stag" in the middle. Again he blew his horn. Cables were thrown
across from one prow to the next, and all the ships were tied together
so that their sides touched. Then the men set their sails again and they
went past a tongue of land into a broad fiord. There lay the long line
of King Harald's ships with their fierce heads grinning and mocking at
the newcomers. Back of those prows was what looked like a long wall with
spots of green and red and blue and yellow and shining gold. It was the
locked shields of the men in the bows, and over every shield looked
fierce blue eyes. Higher up and farther back was another wall of
shields; for on the half deck in the stern of every ship stood the
captain with his shield-guard of a dozen men. Arnvid's people had furled their sails and were taking down the masts,
but the ships were still drifting on with the wind. The horn blew, and
quickly every man sprang to his place in bow and stern. All were leaning
forward with clenched teeth and widespread nostrils. They were clutching
their naked swords in their hands. Their flashing eyes looked over their
shields. Soon King Arnvid's ships crashed into Harald's line, and immediately the
men in the bows began to swing their swords at one another. The soldiers
of the shield-guard on the high decks began to throw darts and stones
and to shoot arrows into the ships opposite them. So in every ship showers of stones and arrows were falling, and many men
died under them or got broken arms or legs. Spears were hurled from deck
to deck and many of them bit deep into men's bodies. In every bow men
slashed with their swords at the foes in the opposite ship. Some jumped
upon the gunwale to get nearer or hung from the prow-head. Some even
leaped into the enemy's boat. King Harald's ship lay prow to prow with King Arnvid's. The battle had
been going on for an hour. King Harald was still in the stern on the
deck. There was a dent in his helmet where a great stone had struck. There was a gash in his shoulder where a spear had cut. But he was still
fighting and laughed as he worked. "Wolf meets wolf to-day," he said. "But things are going badly in the
prow," he cried. "Ivar fallen, Thorstein wounded, a dozen men lying in
the bottom of the boat!" He leaped down from the deck and ran along the gunwale, shouting as he
went:

"Harald and victory!" So he came to the bow and stood swinging his sword as fast as he
breathed. Every time it hit a man of Arnvid's men. Harald's own warriors
cheered, seeing him. "Harald and victory!" they shouted, and went to work again with good
heart. Slowly King Arnvid's men fell back before Harald's biting sword. Then
Harald's men threw a great hook into that boat and pulled it alongside
and still pushed King Arnvid's people back. "Come on! Follow me!" cried Harald. Then he leaped into King Arnvid's boat, and his warriors followed him. "He comes like a mad wolf," King Arnvid's men said, and they turned and
ran back below the deck. Then Arnvid himself leaped down and stood with his sword raised. "Can this young Shockhead make cowards of you all?" he cried. But Harald's sword struck him, and he fell dead. Then a big, bloody
viking of King Arnvid leaped upon the edge of the ship and stood there. He held his drinking-horn and his sword high in his hands. "Ran[9] and not you, Shockhead, shall have them and me!" he cried, and
leaped laughing into the water and was drowned. Many other warriors chose the same death on that terrible day. 