



Produced by Alicia Williams, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1904


Lucy Maud Montgomery was born at Clifton (now New London), Prince
Edward Island, Canada, on November 30, 1874. She achieved
international fame in her lifetime, putting Prince Edward Island and
Canada on the world literary map. Best known for her "Anne of Green
Gables" books, she was also a prolific writer of short stories and
poetry. She published some 500 short stories and poems and twenty
novels before her death in 1942. The Project Gutenberg collection of
her short stories was gathered from numerous sources and is presented
in chronological publishing order:

Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1896 to 1901
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1902 to 1903
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1904
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1905 to 1906
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1907 to 1908
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1909 to 1922


       *       *       *       *       *




Short Stories 1904

    A Fortunate Mistake                                      1904
    An Unpremeditated Ceremony                               1904
    At the Bay Shore Farm                                    1904
    Elizabeth's Child                                        1904
    Freda's Adopted Grave                                    1904
    How Don Was Saved                                        1904
    Miss Madeline's Proposal                                 1904
    Miss Sally's Company                                     1904
    Mrs. March's Revenge                                     1904
    Nan                                                      1904
    Natty of Blue Point                                      1904
    Penelope's Party Waist                                   1904
    The Girl and the Wild Race                               1904
    The Promise of Lucy Ellen                                1904
    The Pursuit of the Ideal                                 1904
    The Softening of Miss Cynthia                            1904
    Them Notorious Pigs                                      1904
    Why Not Ask Miss Price? 1904




A Fortunate Mistake


"Oh, dear! oh, dear!" fretted Nan Wallace, twisting herself about
uneasily on the sofa in her pretty room. "I never thought before that
the days could be so long as they are now." "Poor you!" said her sister Maude sympathetically. Maude was moving
briskly about the room, putting it into the beautiful order that
Mother insisted on. It was Nan's week to care for their room, but Nan
had sprained her ankle three days ago and could do nothing but lie on
the sofa ever since. And very tired of it, too, was wide-awake, active
Nan. "And the picnic this afternoon, too!" she sighed. "I've looked forward
to it all summer. And it's a perfect day--and I've got to stay here
and nurse this foot." Nan looked vindictively at the bandaged member, while Maude leaned out
of the window to pull a pink climbing rose. As she did so she nodded
to someone in the village street below. "Who is passing?" asked Nan. "Florrie Hamilton." "Is she going to the picnic?" asked Nan indifferently. "No. She wasn't asked. Of course, I don't suppose she expected to be. She knows she isn't in our set. She must feel horribly out of place at
school. A lot of the girls say it is ridiculous of her father to send
her to Miss Braxton's private school--a factory overseer's daughter." "She ought to have been asked to the picnic all the same," said Nan
shortly. "She is in our class if she isn't in our set. Of course I
don't suppose she would have enjoyed herself--or even gone at all, for
that matter. She certainly doesn't push herself in among us. One would
think she hadn't a tongue in her head." "She is the best student in the class," admitted Maude, arranging her
roses in a vase and putting them on the table at Nan's elbow. "But
Patty Morrison and Wilhelmina Patterson had the most to say about the
invitations, and they wouldn't have her. There, Nannie dear, aren't
those lovely? I'll leave them here to be company for you." "I'm going to have more company than that," said Nan, thumping her
pillow energetically. "I'm not going to mope here alone all the
afternoon, with you off having a jolly time at the picnic. Write a
little note for me to Florrie Hastings, will you? I'll do as much for
you when you sprain your foot." "What shall I put in it?" said Maude, rummaging out her portfolio
obligingly. "Oh, just ask her if she will come down and cheer a poor invalid up
this afternoon. She'll come, I know. And she is such good company. Get
Dickie to run right out and mail it." "I do wonder if Florrie Hamilton will feel hurt over not being asked
to the picnic," speculated Maude absently as she slipped her note into
an envelope and addressed it. Florrie Hamilton herself could best have answered that question as she
walked along the street in the fresh morning sunshine. She did feel
hurt--much more keenly than she would acknowledge even to herself. It
was not that she cared about the picnic itself: as Nan Wallace had
said, she would not have been likely to enjoy herself if she had gone
among a crowd of girls many of whom looked down on her and ignored
her. But to be left out when every other girl in the school was
invited! Florrie's lip quivered as she thought of it. "I'll get Father to let me to go to the public school after vacation,"
she murmured. "I hate going to Miss Braxton's." Florrie was a newcomer in Winboro. Her father had recently come to
take a position in the largest factory of the small town. For this
reason Florrie was slighted at school by some of the ruder girls and
severely left alone by most of the others. Some, it is true, tried at
the start to be friends, but Florrie, too keenly sensitive to the
atmosphere around her to respond, was believed to be decidedly dull
and mopy. She retreated further and further into herself and was
almost as solitary at Miss Braxton's as if she had been on a desert
island. "They don't like me because I am plainly dressed and because my father
is not a wealthy man," thought Florrie bitterly. And there was enough
truth in this in regard to many of Miss Braxton's girls to make a very
uncomfortable state of affairs. "Here's a letter for you, Flo," said her brother Jack at noon. "Got it
at the office on my way home. Who is your swell correspondent?" Florrie opened the dainty, perfumed note and read it with a face that,
puzzled at first, suddenly grew radiant. "Listen, Jack," she said excitedly. "Dear Florrie:

    "Nan is confined to house, room, and sofa with a sprained
    foot. As she will be all alone this afternoon, won't you come
    down and spend it with her? She very much wants you to
    come--she is so lonesome and thinks you will be just the one
    to cheer her up. "Yours cordially,
                                    "Maude Wallace." "Are you going?" asked Jack. "Yes--I don't know--I'll think about it," said Florrie absently. Then
she hurried upstairs to her room. "Shall I go?" she thought. "Yes, I will. I dare say Nan has asked me
just out of pity because I was not invited to the picnic. But even so
it was sweet of her. I've always thought I would like those Wallace
girls if I could get really acquainted with them. They've always been
nice to me, too--I don't know why I am always so tongue-tied and
stupid with them. But I'll go anyway." That afternoon Mrs. Wallace came into Nan's room. "Nan, dear, Florrie Hamilton is downstairs asking for you." "Florrie--Hamilton?" "Yes. She said something about a note you sent her this morning. Shall
I ask her to come up?" "Yes, of course," said Nan lamely. When her mother had gone out she
fell back on her pillows and thought rapidly. "Florrie Hamilton! Maude must have addressed that note to her by
mistake. But she mustn't know it was a mistake--mustn't suspect it. Oh, dear! What shall I ever find to talk to her about? She is so quiet
and shy." Further reflections were cut short by Florrie's entrance. Nan held out
her hand with a chummy smile. "It's good of you to give your afternoon up to visiting a cranky
invalid," she said heartily. "You don't know how lonesome I've been
since Maude went away. Take off your hat and pick out the nicest chair
you can find, and let's be comfy." Somehow, Nan's frank greeting did away with Florrie's embarrassment
and made her feel at home. She sat down in Maude's rocker, then,
glancing over to a vase filled with roses, her eyes kindled with
pleasure. Seeing this, Nan said, "Aren't they lovely? We Wallaces are
very fond of our climbing roses. Our great-grandmother brought the
roots out from England with her sixty years ago, and they grow nowhere
else in this country." "I know," said Florrie, with a smile. "I recognized them as soon as I
came into the room. They are the same kind of roses as those which
grow about Grandmother Hamilton's house in England. I used to love
them so." "In England! Were you ever in England?" "Oh, yes," laughed Florrie. "And I've been in pretty nearly every
other country upon earth--every one that a ship could get to, at
least." "Why, Florrie Hamilton! Are you in earnest?" "Indeed, yes. Perhaps you don't know that our 'now-mother,' as Jack
says sometimes, is Father's second wife. My own mother died when I was
a baby, and my aunt, who had no children of her own, took me to bring
up. Her husband was a sea-captain, and she always went on his
sea-voyages with him. So I went too. I almost grew up on shipboard. We
had delightful times. I never went to school. Auntie had been a
teacher before her marriage, and she taught me. Two years ago, when I
was fourteen, Father married again, and then he wanted me to go home
to him and Jack and our new mother. So I did, although at first I was
very sorry to leave Auntie and the dear old ship and all our lovely
wanderings." "Oh, tell me all about them," demanded Nan. "Why, Florrie Hamilton, to
think you've never said a word about your wonderful experiences! I
love to hear about foreign countries from people who have really been
there. Please just talk--and I'll listen and ask questions." Florrie did talk. I'm not sure whether she or Nan was the more
surprised to find that she could talk so well and describe her travels
so brightly and humorously. The afternoon passed quickly, and when
Florrie went away at dusk, after a dainty tea served up in Nan's room,
it was with a cordial invitation to come again soon. "I've enjoyed your visit so much," said Nan sincerely. "I'm going down
to see you as soon as I can walk. But don't wait for that. Let us be
good, chummy friends without any ceremony." When Florrie, with a light heart and a happy smile, had gone, came
Maude, sunburned and glowing from her picnic. "Such a nice time as we had!" she exclaimed. "Wasn't I sorry to think
of you cooped up here! Did Florrie come?" "One Florrie did. Maude, you addressed that note to Florrie Hamilton
today instead of Florrie Hastings." "Nan, surely not! I'm sure--"

"Yes, you did. And she came here. Was I not taken aback at first,
Maude!" "I was thinking about her when I addressed it, and I must have put her
name down by mistake. I'm so sorry--"

"You needn't be. I haven't been entertained so charmingly for a long
while. Why, Maude, she has travelled almost everywhere--and is so
bright and witty when she thaws out. She didn't seem like the same
girl at all. She is just perfectly lovely!" "Well, I'm glad you had such a nice time together. Do you know, some
of the girls were very much vexed because she wasn't asked to the
picnic. They said that it was sheer rudeness not to ask her, and that
it reflected on us all, even if Patty and Wilhelmina were responsible
for it. I'm afraid we girls at Miss Braxton's have been getting
snobbish, and some of us are beginning to find it out and be ashamed
of it." "Just wait until school opens," said Nan--vaguely enough, it would
seem. But Maude understood. However, they did not have to wait until school opened. Long before
that time Winboro girlhood discovered that the Wallace girls were
taking Florrie Hamilton into their lives. If the Wallace girls liked
her, there must be something in the girl more than was at first
thought--thus more than one of Miss Braxton's girls reasoned. And
gradually the other girls found, as Nan had found, that Florrie was
full of fun and an all-round good companion when drawn out of her
diffidence. When Miss Braxton's school reopened Florrie was the class
favourite. Between her and Nan Wallace a beautiful and helpful
friendship had been formed which was to grow and deepen through their
whole lives. "And all because Maude in a fit of abstraction wrote 'Hamilton' for
'Hastings,'" said Nan to herself one day. But that is something
Florrie Hamilton will never know. An Unpremeditated Ceremony


Selwyn Grant sauntered in upon the assembled family at the homestead
as if he were returning from an hour's absence instead of a western
sojourn of ten years. Guided by the sound of voices on the still,
pungent autumnal air, he went around to the door of the dining room
which opened directly on the poppy walk in the garden. Nobody noticed him for a moment and he stood in the doorway looking at
them with a smile, wondering what was the reason of the festal air
that hung about them all as visibly as a garment. His mother sat by
the table, industriously polishing the best silver spoons, which, as
he remembered, were only brought forth upon some great occasion. Her
eyes were as bright, her form as erect, her nose--the Carston
nose--as pronounced and aristocratic as of yore. Selwyn saw little change in her. But was it possible that the tall,
handsome young lady with the sleek brown pompadour and a nose
unmistakably and plebeianly Grant, who sat by the window doing
something to a heap of lace and organdy in her lap, was the little
curly-headed, sunburned sister of thirteen whom he remembered? The
young man leaning against the sideboard must be Leo, of course; a
fine-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow who made Selwyn think
suddenly that he must be growing old. And there was the little, thin,
grey father in the corner, peering at his newspaper with nearsighted
eyes. Selwyn's heart gave a bound at the sight of him which not even
his mother had caused. Dear old Dad! The years had been kind to him. Mrs. Grant held up a glistening spoon and surveyed it complacently. "There, I think that is bright enough even to suit Margaret Graham. I
shall take over the whole two dozen teas and one dozen desserts. I
wish, Bertha, that you would tie a red cord around each of the handles
for me. The Carmody spoons are the same pattern and I shall always be
convinced that Mrs. Carmody carried off two of ours the time that
Jenny Graham was married. I don't mean to take any more risks. And,
Father----"

Something made the mother look around, and she saw her first-born! When the commotion was over Selwyn asked why the family spoons were
being rubbed up. "For the wedding, of course," said Mrs. Grant, polishing her
gold-bowed spectacles and deciding that there was no more time for
tears and sentiment just then. "And there, they're not half done--and
we'll have to dress in another hour. Bertha is no earthly use--she is
so taken up with her bridesmaid finery." "Wedding? Whose wedding?" demanded Selwyn, in bewilderment. "Why, Leo's, of course. Leo is to be married tonight. Didn't you get
your invitation? Wasn't that what brought you home?" "Hand me a chair, quick," implored Selwyn. "Leo, are _you_ going to
commit matrimony in this headlong fashion? Are you sure you're grown
up?" "Six feet is a pretty good imitation of it, isn't it?" grinned Leo. "Brace up, old fellow. It's not so bad as it might be. She's quite a
respectable girl. We wrote you all about it three weeks ago and broke
the news as gently as possible." "I left for the East a month ago and have been wandering around
preying on old college chums ever since. Haven't seen a letter. There,
I'm better now. No, you needn't fan me, Sis. Well, no family can get
through the world without its seasons of tribulations. Who is the
party of the second part, little brother?" "Alice Graham," replied Mrs. Grant, who had a habit of speaking for
her children, none of whom had the Carston nose. "Alice Graham! That child!" exclaimed Selwyn in astonishment. Leo roared. "Come, come, Sel, perhaps we're not very progressive here
in Croyden, but we don't actually stand still. Girls are apt to
stretch out some between ten and twenty, you know. You old bachelors
think nobody ever grows up. Why, Sel, you're grey around your
temples." "Too well I know it, but a man's own brother shouldn't be the first to
cast such things up to him. I'll admit, since I come to think of it,
that Alice has probably grown bigger. Is she any better-looking than
she used to be?" "Alice is a charming girl," said Mrs. Grant impressively. "She is a
beauty and she is also sweet and sensible, which beauties are not
always. We are all very much pleased with Leo's choice. But we have
really no more time to spare just now. The wedding is at seven o'clock
and it is four already." "Is there anybody you can send to the station for my luggage?" asked
Selwyn. "Luckily I have a new suit, otherwise I shouldn't have the
face to go." "Well, I must be off," said Mrs. Grant. "Father, take Selwyn away so
that I shan't be tempted to waste time talking to him." In the library father and son looked at each other affectionately. "Dad, it's a blessing to see you just the same. I'm a little dizzy
with all these changes. Bertha grown up and Leo within an inch of
being married! To Alice Graham at that, whom I can't think of yet as
anything else than the long-legged, black-eyed imp of mischief she
was when a kiddy. To tell you the truth, Dad, I don't feel in a mood
for going to a wedding at Wish-ton-wish tonight. I'm sure you don't
either. You've always hated fusses. Can't we shirk it?" They smiled at each other with chummy remembrance of many a family
festival they had "shirked" together in the old days. But Mr. Grant
shook his head. "Not this time, sonny. There are some things a decent
man can't shirk and one of them is his own boy's wedding. It's a
nuisance, but I must go through with it. You'll understand how it is
when you're a family man yourself. By the way, why aren't you a family
man by this time? Why haven't I been put to the bother and
inconvenience of attending your wedding before now, son?" Selwyn laughed, with a little vibrant note of bitterness in the
laughter, which the father's quick ears detected. "I've been too busy
with law books, Dad, to find me a wife." Mr. Grant shook his bushy grey head. "That's not the real reason, son. The world has a wife for every man; if he hasn't found her by the time
he's thirty-five, there's some real reason for it. Well, I don't want
to pry into yours, but I hope it's a sound one and not a mean,
sneaking, selfish sort of reason. Perhaps you'll choose a Madam Selwyn
some day yet. In case you should I'm going to give you a small bit of
good advice. Your mother--now, she's a splendid woman, Selwyn, a
splendid woman. She can't be matched as a housekeeper and she has
improved my finances until I don't know them when I meet them. She's
been a good wife and a good mother. If I were a young man I'd court
her and marry her over again, that I would. But, son, when _you_ pick
a wife pick one with a nice little commonplace nose, not a family
nose. Never marry a woman with a family nose, son." A woman with a family nose came into the library at this juncture and
beamed maternally upon them both. "There's a bite for you in the
dining room. After you've eaten it you must dress. Mind you brush your
hair well down, Father. The green room is ready for you, Selwyn. Tomorrow I'll have a good talk with you, but tonight I'll be too busy
to remember you're around. How are we all going to get over to
Wish-ton-wish? Leo and Bertha are going in the pony carriage. It won't
hold a third passenger. You'll have to squeeze in with Father and me
in the buggy, Selwyn." "By no means," replied Selwyn briskly. "I'll walk over to
Wish-ton-wish. Ifs only half a mile across lots. I suppose the old way
is still open?" "It ought to be," answered Mr. Grant drily; "Leo has kept it well
trodden. If you've forgotten how it runs he can tell you." "I haven't forgotten," said Selwyn, a little brusquely. He had his own
reasons for remembering the wood path. Leo had not been the first
Grant to go courting to Wish-ton-wish. When he started, the moon was rising round and red and hazy in an
eastern hill-gap. The autumn air was mild and spicy. Long shadows
stretched across the fields on his right and silvery mosaics patterned
the floor of the old beechwood lane. Selwyn walked slowly. He was
thinking of Esme Graham or, rather, of the girl who had been Esme
Graham, and wondering if he would see her at the wedding. It was
probable, and he did not want to see her. In spite of ten years'
effort, he did not think he could yet look upon Tom St. Clair's wife
with the proper calm indifference. At the best, it would taint his own
memory of her; he would never again be able to think of her as Esme
Graham but only as Esme St. Clair. The Grahams had come to Wish-ton-wish eleven years before. There was a
big family of girls of whom the tall, brown-haired Esme was the
oldest. There was one summer during which Selwyn Grant had haunted
Wish-ton-wish, the merry comrade of the younger girls, the boyishly,
silently devoted lover of Esme. Tom St. Clair had always been there
too, in his right as second cousin, Selwyn had supposed. One day he
found out that Tom and Esme had been engaged ever since she was
sixteen; one of her sisters told him. That had been all. He had gone
away soon after, and some time later a letter from home made casual
mention of Tom St. Clair's marriage. He narrowly missed being late for the wedding ceremony. The bridal
party entered the parlour at Wish-ton-wish at the same moment as he
slipped in by another door. Selwyn almost whistled with amazement at
sight of the bride. _That_ Alice Graham, that tall, stately, blushing
young woman, with her masses of dead-black hair, frosted over by the
film of wedding veil! Could that be the scrawny little tomboy of ten
years ago? She looked not unlike Esme, with that subtle family
resemblance that is quite independent of feature and colouring. Where was Esme? Selwyn cast his eyes furtively over the assembled
guests while the minister read the marriage ceremony. He recognized
several of the Graham girls but he did not see Esme, although Tom St.
Clair, stout and florid and prosperous-looking, was standing on a
chair in a faraway corner, peering over the heads of the women. After the turmoil of handshakings and congratulations, Selwyn fled to
the cool, still outdoors, where the rosy glow of Chinese lanterns
mingled with the waves of moonshine to make fairyland. And there he
met her, as she came out of the house by a side door, a tall, slender
woman in some glistening, clinging garment, with white flowers shining
like stars in the coils of her brown hair. In the soft glow she looked
even more beautiful than in the days of her girlhood, and Selwyn's
heart throbbed dangerously at sight of her. "Esme!" he said involuntarily. She started, and he had an idea that she changed colour, although it
was too dim to be sure. "Selwyn!" she exclaimed, putting out her
hands. "Why, Selwyn Grant! Is it really you? Or are you such stuff as
dreams are made of? I did not know you were here. I did not know you
were home." He caught her hands and held them tightly, drawing her a little closer
to him, forgetting that she was Tom St. Clair's wife, remembering only
that she was the woman to whom he had given all his love and life's
devotion, to the entire beggaring of his heart. "I reached home only four hours ago, and was haled straightway here to
Leo's wedding. I'm dizzy, Esme. I can't adjust my old conceptions to
this new state of affairs all at once. It seems ridiculous to think
that Leo and Alice are married. I'm sure they can't be really grown
up." Esme laughed as she drew away her hands. "We are all ten years older,"
she said lightly. "Not you. You are more beautiful than ever, Esme. That sunflower
compliment is permissible in an old friend, isn't it?" "This mellow glow is kinder to me than sunlight now. I am thirty, you
know, Selwyn." "And I have some grey hairs," he confessed. "I knew I had them but I
had a sneaking hope that other folks didn't until Leo destroyed it
today. These young brothers and sisters who won't stay children are
nuisances. You'll be telling me next thing that 'Baby' is grown up." "'Baby' is eighteen and has a beau," laughed Esme. "And I give you
fair warning that she insists on being called Laura now. Do you want
to come for a walk with me--down under the beeches to the old lane
gate? I came out to see if the fresh air would do my bit of a headache
good. I shall have to help with the supper later on." They went slowly across the lawn and turned into a dim, moonlight lane
beyond, their old favourite ramble. Selwyn felt like a man in a dream,
a pleasant dream from which he dreads to awaken. The voices and
laughter echoing out from the house died away behind them and the
great silence of the night fell about them as they came to the old
gate, beyond which was a range of shining, moonlight-misted fields. For a little while neither of them spoke. The woman looked out across
the white spaces and the man watched the glimmering curve of her neck
and the soft darkness of her rich hair. How virginal, how sacred, she
looked! The thought of Tom St. Clair was a sacrilege. "It's nice to see you again, Selwyn," said Esme frankly at last. "There are so few of our old set left, and so many of the babies grown
up. Sometimes I don't know my own world, it has changed so. It's an
uncomfortable feeling. You give me a pleasant sensation of really
belonging here. I'd be lonesome tonight if I dared. I'm going to miss
Alice so much. There will be only Mother and Baby and I left now. Our
family circle has dwindled woefully." "Mother and Baby and you!" Selwyn felt his head whirling again. "Why,
where is Tom?" He felt that it was an idiotic question, but it slipped from his
tongue before he could catch it. Esme turned her head and looked at
him wonderingly. He knew that in the sunlight her eyes were as mistily
blue as early meadow violets, but here they looked dark and
unfathomably tender. "Tom?" she said perplexedly. "Do you mean Tom St. Clair? He is here,
of course, he and his wife. Didn't you see her? That pretty woman in
pale pink, Lil Meredith. Why, you used to know Lil, didn't you? One of
the Uxbridge Merediths?" To the day of his death Selwyn Grant will firmly believe that if he
had not clutched fast hold of the top bar of the gate he would have
tumbled down on the moss under the beeches in speechless astonishment. All the surprises of that surprising evening were as nothing to this. He had a swift conviction that there were no words in the English
language that could fully express his feelings and that it would be a
waste of time to try to find any. Therefore he laid hold of the first
baldly commonplace ones that came handy and said tamely, "I thought
you were married to Tom." "You--thought--I--was--married--to--Tom!" repeated Esme slowly. "And
have you thought _that_ all these years, Selwyn Grant?" "Yes, I have. Is it any wonder? You were engaged to Tom when I went
away, Jenny told me you were. And a year later Bertha wrote me a
letter in which she made some reference to Tom's marriage. She didn't
say to _whom_, but hadn't I the right to suppose it was to you?" "Oh!" The word was partly a sigh and partly a little cry of
long-concealed, long-denied pain. "It's been all a funny
misunderstanding. Tom and I _were_ engaged once--a boy-and-girl affair
in the beginning. Then we both found out that we had made a
mistake--that what we had thought was love was merely the affection of
good comrades. We broke our engagement shortly before you went away. All the older girls knew it was broken but I suppose nobody mentioned
the matter to Jen. She was such a child, we never thought about her. And you've thought I was Tom's wife all this time? It's--funny." "Funny. You mean tragic! Look here, Esme, I'm not going to risk any
more misunderstanding. There's nothing for it but plain talk when
matters get to such a state as this. I love you--and I've loved you
ever since I met you. I went away because I could not stay here and
see you married to another man. I've stayed away for the same reason. Esme, is it too late? Did you ever care anything for me?" "Yes, I did," she said slowly. "Do you care still?" he asked. She hid her face against his shoulder. "Yes," she whispered. "Then we'll go back to the house and be married," he said joyfully. Esme broke away and stared at him. "Married!" "Yes, married. We've wasted ten years and we're not going to waste
another minute. We're _not_, I say." "Selwyn! It's impossible." "I have expurgated that word from my dictionary. It's the very
simplest thing when you look at it in an unprejudiced way. Here is a
ready-made wedding and decorations and assembled guests, a minister on
the spot and a state where no licence is required. You have a very
pretty new dress on and you love me. I have a plain gold ring on my
little finger that will fit you. Aren't all the conditions fulfilled? Where is the sense of waiting and having another family upheaval in a
few weeks' time?" "I understand why you have made such a success of the law," said Esme,
"but--"

"There are no buts. Come with me, Esme. I'm going to hunt up your
mother and mine and talk to them." Half an hour later an astonishing whisper went circulating among the
guests. Before they could grasp its significance Tom St. Clair and
Jen's husband, broadly smiling, were hustling scattered folk into the
parlour again and making clear a passage in the hall. The minister
came in with his blue book, and then Selwyn Grant and Esme Graham
walked in hand in hand. When the second ceremony was over, Mr. Grant shook his son's hand
vigorously. "There's no need to wish you happiness, son; you've got
it. And you've made one fuss and bother do for both weddings, that's
what I call genius. And"--this in a careful whisper, while Esme was
temporarily obliterated in Mrs. Grant's capacious embrace--"she's got
the right sort of a nose. But your mother is a grand woman, son, a
grand woman." At the Bay Shore Farm


The Newburys were agog with excitement over the Governor's picnic. As
they talked it over on the verandah at sunset, they felt that life
could not be worth living to those unfortunate people who had not been
invited to it. Not that there were many of the latter in Claymont, for
it was the Governor's native village, and the Claymonters were getting
up the picnic for him during his political visit to the city fifteen
miles away. Each of the Newburys had a special reason for wishing to attend the
Governor's picnic. Ralph and Elliott wanted to see the Governor
himself. He was a pet hero of theirs. Had he not once been a Claymont
lad just like themselves? Had he not risen to the highest office in
the state by dint of sheer hard work and persistency? Had he not won a
national reputation by his prompt and decisive measures during the big
strike at Campden? And was he not a man, personally and politically,
whom any boy might be proud to imitate? Yes, to all of these
questions. Hence to the Newbury boys the interest of the picnic
centred in the Governor. "I shall feel two inches taller just to get a look at him," said Ralph
enthusiastically. "He isn't much to look at," said Frances, rather patronizingly. "I saw
him once at Campden--he came to the school when his daughter was
graduated. He is bald and fat. Oh, of course, he is famous and all
that! But I want to go to the picnic to see Sara Beaumont. She's to be
there with the Chandlers from Campden, and Mary Spearman, who knows
her by sight, is going to point her out to me. I suppose it would be
too much to expect to be introduced to her. I shall probably have to
content myself with just looking at her." Ralph resented hearing the Governor called bald and fat. Somehow it
seemed as if his hero were being reduced to the level of common clay. "That's like a girl," he said loftily; "thinking more about a woman
who writes books than about a man like the Governor!" "I'd rather see Sara Beaumont than forty governors," retorted Frances. "Why, she's famous--and her books are perfect! If I could ever hope to
write anything like them! It's been the dream of my life just to see
her ever since I read _The Story of Idlewild_. And now to think that
it is to be fulfilled! It seems too good to be true that
tomorrow--tomorrow, Newburys,--I shall see Sara Beaumont!" "Well," said Cecilia gently--Cecilia was always gentle even in her
enthusiasm--"I shall like to see the Governor and Sara Beaumont too. But I'm going to the picnic more for the sake of seeing Nan Harris
than anything else. It's three years since she went away, you know,
and I've never had another chum whom I love so dearly. I'm just
looking forward to meeting her and talking over all our dear, good old
times. I do wonder if she has changed much. But I am sure I shall know
her." "By her red hair and her freckles?" questioned Elliott teasingly. "They'll be the same as ever, I'll be bound." Cecilia flushed and looked as angry as she could--which isn't saying
much, after all. She didn't mind when Elliott teased her about her pug
nose and her big mouth, but it always hurt her when he made fun of
Nan. Nan's family had once lived across the street from the Newburys. Nan
and Cecilia had been playmates all through childhood, but when both
girls were fourteen the Harrises had moved out west. Cecilia had never
seen Nan since. But now the latter had come east for a visit, and was
with her relatives in Campden. She was to be at the picnic, and
Cecilia's cup of delight brimmed over. Mrs. Newbury came briskly into the middle of their sunset plans. She
had been down to the post office, and she carried an open letter in
her hand. "Mother," said Frances, straightening up anxiously, "you have a
pitying expression on your face. Which of us is it for--speak
out--don't keep us in suspense. Has Mary Spearman told you that Sara
Beaumont isn't going to be at the picnic?" "Or that the Governor isn't going to be there?" "Or that Nan Harris isn't coming?" "Or that something's happened to put off the affair altogether?" cried
Ralph and Cecilia and Elliott all at once. Mrs. Newbury laughed. "No, it's none of those things. And I don't know
just whom I do pity, but it is one of you girls. This is a letter from
Grandmother Newbury. Tomorrow is her birthday, and she wants either
Frances or Cecilia to go out to Ashland on the early morning train and
spend the day at the Bay Shore Farm." There was silence on the verandah of the Newburys for the space of ten
seconds. Then Frances burst out with: "Mother, you know neither of us
can go tomorrow. If it were any other day! But the day of the picnic!" "I'm sorry, but one of you must go," said Mrs. Newbury firmly. "Your
father said so when I called at the store to show him the letter. Grandmother Newbury would be very much hurt and displeased if her
invitation were disregarded--you know that. But we leave it to
yourselves to decide which one shall go." "Don't do that," implored Frances miserably. "Pick one of us
yourself--pull straws--anything to shorten the agony." "No; you must settle it for yourselves," said Mrs. Newbury. But in
spite of herself she looked at Cecilia. Cecilia was apt to be looked
at, someway, when things were to be given up. Mostly it was Cecilia
who gave them up. The family had come to expect it of her; they all
said that Cecilia was very unselfish. Cecilia knew that her mother looked at her, but did not turn her face. She couldn't, just then; she looked away out over the hills and tried
to swallow something that came up in her throat. "Glad I'm not a girl," said Ralph, when Mrs. Newbury had gone into the
house. "Whew! Nothing could induce me to give up that picnic--not if a
dozen Grandmother Newburys were offended. Where's your sparkle gone
now, Fran?" "It's too bad of Grandmother Newbury," declared Frances angrily. "Oh, Fran, she didn't know about the picnic," said Cecilia--but still
without turning round. "Well, she needn't always be so annoyed if we don't go when we are
invited. Another day would do just as well," said Frances shortly. Something in her voice sounded choked too. She rose and walked to the
other end of the verandah, where she stood and scowled down the road;
Ralph and Elliott, feeling uncomfortable, went away. The verandah was very still for a little while. The sun had quite set,
and it was growing dark when Frances came back to the steps. "Well, what are you going to do about it?" she said shortly. "Which of
us is to go to the Bay Shore?" "I suppose I had better go," said Cecilia slowly--very slowly indeed. Frances kicked her slippered toe against the fern _jardiniere_. "You may see Nan Harris somewhere else before she goes back," she said
consolingly. "Yes, I may," said Cecilia. She knew quite well that she would not. Nan would return to Campden on the special train, and she was going
back west in three days. It was hard to give the picnic up, but Cecilia was used to giving
things up. Nobody ever expected Frances to give things up; she was so
brilliant and popular that the good things of life came her way
naturally. It never seemed to matter so much about quiet Cecilia. *       *       *       *       *

Cecilia cried herself to sleep that night. She felt that it was
horribly selfish of her to do so, but she couldn't help it. She awoke
in the morning with a confused idea that it was very late. Why hadn't
Mary called her, as she had been told to do? Through the open door between her room and Frances's she could see
that the latter's bed was empty. Then she saw a little note, addressed
to her, pinned on the pillow. Dear Saint Cecilia [it ran], when you read this I shall be on
    the train to Ashland to spend the day with Grandmother
    Newbury. You've been giving up things so often and so long
    that I suppose you think you have a monopoly of it; but you
    see you haven't. I didn't tell you this last night because I
    hadn't quite made up my mind. But after you went upstairs, I
    fought it out to a finish and came to a decision. Sara
    Beaumont would keep, but Nan Harris wouldn't, so you must go
    to the picnic. I told Mary to call me instead of you this
    morning, and now I'm off. You needn't spoil your fun pitying
    me. Now that the wrench is over, I feel a most delightful glow
    of virtuous satisfaction! Fran. If by running after Frances Cecilia could have brought her back,
Cecilia would have run. But a glance at her watch told her that
Frances must already be halfway to Ashland. So she could only accept
the situation. "Well, anyway," she thought, "I'll get Mary to point Sara Beaumont out
to me, and I'll store up a description of her in my mind to tell Fran
tonight. I must remember to take notice of the colour of her eyes. Fran has always been exercised about that." It was mid-forenoon when Frances arrived at Ashland station. Grandmother Newbury's man, Hiram, was waiting for her with the pony
carriage, and Frances heartily enjoyed the three-mile drive to the Bay
Shore Farm. Grandmother Newbury came to the door to meet her granddaughter. She
was a tall, handsome old lady with piercing black eyes and thick white
hair. There was no savour of the traditional grandmother of caps and
knitting about her. She was like a stately old princess and, much as
her grandchildren admired her, they were decidedly in awe of her. "So it is Frances," she said, bending her head graciously that Frances
might kiss her still rosy cheek. "I expected it would be Cecilia. I
heard after I had written you that there was to be a gubernatorial
picnic in Claymont today, so I was quite sure it would be Cecilia. Why
isn't it Cecilia?" Frances flushed a little. There was a meaning tone in Grandmother
Newbury's voice. "Cecilia was very anxious to go to the picnic today to see an old
friend of hers," she answered. "She was willing to come here, but you
know, Grandmother, that Cecilia is always willing to do the things
somebody else ought to do, so I decided I would stand on my rights as
'Miss Newbury' for once and come to the Bay Shore." Grandmother Newbury smiled. She understood. Frances had always been
her favourite granddaughter, but she had never been blind,
clear-sighted old lady that she was, to the little leaven of
easy-going selfishness in the girl's nature. She was pleased to see
that Frances had conquered it this time. "I'm glad it is you who have come--principally because you are
cleverer than Cecilia," she said brusquely. "Or at least you are the
better talker. And I want a clever girl and a good talker to help me
entertain a guest today. She's clever herself, and she likes young
girls. She is a particular friend of your Uncle Robert's family down
south, and that is why I have asked her to spend a few days with me. You'll like her." Here Grandmother Newbury led Frances into the sitting-room. "Mrs. Kennedy, this is my granddaughter, Frances Newbury. I told you
about her and her ambitions last night. You see, Frances, we have
talked you over." Mrs. Kennedy was a much younger woman than Grandmother Newbury. She
was certainly no more than fifty and, in spite of her grey hair,
looked almost girlish, so bright were her dark eyes, so clear-cut and
fresh her delicate face, and so smart her general appearance. Frances,
although not given to sudden likings, took one for Mrs. Kennedy. She
thought she had never seen so charming a face. She found herself enjoying the day immensely. In fact, she forgot the
Governor's picnic and Sara Beaumont altogether. Mrs. Kennedy proved to
be a delightful companion. She had travelled extensively and was an
excellent _raconteur_. She had seen much of men and women and
crystallized her experiences into sparkling little sentences and
epigrams which made Frances feel as if she were listening to one of
the witty people in clever books. But under all her sparkling wit
there was a strongly felt undercurrent of true womanly sympathy and
kind-heartedness which won affection as speedily as her brilliance won
admiration. Frances listened and laughed and enjoyed. Once she found
time to think that she would have missed a great deal if she had not
come to Bay Shore Farm that day. Surely talking to a woman like Mrs.
Kennedy was better than looking at Sara Beaumont from a distance. "I've been 'rewarded' in the most approved storybook style," she
thought with amusement. In the afternoon, Grandmother Newbury packed Mrs. Kennedy and Frances
off for a walk. "The old woman wants to have her regular nap," she told them. "Frances, take Mrs. Kennedy to the fern walk and show her the famous
'Newbury Bubble' among the rocks. I want to be rid of you both until
tea-time." Frances and Mrs. Kennedy went to the fern walk and the beautiful
"Bubble"--a clear, round spring of amber-hued water set down in a cup
of rock overhung with ferns and beeches. It was a spot Frances had
always loved. She found herself talking freely to Mrs. Kennedy of her
hopes and plans. The older woman drew the girl out with tactful
sympathy until she found that Frances's dearest ambition was some day
to be a writer of books like Sara Beaumont. "Not that I expect ever to write books like hers," she said hurriedly,
"and I know it must be a long while before I can write anything worth
while at all. But do you think--if I try hard and work hard--that I
might do something in this line some day?" "I think so," said Mrs. Kennedy, smiling, "if, as you say, you are
willing to work hard and study hard. There will be a great deal of
both and many disappointments. Sara Beaumont herself had a hard time
at first--and for a very long first too. Her family was poor, you
know, and Sara earned enough money to send away her first manuscripts
by making a pot of jelly for a neighbour. The manuscripts came back,
and Sara made more jelly and wrote more stories. Still they came back. Once she thought she had better give up writing stories and stick to
the jelly alone. There did seem some little demand for the one and
none at all for the other. But she determined to keep on until she
either succeeded or proved to her own satisfaction that she could make
better jelly than stories. And you see she did succeed. But it means
perseverance and patience and much hard work. Prepare yourself for
that, Frances, and one day you will win your place. Then you will look
back to the 'Newbury Bubble,' and you will tell me what a good
prophetess I was." They talked longer--an earnest, helpful talk that went far to inspire
Frances's hazy ambition with a definite purpose. She understood that
she must not write merely to win fame for herself or even for the
higher motive of pure pleasure in her work. She must aim, however
humbly, to help her readers to higher planes of thought and
endeavour. Then and only then would it be worth while. "Mrs. Kennedy is going to drive you to the station," said Grandmother
Newbury after tea. "I am much obliged to you, Frances, for giving up
the picnic today and coming to the Bay Shore to gratify an old woman's
inconvenient whim. But I shall not burden you with too much gratitude,
for I think you have enjoyed yourself." "Indeed, I have," said Frances heartily. Then she added with a laugh,
"I think I would feel much more meritorious if it had not been so
pleasant. It has robbed me of all the self-sacrificing complacency I
felt this morning. You see, I wanted to go to that picnic to see Sara
Beaumont, and I felt quite like a martyr at giving it up." Grandmother Newbury's eyes twinkled. "You would have been beautifully
disappointed had you gone. Sara Beaumont was not there. Mrs. Kennedy,
I see you haven't told our secret. Frances, my dear, let me introduce
you two over again. This lady is Mrs. Sara Beaumont Kennedy, the
writer of _The Story of Idlewild_ and all those other books you so
much admire." *       *       *       *       *

The Newburys were sitting on the verandah at dusk, too tired and too
happy to talk. Ralph and Elliott had seen the Governor; more than
that, they had been introduced to him, and he had shaken hands with
them both and told them that their father and he had been chums when
just their size. And Cecilia had spent a whole day with Nan Harris,
who had not changed at all except to grow taller. But there was one
little cloud on her content. "I wanted to see Sara Beaumont to tell Frances about her, but I
couldn't get a glimpse of her. I don't even know if she was there." "There comes Fran up the station road now," said Ralph. "My eyes,
hasn't she a step!" Frances came smiling over the lawn and up the steps. "So you are all home safe," she said gaily. "I hope you feasted your
eyes on your beloved Governor, boys. I can tell that Cecilia
forgathered with Nan by the beatific look on her face." "Oh, Fran, it was lovely!" cried Cecilia. "But I felt so sorry--why
didn't you let me go to Ashland? It was too bad you missed it--and
Sara Beaumont." "Sara Beaumont was at the Bay Shore Farm," said Frances. "I'll tell
you all about it when I get my breath--I've been breathless ever since
Grandmother Newbury told me of it. There's only one drawback to my
supreme bliss--the remembrance of how complacently self-sacrificing I
felt this morning. It humiliates me wholesomely to remember it!" Elizabeth's Child


The Ingelows, of Ingelow Grange, were not a marrying family. Only one
of them, Elizabeth, had married, and perhaps it was her "poor match"
that discouraged the others. At any rate, Ellen and Charlotte and
George Ingelow at the Grange were single, and so was Paul down at
Greenwood Farm. It was seventeen years since Elizabeth had married James Sheldon in
the face of the most decided opposition on the part of her family. Sheldon was a handsome, shiftless ne'er-do-well, without any violent
bad habits, but also "without any backbone," as the Ingelows declared. "There is sometimes hope of a man who is actively bad," Charlotte
Ingelow had said sententiously, "but who ever heard of reforming a
jellyfish?" Elizabeth and her husband had gone west and settled on a prairie farm
in Manitoba. She had never been home since. Perhaps her pride kept her
away, for she had the Ingelow share of that, and she soon discovered
that her family's estimate of James Sheldon had been the true one. There was no active resentment on either side, and once in a long
while letters were exchanged. Still, ever since her marriage,
Elizabeth had been practically an outsider and an alien. As the years
came and went the Ingelows at home remembered only at long intervals
that they had a sister on the western prairies. One of these remembrances came to Charlotte Ingelow on a spring
afternoon when the great orchards about the Grange were pink and white
with apple and cherry blossoms, and over every hill and field was a
delicate, flower-starred green. A soft breeze was blowing loose petals
from the August Sweeting through the open door of the wide hall when
Charlotte came through it. Ellen and George were standing on the steps
outside. "This kind of a day always makes me think of Elizabeth," said
Charlotte dreamily. "It was in apple-blossom time she went away." The
Ingelows always spoke of Elizabeth's going away, never of her
marrying. "Seventeen years ago," said Ellen. "Why, Elizabeth's oldest child must
be quite a young woman now! I--I--" a sudden idea swept over and left
her a little breathless. "I would really like to see her." "Then why don't you write and ask her to come east and visit us?" asked George, who did not often speak, but who always spoke to some
purpose when he did. Ellen and Charlotte looked at each other. "I would like to see
Elizabeth's child," repeated Ellen firmly. "Do you think she would come?" asked Charlotte. "You know when James
Sheldon died five years ago, we wrote to Elizabeth and asked her to
come home and live with us, and she seemed almost resentful in the
letter she wrote back. I've never said so before, but I've often
thought it." "Yes, she did," said Ellen, who had often thought so too, but never
said so. "Elizabeth was always very independent," remarked George. "Perhaps she
thought your letter savoured of charity or pity. No Ingelow would
endure that." "At any rate, you know she refused to come, even for a visit. She said
she could not leave the farm. She may refuse to let her child come." "It won't do any harm to ask her," said George. In the end, Charlotte wrote to Elizabeth and asked her to let her
daughter visit the old homestead. The letter was written and mailed in
much perplexity and distrust when once the glow of momentary
enthusiasm in the new idea had passed. "What if Elizabeth's child is like her father?" queried Charlotte in a
half-whisper. "Let us hope she won't be!" cried Ellen fervently. Indeed, she felt
that a feminine edition of James Sheldon would be more than she could
endure. "She may not like us, or our ways," sighed Charlotte. "We don't know
how she has been brought up. She will seem like a stranger after all. I really long to see Elizabeth's child, but I can't help fearing we
have done a rash thing, Ellen." "Perhaps she may not come," suggested Ellen, wondering whether she
hoped it or feared it. But Worth Sheldon did come. Elizabeth wrote back a prompt acceptance,
with no trace of the proud bitterness that had permeated her answer to
the former invitation. The Ingelows at the Grange were thrown into a
flutter when the letter came. In another week Elizabeth's child would
be with them. "If only she isn't like her father," said Charlotte with foreboding,
as she aired and swept the southeast spare room for their expected
guest. They had three spare rooms at the Grange, but the aunts had
selected the southeast one for their niece because it was done in
white, "and white seems the most appropriate for a young girl," Ellen
said, as she arranged a pitcher of wild roses on the table. "I think everything is ready," announced Charlotte. "I put the very
finest sheets on the bed, they smell deliciously of lavender, and we
had very good luck doing up the muslin curtains. It is pleasant to be
expecting a guest, isn't it, Ellen? I have often thought, although I
have never said so before, that our lives were too self-centred. We
seemed to have no interests outside of ourselves. Even Elizabeth has
been really nothing to us, you know. She seemed to have become a
stranger. I hope her child will be the means of bringing us nearer
together again." "If she has James Sheldon's round face and big blue eyes and curly
yellow hair I shall never really like her, no matter how Ingelowish
she may be inside," said Ellen decidedly. When Worth Sheldon came, each of her aunts drew a long breath of
relief. Worth was not in the least like her father in appearance. Neither did she resemble her mother, who had been a sprightly,
black-haired and black-eyed girl. Worth was tall and straight, with a
long braid of thick, wavy brown hair, large, level-gazing grey eyes, a
square jaw, and an excellent chin with a dimple in it. "She is the very image of Mother's sister, Aunt Alice, who died so
long ago," said Charlotte. "You don't remember her, Ellen, but I do
very well. She was the sweetest woman that ever drew breath. She was
Paul's favourite aunt, too," Charlotte added with a sigh. Paul's
antagonistic attitude was the only drawback to the joy of this
meeting. How delightful it would have been if he had not refused to be
there too, to welcome Elizabeth's child. Worth came to hearts prepared to love her, but they must have loved
her in any case. In a day Aunt Charlotte and Aunt Ellen and shy,
quiet Uncle George had yielded wholly to her charm. She was girlishly
bright and merry, frankly delighted with the old homestead and the
quaint, old-fashioned, daintily kept rooms. Yet there was no
suggestion of gush about her; she did not go into raptures, but her
pleasure shone out in eyes and tones. There was so much to tell and
ask and remember the first day that it was not until the second
morning after her arrival that Worth asked the question her aunts had
been dreading. She asked it out in the orchard, in the emerald gloom
of a long arcade of stout old trees that Grandfather Ingelow had
planted fifty years ago. "Aunt Charlotte, when is Uncle Paul coming up to see me? I long to see
him; Mother has talked so much to me about him. She was his favourite
sister, wasn't she?" Charlotte and Ellen looked at each other. Ellen nodded slyly. It would
be better to tell Worth the whole truth at once. She would certainly
find it out soon. "I do not think, my dear," said Aunt Charlotte quietly, "that your
Uncle Paul will be up to see you at all." "Why not?" asked Worth, her serious grey eyes looking straight into
Aunt Charlotte's troubled dark ones. Aunt Charlotte understood that
Elizabeth had never told Worth anything about her family's resentment
of her marriage. It was not a pleasant thing to have to explain it all
to Elizabeth's child, but it must be done. "I think, my dear," she said gently, "that I will have to tell you a
little bit of our family history that may not be very pleasant to hear
or tell. Perhaps you don't know that when your mother married
we--we--did not exactly approve of her marriage. Perhaps we were
mistaken; at any rate it was wrong and foolish to let it come between
us and her as we have done. But that is how it was. None of us
approved, as I have said, but none of us was so bitter as your Uncle
Paul. Your mother was his favourite sister, and he was very deeply
attached to her. She was only a year younger than he. When he bought
the Greenwood farm she went and kept house for him for three years
before her marriage. When she married, Paul was terribly angry. He was
always a strange man, very determined and unyielding. He said he would
never forgive her, and he never has. He has never married, and he has
lived so long alone at Greenwood with only deaf old Mrs. Bree to keep
house for him that he has grown odder than ever. One of us wanted to
go and keep house for him, but he would not let us. And--I must tell
you this although I hate to--he was very angry when he heard we had
invited you to visit us, and he said he would not come near the Grange
as long as you were here. Oh, you can't realize how bitter and
obstinate he is. We pleaded with him, but I think that only made him
worse. We have felt so bad over it, your Aunt Ellen and your Uncle
George and I, but we can do nothing at all." Worth had listened gravely. The story was all new to her, but she had
long thought there must be a something at the root of her mother's
indifferent relations with her old home and friends. When Aunt
Charlotte, flushed and half-tearful, finished speaking, a little
glimmer of fun came into Worth's grey eyes, and her dimple was very
pronounced as she said,

"Then, if Uncle Paul will not come to see me, I must go to see him." "My dear!" cried both her aunts together in dismay. Aunt Ellen got her
breath first. "Oh, my dear child, you must not think of such a thing," she cried
nervously. "It would never do. He would--I don't know what he would
do--order you off the premises, or say something dreadful. No! No! Wait. Perhaps he will come after all--we will see. You must have
patience." Worth shook her head and the smile in her eyes deepened. "I don't think he will come," she said. "Mother has told me something
about the Ingelow stubbornness. She says I have it in full measure,
but I like to call it determination, it sounds so much better. No, the
mountain will not come to Mohammed, so Mohammed will go to the
mountain. I think I will walk down to Greenwood this afternoon. There,
dear aunties, don't look so troubled. Uncle Paul won't run at me with
a pitchfork, will he? He can't do worse than order me off his
premises, as you say." Aunt Charlotte shook her head. She understood that no argument would
turn the girl from her purpose if she had the Ingelow will, so she
said nothing more. In the afternoon Worth set out for Greenwood, a
mile away. "Oh, what will Paul say?" exclaimed the aunts, with dismal
forebodings. Worth met her Uncle Paul at the garden gate. He was standing there
when she came up the slope of the long lane, a tall, massive figure of
a man, with deep-set black eyes, a long, prematurely white beard, and
a hooked nose. Handsome and stubborn enough Paul Ingelow looked. It
was not without reason that his neighbours called him the oddest
Ingelow of them all. Behind him was a fine old farmhouse in beautiful grounds. Worth felt
almost as much interested in Greenwood as in the Grange. It had been
her mother's home for three years, and Elizabeth Ingelow had loved it
and talked much to her daughter of it. Paul Ingelow did not move or speak, although he probably guessed who
his visitor was. Worth held out her hand. "How do you do, Uncle Paul?" she said. Paul ignored the outstretched hand. "Who are you?" he asked gruffly. "I am Worth Sheldon, your sister Elizabeth's daughter," she answered. "Won't you shake hands with me, Uncle Paul?" "I have no sister Elizabeth," he answered unbendingly. Worth folded her hands on the gatepost and met his frowning gaze
unshrinkingly. "Oh, yes, you have," she said calmly. "You can't do
away with natural ties by simply ignoring them, Uncle Paul. They go on
existing. I never knew until this morning that you were at enmity with
my mother. She never told me. But she has talked a great deal of you
to me. She has told me often how much you and she loved each other and
how good you always were to her. She sent her love to you." "Years ago I had a sister Elizabeth," said Paul Ingelow harshly. "I
loved her very tenderly, but she married against my will a shiftless
scamp who--"

Worth lifted her hand slightly. "He was my father, Uncle Paul, and he
was always kind to me; whatever his faults may have been I cannot
listen to a word against him." "You shouldn't have come here, then," he said, but he said it less
harshly. There was even a certain reluctant approval of this composed,
independent niece in his eyes. "Didn't they tell you at the Grange
that I didn't want to see you?" "Yes, they told me this morning, but _I_ wanted to see you, so I came. Why cannot we be friends, Uncle Paul, not because we are uncle and
niece, but simply because you are you and I am I? Let us leave my
father and mother out of the question and start fair on our own
account." For a moment Uncle Paul looked at her. She met his gaze frankly and
firmly, with a merry smile lurking in her eyes. Then he threw back his
head and laughed a hearty laugh that was good to hear. "Very well," he
said. "It is a bargain." He put his hand over the gate and shook hers. Then he opened the gate
and invited her into the house. Worth stayed to tea, and Uncle Paul
showed her all over Greenwood. "You are to come here as often as you like," he told her. "When a
young lady and I make a compact of friendship I am going to live up to
it. But you are not to talk to me about your mother. Remember, we are
friends because I am I and you are you, and there is no question of
anybody else." The Grange Ingelows were amazed to see Paul bringing Worth home in his
buggy that evening. When Worth had gone into the house Charlotte told
him that she was glad to see that he had relented towards Elizabeth's
child. "I have not," he made stern answer. "I don't know whom you mean by
Elizabeth's child. That young woman and I have taken a liking for each
other which we mean to cultivate on our own account. Don't call her
Elizabeth's child to me again." As the days and weeks went by Worth grew dearer and dearer to the
Grange folk. The aunts often wondered to themselves how they had
existed before Worth came and, oftener yet, how they could do without
her when the time came for her to go home. Meanwhile, the odd
friendship between her and Uncle Paul deepened and grew. They read and
drove and walked together. Worth spent half her time at Greenwood. Once Uncle Paul said to her, as if speaking half to himself,

"To think that James Sheldon could have a daughter like you!" Up went Worth's head. Worth's grey eyes flashed. "I thought we were
not to speak of my parents?" she said. "You ought not to have been the
first to break the compact, Uncle Paul." "I accept the rebuke and beg your pardon," he said. He liked her all
the better for those little flashes of spirit across her girlish
composure. One day in September they were together in the garden at Greenwood. Worth, looking lovingly and regretfully down the sun-flecked avenue of
box, said with a sigh, "Next month I must go home. How sorry I shall
be to leave the Grange and Greenwood. I have had such a delightful
summer, and I have learned to love all the old nooks and corners as
well as if I had lived here all my life." "Stay here!" said Uncle Paul abruptly. "Stay here with me. I want you,
Worth. Let Greenwood be your home henceforth and adopt your crusty old
bachelor uncle for a father." "Oh, Uncle Paul," cried Worth, "I don't know--I don't think--oh, you
surprise me!" "I surprise myself, perhaps. But I mean it, Worth. I am a rich, lonely
old man and I want to keep this new interest you have brought into my
life. Stay with me. I will try to give you a very happy life, my
child, and all I have shall be yours." Seeing her troubled face, he added, "There, I don't ask you to decide
right here. I suppose you have other claims to adjust. Take time to
think it over." "Thank you," said Worth. She went back to the Grange as one in a
dream and shut herself up in the white southeast room to think. She
knew that she wanted to accept this unexpected offer of Uncle Paul's. Worth's loyal tongue had never betrayed, even to the loving aunts, any
discontent in the prairie farm life that had always been hers. But it
had been a hard life for the girl, narrow and poverty-bounded. She
longed to put forth her hand and take this other life which opened so
temptingly before her. She knew, too, that her mother, ambitious for
her child, would not be likely to interpose any objections. She had
only to go to Uncle Paul and all that she longed for would be given
her, together with the faithful, protecting fatherly love and care
that in all its strength and sweetness had never been hers. She must decide for herself. Not even of Aunt Charlotte or Aunt Ellen
could she ask advice. She knew they would entreat her to accept, and
she needed no such incentive to her own wishes. Far on into the night
Worth sat at the white-curtained dormer window, looking at the stars
over the apple trees, and fighting her battle between inclination and
duty. It was a hard and stubbornly contested battle, but with that
square chin and those unfaltering grey eyes it could end in only one
way. Next day Worth went down to Greenwood. "Well, what is it to be?" said Uncle Paul without preface, as he met
her in the garden. "I cannot come, Uncle Paul," said Worth steadily. "I cannot give up my
mother." "I don't ask you to give her up," he said gruffly. "You can write to
her and visit her. I don't want to come between parent and child." "That isn't the point exactly, Uncle Paul. I hope you will not be
angry with me for not accepting your offer. I wanted to--you don't
know how much I wanted to--but I cannot. Mother and I are so much to
each other, Uncle Paul, more, I am sure, than even most mothers and
daughters. You have never let me speak of her, but I must tell you
this. Mother has often told me that when I came to her things were
going very hard with her and that I was heaven's own gift to comfort
and encourage her. Then, in the ten years that followed, the three
other babies that came to her all died before they were two years old. And with each loss Mother said I grew dearer to her. Don't you see,
Uncle Paul, I'm not merely just one child to her but I'm _all_ those
children? Six years ago the twins were born, and they are dear, bright
little lads, but they are very small yet, so Mother has really nobody
but me. I know she would consent to let me stay here, because she
would think it best for me, but it wouldn't be really best for me; it
couldn't be best for a girl to do what wasn't right. I love you, Uncle
Paul, and I love Greenwood, and I want to stay so much, but I cannot. I have thought it all over and I must go back to Mother." Uncle Paul did not say one word. He turned his back on Worth and
walked the full length of the box alley twice. Worth watched him
wistfully. Was he very angry? Would he forgive her? "You are an Ingelow, Worth," he said when he came back. That was all,
but Worth understood that her decision was not to cause any
estrangement between them. A month later Worth's last day at the Grange came. She was to leave
for the West the next morning. They were all out in Grandfather
Ingelow's arcade, Uncle George and Aunt Charlotte and Aunt Ellen and
Worth, enjoying the ripe mellow sunshine of the October day, when Paul
Ingelow came up the slope. Worth went to meet him with outstretched
hands. He took them both in his and looked at her very gravely. "I have not come to say goodbye, Worth. I will not say it. You are
coming back to me." Worth shook her brown head sadly. "Oh, I cannot, Uncle Paul. You
know--I told you--"

"Yes, I know," he interrupted. "I have been thinking it all over every
day since. You know yourself what the Ingelow determination is. It's a
good thing in a good cause but a bad thing in a bad one. And it is no
easy thing to conquer when you've let it rule you for years as I have
done. But I have conquered it, or you have conquered it for me. Child,
here is a letter. It is to your mother--my sister Elizabeth. In it I
have asked her to forgive me, and to forget our long estrangement. I
have asked her to come back to me with you and her boys. I want you
all--all--at Greenwood and I will do the best I can for you all." "Oh, Uncle Paul," cried Worth, her face aglow and quivering with
smiles and tears and sunshine. "Do you think she will forgive me and come?" "I know she will," cried Worth. "I know how she has longed for you and
home. Oh, I am so happy, Uncle Paul!" He smiled at her and put his arm over her shoulder. Together they
walked up the golden arcade to tell the others. That night Charlotte
and Ellen cried with happiness as they talked it over in the twilight. "How beautiful!" murmured Charlotte softly. "We shall not lose Worth
after all. Ellen, I could not have borne it to see that girl go
utterly out of our lives again." "I always hoped and believed that Elizabeth's child would somehow
bring us all together again," said Ellen happily. Freda's Adopted Grave


North Point, where Freda lived, was the bleakest settlement in the
world. Even its inhabitants, who loved it, had to admit that. The
northeast winds swept whistling up the bay and blew rawly over the
long hill that sloped down to it, blighting everything that was in
their way. Only the sturdy firs and spruces could hold their own
against it. So there were no orchards or groves or flower gardens in
North Point. Just over the hill, in a sheltered southwest valley, was the North
Point church with the graveyard behind it, and this graveyard was the
most beautiful spot in North Point or near it. The North Point folk
loved flowers. They could not have them about their homes, so they had
them in their graveyard. It was a matter of pride with each family to
keep the separate plot neatly trimmed and weeded and adorned with
beautiful blossoms. It was one of the unwritten laws of the little community that on some
selected day in May everybody would repair to the graveyard to plant,
trim and clip. It was not an unpleasant duty, even to those whose
sorrow was fresh. It seemed as if they were still doing something for
the friends who had gone when they made their earthly resting places
beautiful. As for the children, they looked forward to "Graveyard Day" as a very
delightful anniversary, and it divided its spring honours with the
amount of the herring catch. "Tomorrow is Graveyard Day," said Minnie Hutchinson at school recess,
when all the little girls were sitting on the fence. "Ain't I glad! I've got the loveliest big white rosebush to plant by Grandma
Hutchinson's grave. Uncle Robert sent it out from town." "My mother has ten tuberoses to set out," said Nan Gray proudly. "We're going to plant a row of lilies right around our plot," said
Katie Morris. Every little girl had some boast to make, that is, every little girl
but Freda. Freda sat in a corner all by herself and felt miserably
outside of everything. She had no part or lot in Graveyard Day. "Are you going to plant anything, Freda?" asked Nan, with a wink at
the others. Freda shook her head mutely. "Freda can't plant anything," said Winnie Bell cruelly, although she
did not mean to be cruel. "She hasn't got a grave." Just then Freda felt as if her gravelessness were a positive disgrace
and crime, as if not to have an interest in a single grave in North
Point cemetery branded you as an outcast forever and ever. It very
nearly did in North Point. The other little girls pitied Freda, but at
the same time they rather looked down upon her for it with the
complacency of those who had been born into a good heritage of family
graves and had an undisputed right to celebrate Graveyard Day. Freda felt that her cup of wretchedness was full. She sat miserably on
the fence while the other girls ran off to play, and she walked home
alone at night. It seemed to her that she could _not_ bear it any
longer. Freda was ten years old. Four years ago Mrs. Wilson had taken her from
the orphan asylum in town. Mrs. Wilson lived just this side of the
hill from the graveyard, and everybody in North Point called her a
"crank." They pitied any child she took, they said. It would be worked
to death and treated like a slave. 