



Produced by Alicia Williams, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1905 to 1906


Lucy Maud Montgomery was born at Clifton (now New London), Prince
Edward Island, Canada, on November 30, 1874. She achieved
international fame in her lifetime, putting Prince Edward Island and
Canada on the world literary map. Best known for her "Anne of Green
Gables" books, she was also a prolific writer of short stories and
poetry. She published some 500 short stories and poems and twenty
novels before her death in 1942. The Project Gutenberg collection of
her short stories was gathered from numerous sources and is presented
in chronological publishing order:

Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1896 to 1901
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1902 to 1903
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1904
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1905 to 1906
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1907 to 1908
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1909 to 1922


       *       *       *       *       *




Short Stories 1905 to 1906

    A Correspondence and a Climax                            1905
    An Adventure on Island Rock                              1906
    At Five O'Clock in the Morning                           1905
    Aunt Susanna's Birthday Celebration                      1905
    Bertie's New Year                                        1905
    Between the Hill and the Valley                          1905
    Clorinda's Gifts                                         1906
    Cyrilla's Inspiration                                    1905
    Dorinda's Desperate Deed                                 1906
    Her Own People                                           1905
    Ida's New Year Cake                                      1905
    In the Old Valley                                        1906
    Jane Lavinia                                             1906
    Mackereling Out in the Gulf                              1905
    Millicent's Double                                       1905
    The Blue North Room                                      1906
    The Christmas Surprise At Enderly Road                   1905
    The Dissipation of Miss Ponsonby                         1906
    The Falsoms' Christmas Dinner                            1906
    The Fraser Scholarship                                   1905
    The Girl at the Gate                                     1906
    The Light on the Big Dipper                              1906
    The Prodigal Brother                                     1906
    The Redemption of John Churchill                         1906
    The Schoolmaster's Letter                                1905
    The Story of Uncle Dick                                  1906
    The Understanding of Sister Sara                         1905
    The Unforgotten One                                      1906
    The Wooing of Bessy                                      1906
    Their Girl Josie                                         1906
    When Jack and Jill Took a Hand                           1905




A Correspondence and A Climax


At sunset Sidney hurried to her room to take off the soiled and faded
cotton dress she had worn while milking. She had milked eight cows and
pumped water for the milk-cans afterward in the fag-end of a hot
summer day. She did that every night, but tonight she had hurried more
than usual because she wanted to get her letter written before the
early farm bedtime. She had been thinking it out while she milked the
cows in the stuffy little pen behind the barn. This monthly letter was
the only pleasure and stimulant in her life. Existence would have
been, so Sidney thought, a dreary, unbearable blank without it. She
cast aside her milking-dress with a thrill of distaste that tingled to
her rosy fingertips. As she slipped into her blue-print afternoon
dress her aunt called to her from below. Sidney ran out to the dark
little entry and leaned over the stair railing. Below in the kitchen
there was a hubbub of laughing, crying, quarrelling children, and a
reek of bad tobacco smoke drifted up to the girl's disgusted nostrils. Aunt Jane was standing at the foot of the stairs with a lamp in one
hand and a year-old baby clinging to the other. She was a big
shapeless woman with a round good-natured face--cheerful and vulgar as
a sunflower was Aunt Jane at all times and occasions. "I want to run over and see how Mrs. Brixby is this evening, Siddy,
and you must take care of the baby till I get back." Sidney sighed and went downstairs for the baby. It never would have
occurred to her to protest or be petulant about it. She had all her
aunt's sweetness of disposition, if she resembled her in nothing else. She had not grumbled because she had to rise at four that morning, get
breakfast, milk the cows, bake bread, prepare seven children for
school, get dinner, preserve twenty quarts of strawberries, get tea,
and milk the cows again. All her days were alike as far as hard work
and dullness went, but she accepted them cheerfully and
uncomplainingly. But she did resent having to look after the baby when
she wanted to write her letter. She carried the baby to her room, spread a quilt on the floor for him
to sit on, and gave him a box of empty spools to play with. Fortunately he was a phlegmatic infant, fond of staying in one place,
and not given to roaming about in search of adventures; but Sidney
knew she would have to keep an eye on him, and it would be distracting
to literary effort. She got out her box of paper and sat down by the little table at the
window with a small kerosene lamp at her elbow. The room was small--a
mere box above the kitchen which Sidney shared with two small cousins. Her bed and the cot where the little girls slept filled up almost all
the available space. The furniture was poor, but everything was
neat--it was the only neat room in the house, indeed, for tidiness was
no besetting virtue of Aunt Jane's. Opposite Sidney was a small muslined and befrilled toilet-table, above
which hung an eight-by-six-inch mirror, in which Sidney saw herself
reflected as she devoutly hoped other people did not see her. Just at
that particular angle one eye appeared to be as large as an orange,
while the other was the size of a pea, and the mouth zigzagged from
ear to ear. Sidney hated that mirror as virulently as she could hate
anything. It seemed to her to typify all that was unlovely in her
life. The mirror of existence into which her fresh young soul had
looked for twenty years gave back to her wistful gaze just such
distortions of fair hopes and ideals. Half of the little table by which she sat was piled high with
books--old books, evidently well read and well-bred books, classics of
fiction and verse every one of them, and all bearing on the flyleaf
the name of Sidney Richmond, thereby meaning not the girl at the
table, but her college-bred young father who had died the day before
she was born. Her mother had died the day after, and Sidney thereupon
had come into the hands of good Aunt Jane, with those books for her
dowry, since nothing else was left after the expenses of the double
funeral had been paid. One of the books had Sidney Richmond's name printed on the title-page
instead of written on the flyleaf. It was a thick little volume of
poems, published in his college days--musical, unsubstantial, pretty
little poems, every one of which the girl Sidney loved and knew by
heart. Sidney dropped her pointed chin in her hands and looked dreamily out
into the moonlit night, while she thought her letter out a little more
fully before beginning to write. Her big brown eyes were full of
wistfulness and romance; for Sidney was romantic, albeit a faithful
and understanding acquaintance with her father's books had given to
her romance refinement and reason, and the delicacy of her own nature
had imparted to it a self-respecting bias. Presently she began to write, with a flush of real excitement on her
face. In the middle of things the baby choked on a small twist spool
and Sidney had to catch him up by the heels and hold him head downward
until the trouble was ejected. Then she had to soothe him, and finally
write the rest of her letter holding him on one arm and protecting the
epistle from the grabs of his sticky little fingers. It was certainly
letter-writing under difficulties, but Sidney seemed to deal with them
mechanically. Her soul and understanding were elsewhere. Four years before, when Sidney was sixteen, still calling herself a
schoolgirl by reason of the fact that she could be spared to attend
school four months in the winter when work was slack, she had been
much interested in the "Maple Leaf" department of the Montreal weekly
her uncle took. It was a page given over to youthful Canadians and
filled with their contributions in the way of letters, verses, and
prize essays. Noms de plume were signed to these, badges were sent to
those who joined the Maple Leaf Club, and a general delightful sense
of mystery pervaded the department. Often a letter concluded with a request to the club members to
correspond with the writer. One such request went from Sidney under
the pen-name of "Ellen Douglas." The girl was lonely in Plainfield;
she had no companions or associates such as she cared for; the Maple
Leaf Club represented all that her life held of outward interest, and
she longed for something more. Only one answer came to "Ellen Douglas," and that was forwarded to her
by the long-suffering editor of "The Maple Leaf." It was from John
Lincoln of the Bar N Ranch, Alberta. He wrote that, although his age
debarred him from membership in the club (he was twenty, and the limit
was eighteen), he read the letters of the department with much
interest, and often had thought of answering some of the requests for
correspondents. He never had done so, but "Ellen Douglas's" letter was
so interesting that he had decided to write to her. Would she be kind
enough to correspond with him? Life on the Bar N, ten miles from the
outposts of civilization, was lonely. He was two years out from the
east, and had not yet forgotten to be homesick at times. Sidney liked the letter and answered it. Since then they had written
to each other regularly. There was nothing sentimental, hinted at or
implied, in the correspondence. Whatever the faults of Sidney's
romantic visions were, they did not tend to precocious flirtation. The
Plainfield boys, attracted by her beauty and repelled by her
indifference and aloofness, could have told that. She never expected
to meet John Lincoln, nor did she wish to do so. In the correspondence
itself she found her pleasure. John Lincoln wrote breezy accounts of ranch life and adventures on the
far western plains, so alien and remote from snug, humdrum Plainfield
life that Sidney always had the sensation of crossing a gulf when she
opened a letter from the Bar N. As for Sidney's own letter, this is
the way it read as she wrote it:


                               "The Evergreens," Plainfield. Dear Mr. Lincoln:

    The very best letter I can write in the half-hour before the
    carriage will be at the door to take me to Mrs. Braddon's
    dance shall be yours tonight. I am sitting here in the library
    arrayed in my smartest, newest, whitest, silkiest gown, with a
    string of pearls which Uncle James gave me today about my
    throat--the dear, glistening, sheeny things! And I am looking
    forward to the "dances and delight" of the evening with keen
    anticipation. You asked me in your last letter if I did not sometimes grow
    weary of my endless round of dances and dinners and social
    functions. No, no, never! I enjoy every one of them, every
    minute of them. I love life and its bloom and brilliancy; I
    love meeting new people; I love the ripple of music, the hum
    of laughter and conversation. Every morning when I awaken the
    new day seems to me to be a good fairy who will bring me some
    beautiful gift of joy. The gift she gave me today was my sunset gallop on my grey
    mare Lady. The thrill of it is in my veins yet. I distanced
    the others who rode with me and led the homeward canter alone,
    rocking along a dark, gleaming road, shadowy with tall firs
    and pines, whose balsam made all the air resinous around me. Before me was a long valley filled with purple dusk, and
    beyond it meadows of sunset and great lakes of saffron and
    rose where a soul might lose itself in colour. On my right was
    the harbour, silvered over with a rising moon. Oh, it was all
    glorious--the clear air with its salt-sea tang, the aroma of
    the pines, the laughter of my friends behind me, the spring
    and rhythm of Lady's grey satin body beneath me! I wanted to
    ride on so forever, straight into the heart of the sunset. Then home and to dinner. We have a houseful of guests at
    present--one of them an old statesman with a massive silver
    head, and eyes that have looked into people's thoughts so long
    that you have an uncanny feeling that they can see right
    through your soul and read motives you dare not avow even to
    yourself. I was terribly in awe of him at first, but when I
    got acquainted with him I found him charming. He is not above
    talking delightful nonsense even to a girl. I sat by him at
    dinner, and he talked to me--not nonsense, either, this time. He told me of his political contests and diplomatic battles;
    he was wise and witty and whimsical. I felt as if I were
    drinking some rare, stimulating mental wine. What a privilege
    it is to meet such men and take a peep through their wise eyes
    at the fascinating game of empire-building! I met another clever man a few evenings ago. A lot of us went
    for a sail on the harbour. Mrs. Braddon's house party came
    too. We had three big white boats that skimmed down the
    moonlit channel like great white sea birds. There was another
    boat far across the harbour, and the people in it were
    singing. The music drifted over the water to us, so sad and
    sweet and beguiling that I could have cried for very pleasure. One of Mrs. Braddon's guests said to me:

    "That is the soul of music with all its sense and earthliness
    refined away." I hadn't thought about him before--I hadn't even caught his
    name in the general introduction. He was a tall, slight man,
    with a worn, sensitive face and iron-grey hair--a quiet man
    who hadn't laughed or talked. But he began to talk to me then,
    and I forgot all about the others. I never had listened to
    anybody in the least like him. He talked of books and music,
    of art and travel. He had been all over the world, and had
    seen everything everybody else had seen and everything they
    hadn't too, I think. I seemed to be looking into an enchanted
    mirror where all my own dreams and ideals were reflected back
    to me, but made, oh, so much more beautiful! On my way home after the Braddon people had left us somebody
    asked me how I liked Paul Moore! The man I had been talking
    with was Paul Moore, the great novelist! I was almost glad I
    hadn't known it while he was talking to me--I should have been
    too awed and reverential to have really enjoyed his
    conversation. As it was, I had contradicted him twice, and he
    had laughed and liked it. But his books will always have a new
    meaning to me henceforth, through the insight he himself has
    given me. It is such meetings as these that give life its sparkle for
    me. But much of its abiding sweetness comes from my friendship
    with Margaret Raleigh. You will be weary of my rhapsodies over
    her. But she is such a rare and wonderful woman; much older
    then I am, but so young in heart and soul and freshness of
    feeling! She is to me mother and sister and wise,
    clear-sighted friend. To her I go with all my perplexities and
    hopes and triumphs. She has sympathy and understanding for my
    every mood. I love life so much for giving me such a
    friendship! This morning I wakened at dawn and stole away to the shore
    before anyone else was up. I had a delightful run-away. The
    long, low-lying meadows between "The Evergreens" and the shore
    were dewy and fresh in that first light, that was as fine and
    purely tinted as the heart of one of my white roses. On the
    beach the water was purring in little blue ripples, and, oh,
    the sunrise out there beyond the harbour! All the eastern
    Heaven was abloom with it. And there was a wind that came
    dancing and whistling up the channel to replace the beautiful
    silence with a music more beautiful still. The rest of the folks were just coming downstairs when I got
    back to breakfast. They were all yawny, and some were grumpy,
    but I had washed my being in the sunrise and felt as
    blithesome as the day. Oh, life is so good to live! Tomorrow Uncle James's new vessel, the _White Lady_, is to be
    launched. We are going to make a festive occasion of it, and I
    am to christen her with a bottle of cobwebby old wine. But I hear the carriage, and Aunt Jane is calling me. I had a
    great deal more to say--about your letter, your big "round-up"
    and your tribulations with your Chinese cook--but I've only
    time now to say goodbye. You wish me a lovely time at the
    dance and a full programme, don't you? Yours sincerely,
                                            Sidney Richmond. Aunt Jane came home presently and carried away her sleeping baby. Sidney said her prayers, went to bed, and slept soundly and serenely. She mailed her letter the next day, and a month later an answer came. Sidney read it as soon as she left the post office, and walked the
rest of the way home as in a nightmare, staring straight ahead of her
with wide-open, unseeing brown eyes. John Lincoln's letter was short, but the pertinent paragraph of it
burned itself into Sidney's brain. He wrote:

    I am going east for a visit. It is six years since I was home,
    and it seems like three times six. I shall go by the C.P.R.,
    which passes through Plainfield, and I mean to stop off for a
    day. You will let me call and see you, won't you? I shall have
    to take your permission for granted, as I shall be gone before
    a letter from you can reach the Bar N. I leave for the east in
    five days, and shall look forward to our meeting with all
    possible interest and pleasure. Sidney did not sleep that night, but tossed restlessly about or cried
in her pillow. She was so pallid and hollow-eyed the next morning that
Aunt Jane noticed it, and asked her what the matter was. "Nothing," said Sidney sharply. Sidney had never spoken sharply to her
aunt before. The good woman shook her head. She was afraid the child
was "taking something." "Don't do much today, Siddy," she said kindly. "Just lie around and
take it easy till you get rested up. I'll fix you a dose of quinine." Sidney refused to lie around and take it easy. She swallowed the
quinine meekly enough, but she worked fiercely all day, hunting out
superfluous tasks to do. That night she slept the sleep of exhaustion,
but her dreams were unenviable and the awakening was terrible. Any day, any hour, might bring John Lincoln to Plainfield. What should
she do? Hide from him? Refuse to see him? But he would find out the
truth just the same; she would lose his friendships and respect just
as surely. Sidney trod the way of the transgressor, and found that its
thorns pierced to bone and marrow. Everything had come to an
end--nothing was left to her! In the untried recklessness of twenty
untempered years she wished she could die before John Lincoln came to
Plainfield. The eyes of youth could not see how she could possibly
live afterward. *       *       *       *       *

Some days later a young man stepped from the C.P.R. train at
Plainfield station and found his way to the one small hotel the place
boasted. After getting his supper he asked the proprietor if he could
direct him to "The Evergreens." Caleb Williams looked at his guest in bewilderment. "Never heerd o'
such a place," he said. "It is the name of Mr. Conway's estate--Mr. James Conway," explained
John Lincoln. "Oh, Jim Conway's place!" said Caleb. "Didn't know that was what he
called it. Sartin I kin tell you whar' to find it. You see that road
out thar'? Well, just follow it straight along for a mile and a half
till you come to a blacksmith's forge. Jim Conway's house is just this
side of it on the right--back from the road a smart piece and no other
handy. You can't mistake it." John Lincoln did not expect to mistake it, once he found it; he knew
by heart what it appeared like from Sidney's description: an old
stately mansion of mellowed brick, covered with ivy and set back from
the highway amid fine ancestral trees, with a pine-grove behind it, a
river to the left, and a harbour beyond. He strode along the road in the warm, ruddy sunshine of early evening. It was not a bad-looking road at all; the farmsteads sprinkled along
it were for the most part snug and wholesome enough; yet somehow it
was different from what he had expected it to be. And there was no
harbour or glimpse of distant sea visible. Had the hotel-keeper made a
mistake? Perhaps he had meant some other James Conway. Presently he found himself before the blacksmith's forge. Beside it
was a rickety, unpainted gate opening into a snake-fenced lane
feathered here and there with scrubby little spruces. It ran down a
bare hill, crossed a little ravine full of young white-stemmed
birches, and up another bare hill to an equally bare crest where a
farmhouse was perched--a farmhouse painted a stark, staring yellow and
the ugliest thing in farmhouses that John Lincoln had ever seen, even
among the log shacks of the west. He knew now that he had been
misdirected, but as there seemed to be nobody about the forge he
concluded that he had better go to the yellow house and inquire
within. He passed down the lane and over the little rustic bridge that
spanned the brook. Just beyond was another home-made gate of poles. Lincoln opened it, or rather he had his hand on the hasp of twisted
withes which secured it, when he was suddenly arrested by the
apparition of a girl, who flashed around the curve of young birch
beyond and stood before him with panting breath and quivering lips. "I beg your pardon," said John Lincoln courteously, dropping the gate
and lifting his hat. "I am looking for the house of Mr. James
Conway--'The Evergreens.' Can you direct me to it?" "That is Mr. James Conway's house," said the girl, with the tragic air
and tone of one driven to desperation and an impatient gesture of her
hand toward the yellow nightmare above them. "I don't think he can be the one I mean," said Lincoln perplexedly. "The man I am thinking of has a niece, Miss Richmond." "There is no other James Conway in Plainfield," said the girl. "This
is his place--nobody calls it 'The Evergreens' but myself. I am Sidney
Richmond." For a moment they looked at each other across the gate, sheer
amazement and bewilderment holding John Lincoln mute. Sidney, burning
with shame, saw that this stranger was exceedingly good to look
upon--tall, clean-limbed, broad-shouldered, with clear-cut bronzed
features and a chin and eyes that would have done honour to any man. John Lincoln, among all his confused sensations, was aware that this
slim, agitated young creature before him was the loveliest thing he
ever had seen, so lithe was her figure, so glossy and dark and silken
her bare, wind-ruffled hair, so big and brown and appealing her eyes,
so delicately oval her flushed cheeks. He felt that she was frightened
and in trouble, and he wanted to comfort and reassure her. But how
could she be Sidney Richmond? "I don't understand," he said perplexedly. "Oh!" Sidney threw out her hands in a burst of passionate protest. "No, and you never will understand--I can't make you understand." "I don't understand," said John Lincoln again. "Can you be Sidney
Richmond--the Sidney Richmond who has written to me for four years?" "I am." "Then, those letters--"

"Were all lies," said Sidney bluntly and desperately. "There was
nothing true in them--nothing at all. This is my home. We are poor. Everything I told you about it and my life was just imagination." "Then why did you write them?" he asked blankly. "Why did you deceive
me?" "Oh, I didn't mean to deceive you! I never thought of such a thing. When you asked me to write to you I wanted to, but I didn't know what
to write about to a stranger. I just couldn't write you about my life
here, not because it was hard, but it was so ugly and empty. So I
wrote instead of the life I wanted to live--the life I did live in
imagination. And when once I had begun, I had to keep it up. I found
it so fascinating, too! Those letters made that other life seem real
to me. I never expected to meet you. These last four days since your
letter came have been dreadful to me. Oh, please go away and forgive
me if you can! I know I can never make you understand how it came
about." Sidney turned away and hid her burning face against the cool white
bark of the birch tree behind her. It was worse than she had even
thought it would be. He was so handsome, so manly, so earnest-eyed! Oh, what a friend to lose! John Lincoln opened the gate and went up to her. There was a great
tenderness in his face, mingled with a little kindly, friendly
amusement. "Please don't distress yourself so, Sidney," he said, unconsciously
using her Christian name. "I think I do understand. I'm not such a
dull fellow as you take me for. After all, those letters were
true--or, rather, there was truth in them. You revealed yourself more
faithfully in them than if you had written truly about your narrow
outward life." Sidney turned her flushed face and wet eyes slowly toward him, a
little smile struggling out amid the clouds of woe. This young man was
certainly good at understanding. "You--you'll forgive me then?" she
stammered. "Yes, if there is anything to forgive. And for my own part, I am glad
you are not what I have always thought you were. If I had come here
and found you what I expected, living in such a home as I expected, I
never could have told you or even thought of telling you what you have
come to mean to me in these lonely years during which your letters
have been the things most eagerly looked forward to. I should have
come this evening and spent an hour or so with you, and then have gone
away on the train tomorrow morning, and that would have been all. "But I find instead just a dreamy romantic little girl, much like my
sisters at home, except that she is a great deal cleverer. And as a
result I mean to stay a week at Plainfield and come to see you every
day, if you will let me. And on my way back to the Bar N I mean to
stop off at Plainfield again for another week, and then I shall tell
you something more--something it would be a little too bold to say
now, perhaps, although I could say it just as well and truly. All this
if I may. May I, Sidney?" He bent forward and looked earnestly into her face. Sidney felt a
new, curious, inexplicable thrill at her heart. "Oh, yes.--I suppose
so," she said shyly. "Now, take me up to the house and introduce me to your Aunt Jane,"
said John Lincoln in satisfied tone. An Adventure on Island Rock


"Who was the man I saw talking to you in the hayfield?" asked Aunt
Kate, as Uncle Richard came to dinner. "Bob Marks," said Uncle Richard briefly. "I've sold Laddie to him." Ernest Hughes, the twelve-year-old orphan boy whom Uncle "boarded and
kept" for the chores he did, suddenly stopped eating. "Oh, Mr. Lawson, you're not going to sell Laddie?" he cried chokily. Uncle Richard stared at him. Never before, in the five years that
Ernest had lived with him, had the quiet little fellow spoken without
being spoken to, much less ventured to protest against anything Uncle
Richard might do. "Certainly I am," answered the latter curtly. "Bob offered me twenty
dollars for the dog, and he's coming after him next week." "Oh, Mr. Lawson," said Ernest, rising to his feet, his small, freckled
face crimson. "Oh, don't sell Laddie! _Please_, Mr. Lawson, don't sell
him!" "What nonsense is this?" said Uncle Richard sharply. He was a man who
brooked no opposition from anybody, and who never changed his mind
when it was once made up. "Don't sell Laddie!" pleaded Ernest miserably. "He is the only friend
I've got. I can't live if Laddie goes away. Oh, don't sell him, Mr. Lawson!" "Sit down and hold your tongue," said Uncle Richard sternly. "The dog
is mine, and I shall do with him as I think fit. He is sold, and that
is all there is about it. Go on with your dinner." But Ernest for the first time did not obey. He snatched his cap from
the back of his chair, dashed it down over his eyes, and ran from the
kitchen with a sob choking his breath. Uncle Richard looked angry, but
Aunt Kate hastened to soothe him. "Don't be vexed with the boy, Richard," she said. "You know he is very
fond of Laddie. He's had to do with him ever since he was a pup, and
no doubt he feels badly at the thought of losing him. I'm rather sorry
myself that you have sold the dog." "Well, he _is_ sold and there's an end of it. I don't say but that the
dog is a good dog. But he is of no use to us, and twenty dollars will
come in mighty handy just now. He's worth that to Bob, for he is a
good watch dog, so we've both made a fair bargain." Nothing more was said about Ernest or Laddie. I had taken no part in
the discussion, for I felt no great interest in the matter. Laddie was
a nice dog; Ernest was a quiet, inoffensive little fellow, five years
younger than myself; that was all I thought about either of them. I was spending my vacation at Uncle Richard's farm on the Nova Scotian
Bay of Fundy shore. I was a great favourite with Uncle Richard, partly
because he had been much attached to my mother, his only sister,
partly because of my strong resemblance to his only son, who had died
several years before. Uncle Richard was a stern, undemonstrative man,
but I knew that he entertained a deep and real affection for me, and I
always enjoyed my vacation sojourns at his place. "What are you going to do this afternoon, Ned?" he asked, after the
disturbance caused by Ernest's outbreak had quieted down. "I think I'll row out to Island Rock," I replied. "I want to take some
views of the shore from it." Uncle Richard nodded. He was much interested in my new camera. "If you're on it about four o'clock, you'll get a fine view of the
'Hole in the Wall' when the sun begins to shine on the water through
it," he said. "I've often thought it would make a handsome picture." "After I've finished taking the pictures, I think I'll go down shore
to Uncle Adam's and stay all night," I said. "Jim's dark room is more
convenient than mine, and he has some pictures he is going to develop
tonight, too." I started for the shore about two o'clock. Ernest was sitting on the
woodpile as I passed through the yard, with his arms about Laddie's
neck and his face buried in Laddie's curly hair. Laddie was a handsome
and intelligent black-and-white Newfoundland, with a magnificent coat. He and Ernest were great chums. I felt sorry for the boy who was to
lose his pet. "Don't take it so hard, Ern," I said, trying to comfort him. "Uncle
will likely get another pup." "I don't want any other pup!" Ernest blurted out. "Oh, Ned, won't you
try and coax your uncle not to sell him? Perhaps he'd listen to you." I shook my head. I knew Uncle Richard too well to hope that. "Not in this case, Ern," I said. "He would say it did not concern me,
and you know nothing moves him when he determines on a thing. You'll
have to reconcile yourself to losing Laddie, I'm afraid." Ernest's tow-coloured head went down on Laddie's neck again, and I,
deciding that there was no use in saying anything more, proceeded
towards the shore, which was about a mile from Uncle Richard's house. The beach along his farm and for several farms along shore was a
lonely, untenanted one, for the fisher-folk all lived two miles
further down, at Rowley's Cove. About three hundred yards from the
shore was the peculiar formation known as Island Rock. This was a
large rock that stood abruptly up out of the water. Below, about the
usual water-line, it was seamed and fissured, but its summit rose up
in a narrow, flat-topped peak. At low tide twenty feet of it was above
water, but at high tide it was six feet and often more under water. I pushed Uncle Richard's small flat down the rough path and rowed out
to Island Rock. Arriving there, I thrust the painter deep into a
narrow cleft. This was the usual way of mooring it, and no doubt of
its safety occurred to me. I scrambled up the rock and around to the eastern end, where there was
a broader space for standing and from which some capital views could
be obtained. The sea about the rock was calm, but there was quite a
swell on and an off-shore breeze was blowing. There were no boats
visible. The tide was low, leaving bare the curious caves and
headlands along shore, and I secured a number of excellent snapshots. It was now three o'clock. I must wait another hour yet before I could
get the best view of the "Hole in the Wall"--a huge, arch-like opening
through a jutting headland to the west of me. I went around to look at
it, when I saw a sight that made me stop short in dismay. This was
nothing less than the flat, drifting outward around the point. The
swell and suction of the water around the rock must have pulled her
loose--and I was a prisoner! At first my only feeling was one of
annoyance. Then a thought flashed into my mind that made me dizzy with
fear. The tide would be high that night. If I could not escape from
Island Rock I would inevitably be drowned. I sat down limply on a ledge and tried to look matters fairly in the
face. I could not swim; calls for help could not reach anybody; my
only hope lay in the chance of somebody passing down the shore or of
some boat appearing. I looked at my watch. It was a quarter past three. The tide would
begin to turn about five, but it would be at least ten before the rock
would be covered. I had, then, little more than six hours to live
unless rescued. The flat was by this time out of sight around the point. I hoped that
the sight of an empty flat drifting down shore might attract someone's
attention and lead to investigation. That seemed to be my only hope. No alarm would be felt at Uncle Richard's because of my
non-appearance. They would suppose I had gone to Uncle Adam's. I have heard of time seeming long to a person in my predicament, but
to me it seemed fairly to fly, for every moment decreased my chance of
rescue. I determined I would not give way to cowardly fear, so, with a
murmured prayer for help, I set myself to the task of waiting for
death as bravely as possible. At intervals I shouted as loudly as I
could and, when the sun came to the proper angle for the best view of
the "Hole in the Wall," I took the picture. It afterwards turned out
to be a great success, but I have never been able to look at it
without a shudder. At five the tide began to come in. Very, very slowly the water rose
around Island Rock. Up, up, up it came, while I watched it with
fascinated eyes, feeling like a rat in a trap. The sun fell lower and
lower; at eight o'clock the moon rose large and bright; at nine it was
a lovely night, dear, calm, bright as day, and the water was swishing
over the highest ledge of the rock. With some difficulty I climbed to
the top and sat there to await the end. I had no longer any hope of
rescue but, by a great effort, I preserved self-control. If I had to
die, I would at least face death staunchly. But when I thought of my
mother at home, it tasked all my energies to keep from breaking down
utterly. Suddenly I heard a whistle. Never was sound so sweet. I stood up and
peered eagerly shoreward. Coming around the "Hole in the Wall"
headland, on top of the cliffs, I saw a boy and a dog. I sent a wild
halloo ringing shoreward. The boy started, stopped and looked out towards Island Rock. The next
moment he hailed me. It was Ernest's voice, and it was Laddie who was
barking beside him. "Ernest," I shouted wildly, "run for help--quick! quick! The tide will
be over the rock in half an hour! Hurry, or you will be too late!" Instead of starting off at full speed, as I expected him to do, Ernest
stood still for a moment, and then began to pick his steps down a
narrow path over the cliff, followed by Laddie. "Ernest," I shouted frantically, "what are you doing? Why don't you go
for help?" Ernest had by this time reached a narrow ledge of rock just above the
water-line. I noticed that he was carrying something over his arm. "It would take too long," he shouted. "By the time I got to the Cove
and a boat could row back here, you'd be drowned. Laddie and I will
save you. Is there anything there you can tie a rope to? I've a coil
of rope here that I think will be long enough to reach you. I've been
down to the Cove and Alec Martin sent it up to your uncle." I looked about me; a smooth, round hole had been worn clean through a
thin part of the apex of the rock. "I could fasten the rope if I had it!" I called. "But how can you get
it to me?" For answer Ernest tied a bit of driftwood to the rope and put it into
Laddie's mouth. The next minute the dog was swimming out to me. As
soon as he came close I caught the rope. It was just long enough to
stretch from shore to rock, allowing for a couple of hitches which
Ernest gave around a small boulder on the ledge. I tied my camera case
on my head by means of some string I found in my pocket, then I
slipped into the water and, holding to the rope, went hand over hand
to the shore with Laddie swimming beside me. Ernest held on to the
shoreward end of the rope like grim death, a task that was no light
one for his small arms. When I finally scrambled up beside him, his
face was dripping with perspiration and he trembled like a leaf. "Ern, you are a brick!" I exclaimed. "You've saved my life!" "No, it was Laddie," said Ernest, refusing to take any credit at all. We hurried home and arrived at Uncle Richard's about ten, just as they
were going to bed. When Uncle Richard heard what had happened, he
turned very pale, and murmured, "Thank God!" Aunt Kate got me out of
my wet clothes as quickly as possible, put me away to bed in hot
blankets and dosed me with ginger tea. I slept like a top and felt
none the worse for my experience the next morning. At the breakfast table Uncle Richard scarcely spoke. But, just as we
finished, he said abruptly to Ernest, "I'm not going to sell Laddie. You and the dog saved Ned's life between you, and no dog who helped do
that is ever going to be sold by me. Henceforth he belongs to you. I
give him to you for your very own." "Oh, Mr. Lawson!" said Ernest, with shining eyes. I never saw a boy look so happy. As for Laddie, who was sitting beside
him with his shaggy head on Ernest's knee, I really believe the dog
understood, too. The look in his eyes was almost human. Uncle Richard
leaned over and patted him. "Good dog!" he said. "Good dog!" At Five O'Clock in the Morning


Fate, in the guise of Mrs. Emory dropping a milk-can on the platform
under his open window, awakened Murray that morning. Had not Mrs.
Emory dropped that can, he would have slumbered peacefully until his
usual hour for rising--a late one, be it admitted, for of all the
boarders at Sweetbriar Cottage Murray was the most irregular in his
habits. "When a young man," Mrs. Emory was wont to remark sagely and a trifle
severely, "prowls about that pond half of the night, a-chasing of
things what he calls 'moonlight effecks,' it ain't to be wondered at
that he's sleepy in the morning. And it ain't the convenientest thing,
nuther and noways, to keep the breakfast table set till the farm folks
are thinking of dinner. But them artist men are not like other people,
say what you will, and allowance has to be made for them. And I must
say that I likes him real well and approves of him every other way." If Murray had slept late that morning--well, he shudders yet over that
"if." But aforesaid Fate saw to it that he woke when the hour of
destiny and the milk-can struck, and having awakened he found he could
not go to sleep again. It suddenly occurred to him that he had never
seen a sunrise on the pond. Doubtless it would be very lovely down
there in those dewy meadows at such a primitive hour; he decided to
get up and see what the world looked like in the young daylight. He scowled at a letter lying on his dressing table and thrust it into
his pocket that it might be out of sight. He had written it the night
before and the writing of it was going to cost him several things--a
prospective million among others. So it is hardly to be wondered at if
the sight of it did not reconcile him to the joys of early rising. "Dear life and heart!" exclaimed Mrs. Emory, pausing in the act of
scalding a milk-can when Murray emerged from a side door. "What on
earth is the matter, Mr. Murray? You ain't sick now, surely? I told
you them pond fogs was p'isen after night! If you've gone and got--"

"Nothing is the matter, dear lady," interrupted Murray, "and I haven't
gone and got anything except an acute attack of early rising which is
not in the least likely to become chronic. But at what hour of the
night do you get up, you wonderful woman? Or rather do you ever go to
bed at all? Here is the sun only beginning to rise and--positively
yes, you have all your cows milked." Mrs. Emory purred with delight. "Folks as has fourteen cows to milk has to rise betimes," she answered
with proud humility. "Laws, I don't complain--I've lots of help with
the milking. How Mrs. Palmer manages, I really cannot comperhend--or
rather, how she has managed. I suppose she'll be all right now since
her niece came last night. I saw her posting to the pond pasture not
ten minutes ago. She'll have to milk all them seven cows herself. But
dear life and heart! Here I be palavering away and not a bite of
breakfast ready for you!" "I don't want any breakfast until the regular time for it," assured
Murray. "I'm going down to the pond to see the sun rise." "Now don't you go and get caught in the ma'sh," anxiously called Mrs.
Emory, as she never failed to do when she saw him starting for the
pond. Nobody ever had got caught in the marsh, but Mrs. Emory lived in
a chronic state of fear lest someone should. "And if you once got stuck in that black mud you'd be sucked right
down and never seen or heard tell of again till the day of judgment,
like Adam Palmer's cow," she was wont to warn her boarders. Murray sought his favourite spot for pond dreaming--a bloomy corner of
the pasture that ran down into the blue water, with a dump of leafy
maples on the left. He was very glad he had risen early. A miracle was
being worked before his very eyes. The world was in a flush and
tremor of maiden loveliness, instinct with all the marvellous fleeting
charm of girlhood and spring and young morning. Overhead the sky was a
vast high-sprung arch of unstained crystal. Down over the sand dunes,
where the pond ran out into the sea, was a great arc of primrose
smitten through with auroral crimsonings. Beneath it the pond waters
shimmered with a hundred fairy hues, but just before him they were
clear as a flawless mirror. The fields around him glistened with dews,
and a little wandering wind, blowing lightly from some bourne in the
hills, strayed down over the slopes, bringing with it an unimaginable
odour and freshness, and fluttered over the pond, leaving a little
path of dancing silver ripples across the mirror-glory of the water. Birds were singing in the beech woods over on Orchard Knob Farm,
answering to each other from shore to shore, until the very air was
tremulous with the elfin music of this wonderful midsummer dawn. "I will get up at sunrise every morning of my life hereafter,"
exclaimed Murray rapturously, not meaning a syllable of it, but
devoutly believing he did. Just as the fiery disc of the sun peered over the sand dunes Murray
heard music that was not of the birds. It was a girl's voice singing
beyond the maples to his left--a clear sweet voice, blithely trilling
out the old-fashioned song, "Five O'Clock in the Morning." "Mrs. Palmer's niece!" Murray sprang to his feet and tiptoed cautiously through the maples. He had heard so much from Mrs. Palmer about her niece that he felt
reasonably well acquainted with her. Moreover, Mrs. Palmer had assured
him that Mollie was a very pretty girl. Now a pretty girl milking cows
at sunrise in the meadows sounded well. Mrs. Palmer had not over-rated her niece's beauty. Murray said so to
himself with a little whistle of amazement as he leaned unseen on the
pasture fence and looked at the girl who was milking a placid Jersey
less than ten yards away from him. Murray's artistic instinct
responded to the whole scene with a thrill of satisfaction. He could see only her profile, but that was perfect, and the colouring
of the oval cheek and the beautiful curve of the chin were something
to adore. Her hair, ruffled into lovable little ringlets by the
morning wind, was coiled in glistening chestnut masses high on her
bare head, and her arms, bare to the elbow, were as white as marble. Presently she began to sing again, and this time Murray joined in. She
half rose from her milking stool and cast a startled glance at the
maples. Then she dropped back again and began to milk determinedly,
but Murray could have sworn that he saw a demure smile hovering about
her lips. That, and the revelation of her full face, decided him. He
sprang over the fence and sauntered across the intervening space of
lush clover blossoms. "Good morning," he said coolly. He had forgotten her other name, and
it did not matter; at five o'clock in the morning people who met in
dewy clover fields might disregard the conventionalities. "Isn't it
rather a large contract for you to be milking seven cows all alone? May I help you?" Mollie looked up at him over her shoulder. She had glorious grey eyes. Her face was serene and undisturbed. "Can you milk?" she asked. "Unlikely as it may seem, I can," said Murray. "I have never confessed
it to Mrs. Emory, because I was afraid she would inveigle me into
milking her fourteen cows. But I don't mind helping you. I learned to
milk when I was a shaver on my vacations at a grandfatherly farm. May
I have that extra pail?" Murray captured a milking stool and rounded up another Jersey. Before
sitting down he seemed struck with an idea. "My name is Arnold Murray. I board at Sweetbriar Cottage, next farm to
Orchard Knob. That makes us near neighbours." "I suppose it does," said Mollie. Murray mentally decided that her voice was the sweetest he had ever
heard. He was glad he had arranged his cow at such an angle that he
could study her profile. It was amazing that Mrs. Palmer's niece
should have such a profile. It looked as if centuries of fine breeding
were responsible for it. "What a morning!" he said enthusiastically. "It harks back to the days
when earth was young. They must have had just such mornings as this in
Eden." "Do you always get up so early?" asked Mollie practically. "Always," said Murray without a blush. Then--"But no, that is a fib,
and I cannot tell fibs to you. The truth is your tribute. I never get
up early. It was fate that roused me and brought me here this morning. The morning is a miracle--and you, I might suppose you were born of
the sunrise, if Mrs. Palmer hadn't told me all about you." "What did she tell you about me?" asked Mollie, changing cows. Murray
discovered that she was tall and that the big blue print apron
shrouded a singularly graceful figure. "She said you were the best-looking girl in Bruce county. I have seen
very few of the girls in Bruce county, but I know she is right." "That compliment is not nearly so pretty as the sunrise one," said
Mollie reflectively. "Mrs. Palmer has told me things about you," she
added. "Curiosity knows no gender," hinted Murray. "She said you were good-looking and lazy and different from other
people." "All compliments," said Murray in a gratified tone. "Lazy?" "Certainly. Laziness is a virtue in these strenuous days, I was not
born with it, but I have painstakingly acquired it, and I am proud of
my success. I have time to enjoy life." "I think that I like you," said Mollie. "You have the merit of being able to enter into a situation," he
assured her. When the last Jersey was milked they carried the pails down to the
spring where the creamers were sunk and strained the milk into them. Murray washed the pails and Mollie wiped them and set them in a
gleaming row on the shelf under a big maple. "Thank you," she said. "You are not going yet," said Murray resolutely. "The time I saved you
in milking three cows belongs to me. We will spend it in a walk along
the pond shore. I will show you a path I have discovered under the
beeches. It is just wide enough for two. Come." He took her hand and drew her through the copse into a green lane,
where the ferns grew thickly on either side and the pond waters
plashed dreamily below them. He kept her hand in his as they went down
the path, and she did not try to withdraw it. About them was the
great, pure silence of the morning, faintly threaded with caressing
sounds--croon of birds, gurgle of waters, sough of wind. The spirit of
youth and love hovered over them and they spoke no word. When they finally came out on a little green nook swimming in early
sunshine and arched over by maples, with the wide shimmer of the pond
before it and the gold dust of blossoms over the grass, the girl drew
a long breath of delight. "It is a morning left over from Eden, isn't it?" said Murray. "Yes," said Mollie softly. Murray bent toward her. "You are Eve," he said. "You are the only
woman in the world--for me. Adam must have told Eve just what he
thought about her the first time he saw her. There were no
conventionalities in Eden--and people could not have taken long to
make up their minds. We are in Eden just now. One can say what he
thinks in Eden without being ridiculous. You are divinely fair, Eve. Your eyes are stars of the morning--your cheek has the flush it stole
from the sunrise-your lips are redder than the roses of paradise. And
I love you, Eve." Mollie lowered her eyes and the long fringe of her lashes lay in a
burnished semi-circle on her cheek. "I think," she said slowly, "that it must have been very delightful in
Eden. But we are not really there, you know--we are only playing that
we are. And it is time for me to go back. I must get the
breakfast--that sounds too prosaic for paradise." Murray bent still closer. "Before we remember that we are only playing at paradise, will you
kiss me, dear Eve?" "You are very audacious," said Mollie coldly. "We are in Eden yet," he urged. "That makes all the difference." "Well," said Mollie. And Murray kissed her. They had passed back over the fern path and were in the pasture before
either spoke again. Then Murray said, "We have left Eden behind--but
we can always return there when we will. And although we were only
playing at paradise, I was not playing at love. I meant all I said,
Mollie." "Have you meant it often?" asked Mollie significantly. "I never meant it--or even played at it--before," he answered. "I
did--at one time--contemplate the possibility of playing at it. But
that was long ago--as long ago as last night. I am glad to the core of
my soul that I decided against it before I met you, dear Eve. I have
the letter of decision in my coat pocket this moment. I mean to mail
it this afternoon." "'Curiosity knows no gender,'" quoted Mollie. "Then, to satisfy your curiosity, I must bore you with some personal
history. My parents died when I was a little chap, and my uncle
brought me up. He has been immensely good to me, but he is a bit of a
tyrant. Recently he picked out a wife for me--the daughter of an old
sweetheart of his. I have never even seen her. But she has arrived in
town on a visit to some relatives there. Uncle Dick wrote to me to
return home at once and pay my court to the lady; I protested. He
wrote again--a letter, short and the reverse of sweet. If I refused to
do my best to win Miss Mannering he would disown me--never speak to me
again--cut me off with a quarter. Uncle always means what he
says--that is one of our family traits, you understand. I spent some
miserable, undecided days. It was not the threat of disinheritance
that worried me, although when you have been brought up to regard
yourself as a prospective millionaire it is rather difficult to adjust
your vision to a pauper focus. But it was the thought of alienating
Uncle Dick. I love the dear, determined old chap like a father. But
last night my guardian angel was with me and I decided to remain my
own man. So I wrote to Uncle Dick, respectfully but firmly declining
to become a candidate for Miss Mannering's hand." "But you have never seen her," said Mollie. "She may
be--almost--charming." "'If she be not fair to me, what care I how fair she be?'" quoted
Murray. "As you say, she may be--almost charming; but she is not Eve. She is merely one of a million other women, as far as I am concerned. Don't let's talk of her. Let us talk only of ourselves--there is
nothing else that is half so interesting." "And will your uncle really cast you off?" asked Mollie. "Not a doubt of it." "What will you do?" "Work, dear Eve. My carefully acquired laziness must be thrown to the
winds and I shall work. That is the rule outside of Eden. Don't worry. I've painted pictures that have actually been sold. I'll make a living
for us somehow." "Us?" "Of course. You are engaged to me." "I am not," said Mollie indignantly. "Mollie! Mollie! After that kiss! Fie, fie!" "You are very absurd," said Mollie, "But your absurdity has been
amusing. I have--yes, positively--I have enjoyed your Eden comedy. But
now you must not come any further with me. My aunt might not approve. Here is my path to Orchard Knob farmhouse. There, I presume, is yours
to Sweetbriar Cottage. Good morning." "I am coming over to see you this afternoon," said Murray coolly. "But
you needn't be afraid. I will not tell tales out of Eden. I will be a
hypocrite and pretend to Mrs. Palmer that we have never met before. But you and I will know and remember. Now, you may go. I reserve to
myself the privilege of standing here and watching you out of sight." *       *       *       *       *

That afternoon Murray strolled over to Orchard Knob, going into the
kitchen without knocking as was the habit in that free and easy world. Mrs. Palmer was lying on the lounge with a pungent handkerchief bound
about her head, but keeping a vigilant eye on a very pretty, very
plump brown-eyed girl who was stirring a kettleful of cherry preserve
on the range. "Good afternoon, Mrs. Palmer," said Murray, wondering where Mollie
was. "I'm sorry to see that you look something like an invalid." "I've a raging, ramping headache," said Mrs. Palmer solemnly. "I had
it all night and I'm good for nothing. Mollie, you'd better take them
cherries off. Mr. Murray, this is my niece, Mollie Booth." "What?" said Murray explosively. "Miss Mollie Booth," repeated Mrs. Palmer in a louder tone. Murray regained outward self-control and bowed to the blushing Mollie. "And what about Eve?" he thought helplessly. "Who--what was she? Did I
dream her? Was she a phantom of delight? No, no, phantoms don't milk
cows. She was flesh and blood. No chilly nymph exhaling from the mists
of the marsh could have given a kiss like that." "Mollie has come to stay the rest of the summer with me," said Mrs.
Palmer. "I hope to goodness my tribulations with hired girls is over
at last. They have made a wreck of me." Murray rapidly reflected. This development, he decided, released him
from his promise to tell no tales. "I met a young lady down in the
pond pasture this morning," he said deliberately. "I talked with her
for a few minutes. I supposed her to be your niece. Who was she?" "Oh, that was Miss Mannering," said Mrs. Palmer. "What?" said Murray again. "Mannering--Dora Mannering," said Mrs. Palmer loudly, wondering if Mr.
Murray were losing his hearing. "She came here last night just to see
me. I haven't seen her since she was a child of twelve. I used to be
her nurse before I was married. I was that proud to think she thought
it worth her while to look me up. And, mind you, this morning, when
she found me crippled with headache and not able to do a hand's turn,
that girl, Mr. Murray, went and milked seven cows"--"only four,"
murmured Murray, but Mrs. Palmer did not hear him--"for me. Couldn't
prevent her. She said she had learned to milk for fun one summer when
she was in the country, and she did it. And then she got breakfast for
the men--Mollie didn't come till the ten o'clock train. Miss Mannering
is as capable as if she had been riz on a farm." "Where is she now?" demanded Murray. "Oh, she's gone." "What?" "Gone," shouted Mrs. Palmer, "gone. She left on the train Mollie come
on. Gracious me, has the man gone crazy? He hasn't seemed like himself
at all this afternoon." Murray had bolted madly out of the house and was striding down the
lane. Blind fool--unspeakable idiot that he had been! To take her for Mrs.
Palmer's niece--that peerless creature with the calm acceptance of any
situation, which marked the woman of the world, with the fine
appreciation and quickness of repartee that spoke of generations of
culture--to imagine that she could be Mollie Booth! He had been blind,
besottedly blind. And now he had lost her! She would never forgive
him; she had gone without a word or sign. As he reached the last curve of the lane where it looped about the
apple trees, a plump figure came flying down the orchard slope. "Mr. Murray, Mr. Murray," Mollie Booth called breathlessly. "Will you
please come here just a minute?" Murray crossed over to the paling rather grumpily. He did not want to
talk with Mollie Booth just then. Confound it, what did the girl want? Why was she looking so mysterious? Mollie produced a little square grey envelope from some feminine
hiding place and handed it over the paling. "She give me this at the station--Miss Mannering did," she gasped,
"and asked me to give it to you without letting Aunt Emily Jane see. I
couldn't get a chanst when you was in, but as soon as you went I
slipped out by the porch door and followed you. You went so fast I
near died trying to head you off." "You dear little soul," said Murray, suddenly radiant. "It is too bad
you have had to put yourself so out of breath on my account. But I am
immensely obliged to you. The next time your young man wants a trusty
private messenger just refer him to me." "Git away with you," giggled Mollie. "I must hurry back 'fore Aunt
Emily Jane gits wind I'm gone. I hope there's good news in your girl's
letter. My, but didn't you look flat when Aunt said she'd went!" Murray beamed at her idiotically. When she had vanished among the
trees he opened his letter. "Dear Mr. Murray," it ran, "your unblushing audacity of the
    morning deserves some punishment. I hereby punish you by
    prompt departure from Orchard Knob. Yet I do not dislike
    audacity, at some times, in some places, in some people. It is
    only from a sense of duty that I punish it in this case. And
    it was really pleasant in Eden. If you do not mail that
    letter, and if you still persist in your very absurd
    interpretation of the meaning of Eve's kiss, we may meet again
    in town. Until then I remain,

                                   "Very sincerely yours,
                                     "Dora Lynne Mannering." Murray kissed the grey letter and put it tenderly away in his pocket. Then he took his letter to his uncle and tore it into tiny fragments. Finally he looked at his watch. "If I hurry, I can catch the afternoon train to town," he said. Aunt Susanna's Birthday Celebration


Good afternoon, Nora May. I'm real glad to see you. I've been watching
you coming down the hill and I hoping you'd turn in at our gate. Going
to visit with me this afternoon? That's good. I'm feeling so happy and
delighted and I've been hankering for someone to tell it all to. Tell you about it? Well, I guess I might as well. It ain't any breach
of confidence. You didn't know Anne Douglas? She taught school here three years ago,
afore your folks moved over from Talcott. She belonged up Montrose way
and she was only eighteen when she came here to teach. She boarded
with us and her and me were the greatest chums. She was just a sweet
girl. She was the prettiest teacher we ever had, and that's saying a good
deal, for Springdale has always been noted for getting good-looking
schoolmarms, just as Miller's Road is noted for its humly ones. Anne had _yards_ of brown wavy hair and big, dark blue eyes. Her face
was kind o' pale, but when she smiled you would have to smile too, if
you'd been chief mourner at your own funeral. She was a well-spring of
joy in the house, and we all loved her. Gilbert Martin began to drive her the very first week she was here. Gilbert is my sister Julia's son, and a fine young fellow he is. It
ain't good manners to brag of your own relations, but I'm always
forgetting and doing it. Gil was a great pet of mine. He was so bright
and nice-mannered everybody liked him. Him and Anne were a
fine-looking couple, Nora May. Not but what they had their
shortcomings. Anne's nose was a mite too long and Gil had a crooked
mouth. Besides, they was both pretty proud and sperrited and
high-strung. But they thought an awful lot of each other. It made me feel young
again to see 'em. Anne wasn't a mossel vain, but nights she expected
Gil she'd prink for hours afore her glass, fixing her hair this way
and that, and trying on all her good clothes to see which become her
most. I used to love her for it. And I used to love to see the way
Gil's face would light up when she came into a room or place where he
was. Amanda Perkins, she says to me once, "Anne Douglas and Gil Martin
are most terrible struck on each other." And she said it in a tone
that indicated that it was a dreadful disgraceful and unbecoming state
of affairs. Amanda had a disappointment once and it soured her. I
immediately responded, "Yes, they are most terrible struck on each
other," and I said it in a tone that indicated I thought it a most
beautiful and lovely thing that they should be so. And so it was. You're rather too young to be thinking of such things,
Nora May, but you'll remember my words when the time comes. Another nephew of mine, James Ebenezer Lawson--he calls himself James
E. back there in town, and I don't blame him, for I never could stand
Ebenezer for a name myself; but that's neither here nor there. Well,
he said their love was idyllic, I ain't very sure what that means. I
looked it up in the dictionary after James Ebenezer left--I wouldn't
display my ignorance afore him--but I can't say that I was much the
wiser for it. Anyway, it meant something real nice; I was sure of that
by the way James Ebenezer spoke and the wistful look in his eyes. James Ebenezer isn't married; he was to have been, and she died a
month afore the wedding day. He was never the same man again. Well, to get back to Gilbert and Anne. When Anne's school year ended
in June she resigned and went home to get ready to be married. The
wedding was to be in September, and I promised Anne faithful I'd go
over to Montrose in August for two weeks and help her to get her
quilts ready. Anne thought that nobody could quilt like me. I was as
tickled as a girl at the thought of visiting with Anne for two weeks,
but I never went; things happened before August. I don't know rightly how the trouble began. Other folks--jealous
folks--made mischief. Anne was thirty miles away and Gilbert couldn't
see her every day to keep matters clear and fair. Besides, as I've
said, they were both proud and high-sperrited. The upshot of it was
they had a terrible quarrel and the engagement was broken. When two people don't care overly much for each other, Nora May, a
quarrel never amounts to much between them, and it's soon made up. But
when they love each other better than life it cuts so deep and hurts
so much that nine times out of ten they won't ever forgive each other. The more you love anybody, Nora May, the more he can hurt you. To be
sure, you're too young to be thinking of such things. It all came like a thunderclap on Gil's friends here at Greendale,
because we hadn't ever suspected things were going wrong. The first
thing we knew was that Anne had gone up west to teach school again at
St. Mary's, eighty miles away, and Gilbert, he went out to Manitoba on
a harvest excursion and stayed there. It just about broke his parents'
hearts. He was their only child and they just worshipped him. Gil and Anne both wrote to me off and on, but never a word, not so
much as a name, did they say of each other. I'd 'a' writ and asked 'em
the rights of the fuss if I could, in hopes of patching it up, but I
can't write now--my hand is too shaky--and mebbe it was just as well,
for meddling is terribly risky work in a love trouble, Nora May. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the last state of a meddler and
them she meddles with is worse than the first. So I just set tight and said nothing, while everybody else in the clan
was talking Anne and Gil sixty words to the minute. Well, last birthday morning I was feeling terrible disperrited. I had
made up my mind that my birthday was always to be a good thing for
other people, and there didn't seem one blessed thing I could do to
make anybody glad. Emma Matilda and George and the children were all
well and happy and wanted for nothing that I could give them. I begun
to be afraid I'd lived long enough, Nora May. When a woman gets to the
point where she can't give a gift of joy to anyone, there ain't much
use in her living. I felt real old and worn out and useless. I was sitting here under these very trees--they was just budding out
in leaf then, as young and cheerful as if they wasn't a hundred years
old. And I sighed right out loud and said, "Oh, Grandpa Holland, it's
time I was put away up on the hill there with you." And with that the
gate banged and there was Nancy Jane Whitmore's boy, Sam, with two
letters for me. One was from Anne up at St. Mary's and the other was from Gil out in
Manitoba. I read Anne's first. She just struck right into things in the first
paragraph. She said her year at St. Mary's was nearly up, and when it
was she meant to quit teaching and go away to New York and learn to be
a trained nurse. She said she was just broken-hearted about Gilbert,
and would always love him to the day of her death. But she knew he
didn't care anything more about her after the way he had acted, and
there was nothing left for her in life but to do something for other
people, and so on and so on, for twelve mortal pages. Anne is a fine
writer, and I just cried like a babe over that letter, it was so
touching, although I was enjoying myself hugely all the time, I was so
delighted to find out that Anne loved Gilbert still. I was getting
skeered she didn't, her letters all winter had been so kind of jokey
and frivolous, all about the good times she was having, and the
parties she went to, and the new dresses she got. New dresses! When I
read that letter of Anne's, I knew that all the purple and fine linen
in the world was just like so much sackcloth and ashes to her as long
as Gilbert was sulking out on a prairie farm. Well, I wiped my eyes and polished up my specs, but I might have
spared myself the trouble, for in five minutes, Nora May, there was I
sobbing again; over Gilbert's letter. By the most curious coincidence
he had opened his heart to me too. Being a man, he wasn't so
discursive as Anne; he said his say in four pages, but I could read
the heartache between the lines. He wrote that he was going to
Klondike and would start in a month's time. He was sick of living now
that he'd lost Anne. He said he loved her better than his life and
always would, and could never forget her, but he knew she didn't care
anything about him now after the way she'd acted, and he wanted to get
as far away from her and the torturing thought of her as he could. So
he was going to Klondike--going to Klondike, Nora May, when his mother
was writing to him to come home every week and Anne was breaking her
heart for him at St. Mary's. Well, I folded up them letters and, says I, "Grandpa Holland, I guess
my birthday celebration is here ready to hand." I thought real hard. I
couldn't write myself to explain to those two people that they each
thought the world of each other still--my hands are too stiff; and I
couldn't get anyone else to write because I couldn't let out what
they'd told me in confidence. So I did a mean, dishonourable thing,
Nora May. I sent Anne's letter to Gilbert and Gilbert's to Anne. I
asked Emma Matilda to address them, and Emma Matilda did it and asked
no questions. I brought her up that way. Then I settled down to wait. In less than a month Gilbert's mother had
a letter from him saying that he was coming home to settle down and
marry Anne. He arrived home yesterday and last night Anne came to
Springdale on her way home from St. Mary's. They came to see me this
morning and said things to me I ain't going to repeat because they
would sound fearful vain. They were so happy that they made me feel as
if it was a good thing to have lived eighty years in a world where
folks could be so happy. They said their new joy was my birthday gift
to them. The wedding is to be in September and I'm going to Montrose
in August to help Anne with her quilts. I don't think anything will
happen to prevent this time--no quarrelling, anyhow. Those two young
creatures have learned their lesson. You'd better take it to heart
too, Nora May. It's less trouble to learn it at second hand. Don't you
ever quarrel with your real beau--it don't matter about the sham ones,
of course. Don't take offence at trifles or listen to what other
people tell you about him--outsiders, that is, that want to make
mischief. What you think about him is of more importance than what
they do. To be sure, you're too young yet to be thinking of such
things at all. But just mind what old Aunt Susanna told you when your
time comes. Bertie's New Year


He stood on the sagging doorstep and looked out on the snowy world. His hands were clasped behind him, and his thin face wore a
thoughtful, puzzled look. The door behind him opened jerkingly, and a
scowling woman came out with a pan of dishwater in her hand. "Ain't you gone yet, Bert?" she said sharply. "What in the world are
you hanging round for?" "It's early yet," said Bertie cheerfully. "I thought maybe George
Fraser'd be along and I'd get a lift as far as the store." "Well, I never saw such laziness! No wonder old Sampson won't keep you
longer than the holidays if you're no smarter than that. Goodness, if
I don't settle that boy!" --as the sound of fretful crying came from
the kitchen behind her. "What is wrong with William John?" asked Bertie. "Why, he wants to go out coasting with those Robinson boys, but he
can't. He hasn't got any mittens and he would catch his death of cold
again." Her voice seemed to imply that William John had died of cold several
times already. Bertie looked soberly down at his old, well-darned mittens. It was
very cold, and he would have a great many errands to run. He shivered,
and looked up at his aunt's hard face as she stood wiping her dish-pan
with a grim frown which boded no good to the discontented William
John. Then he suddenly pulled off his mittens and held them out. "Here--he can have mine. I'll get on without them well enough." "Nonsense!" said Mrs. Ross, but less unkindly. "The fingers would
freeze off you. Don't be a goose." "It's all right," persisted Bertie. "I don't need them--much. And
William John doesn't hardly ever get out." He thrust them into her hand and ran quickly down the street, as
though he feared that the keen air might make him change his mind in
spite of himself. He had to stop a great many times that day to
breathe on his purple hands. Still, he did not regret having lent his
mittens to William John--poor, pale, sickly little William John, who
had so few pleasures. It was sunset when Bertie laid an armful of parcels down on the steps
of Doctor Forbes's handsome house. His back was turned towards the big
bay window at one side, and he was busy trying to warm his hands, so
he did not see the two small faces looking at him through the frosty
panes. "Just look at that poor little boy, Amy," said the taller of the two. "He is almost frozen, I believe. Why doesn't Caroline hurry and open
the door?" "There she goes now," said Amy. "Edie, couldn't we coax her to let him
come in and get warm? He looks so cold." And she drew her sister out
into the hall, where the housekeeper was taking Bertie's parcels. "Caroline," whispered Edith timidly, "please tell that poor little
fellow to come in and get warm--he looks very cold." "He's used to the cold, I warrant you," said the housekeeper rather
impatiently. "It won't hurt him." "But it is Christmas week," said Edith gravely, "and you know,
Caroline, when Mamma was here she used to say that we ought to be
particularly thoughtful of others who were not so happy or well-off as
we were at this time." Perhaps Edith's reference to her mother softened Caroline, for she
turned to Bertie and said cordially enough, "Come in, and warm
yourself before you go. It's a cold day." Bertie shyly followed her to the kitchen. "Sit up to the fire," said Caroline, placing a chair for him, while
Edith and Amy came round to the other side of the stove and watched
him with friendly interest. "What's your name?" asked Caroline. "Robert Ross, ma'am." "Oh, you're Mrs. Ross's nephew then," said Caroline, breaking eggs
into her cake-bowl, and whisking them deftly round. "And you're
Sampson's errand boy just now? My goodness," as the boy spread his
blue hands over the fire, "where are your mittens, child? You're never
out without mittens a day like this!" "I lent them to William John--he hadn't any," faltered Bertie. He did
not know but that the lady might consider it a grave crime to be
mittenless. "No mittens!" exclaimed Amy in dismay. "Why, I have three pairs. And
who is William John?" "He is my cousin," said Bertie. "And he's awful sickly. He wanted to
go out to play, and he hadn't any mittens, so I lent him mine. I
didn't miss them--much." "What kind of a Christmas did you have?" "We didn't have any." "No Christmas!" said Amy, quite overcome. "Oh, well, I suppose you are
going to have a good time on New Year's instead." Bertie shook his head. "No'm, I guess not. We never have it different from other times." Amy was silent from sheer amazement. Edith understood better, and she
changed the subject. "Have you any brothers or sisters, Bertie?" "No'm," returned Bertie cheerfully. "I guess there's enough of us
without that. I must be going now. I'm very much obliged to you." Edith slipped from the room as he spoke, and met him again at the
door. She held out a pair of warm-looking mittens. "These are for William John," she said simply, "so that you can have
your own. They are a pair of mine which are too big for me. I know
Papa will say it is all right. Goodbye, Bertie." "Goodbye--and thank you," stammered Bertie, as the door closed. Then
he hastened home to William John. That evening Doctor Forbes noticed a peculiarly thoughtful look on
Edith's face as she sat gazing into the glowing coal fire after
dinner. He laid his hand on her dark curls inquiringly. "What are you musing over?" "There was a little boy here today," began Edith. "Oh, such a dear little boy," broke in Amy eagerly from the corner,
where she was playing with her kitten. "His name was Bertie Ross. He
brought up the parcels, and we asked him in to get warm. He had no
mittens, and his hands were almost frozen. And, oh, Papa, just
think!--he said he never had any Christmas or New Year at all." "Poor little fellow!" said the doctor. "I've heard of him; a pretty
hard time he has of it, I think." "He was so pretty, Papa. And Edie gave him her blue mittens for
William John." "The plot deepens. Who is William John?" "Oh, a cousin or something, didn't he say Edie? Anyway, he is sick,
and he wanted to go coasting, and Bertie gave him his mittens. And I
suppose he never had any Christmas either." "There are plenty who haven't," said the doctor, taking up his paper
with a sigh. "Well, girlies, you seem interested in this little fellow
so, if you like, you may invite him and his cousin to take dinner with
you on New Year's night." "Oh, Papa!" said Edith, her eyes shining like stars. The doctor laughed. "Write him a nice little note of invitation--you
are the lady of the house, you know--and I'll see that he gets it
tomorrow." And this was how it came to pass that Bertie received the next day his
first invitation to dine out. He read the little note through three
times in order fully to take in its contents, and then went around the
rest of the day in deep abstraction as though he was trying to decide
some very important question. It was with the same expression that he
opened the door at home in the evening. His aunt was stirring some
oatmeal mush on the stove. "Is that you, Bert?" She spoke sharply. She always spoke sharply, even
when not intending it; it had grown to be a habit. "Yes'm," said Bertie meekly, as he hung up his cap. "I s'pose you've only got one day more at the store," said Mrs. Ross. "Sampson didn't say anything about keeping you longer, did he?" "No. He said he couldn't--I asked him." "Well, I didn't expect he would. You'll have a holiday on New Year's
anyhow; whether you'll have anything to eat or not is a different
question." "I've an invitation to dinner," said Bertie timidly, "me and William
John. It's from Doctor Forbes's little girls--the ones that gave me
the mittens." He handed her the little note, and Mrs. Ross stooped down and read it
by the fitful gleam of light which came from the cracked stove. "Well, you can please yourself," she said as she handed it back, "but
William John couldn't go if he had ten invitations. He caught cold
coasting yesterday. I told him he would, but he was bound to go, and
now he's laid up for a week. Listen to him barking in the bedroom
there." "Well, then, I won't go either," said Bertie with a sigh, it might be
of relief, or it might be of disappointment. "I wouldn't go there all
alone." "You're a goose!" said his aunt. "They wouldn't eat you. But as I
said, please yourself. Anyhow, hold your tongue about it to William
John, or you'll have him crying and bawling to go too." The caution came too late. 