



Produced by Alicia Williams, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1896 to 1901


Lucy Maud Montgomery was born at Clifton (now New London), Prince
Edward Island, Canada, on November 30, 1874. She achieved
international fame in her lifetime, putting Prince Edward Island and
Canada on the world literary map. Best known for her "Anne of Green
Gables" books, she was also a prolific writer of short stories and
poetry. She published some 500 short stories and poems and twenty
novels before her death in 1942. The Project Gutenberg collection of
her short stories was gathered from numerous sources and is presented
in chronological publishing order:

Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1896 to 1901
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1902 to 1903
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1904
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1905 to 1906
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1907 to 1908
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1909 to 1922


       *       *       *       *       *




Short Stories 1896 to 1901

    A Case of Trespass                                       1897
    A Christmas Inspiration                                  1901
    A Christmas Mistake                                      1899
    A Strayed Allegiance                                     1897
    An Invitation Given on Impulse                           1900
    Detected by the Camera                                   1897
    In Spite of Myself                                       1896
    Kismet                                                   1899
    Lillian's Business Venture                               1900
    Miriam's Lover                                           1901
    Miss Calista's Peppermint Bottle                         1900
    The Jest that Failed                                     1901
    The Pennington's Girl                                    1900
    The Red Room                                             1898
    The Setness of Theodosia                                 1901
    The Story of An Invitation                               1901
    The Touch of Fate                                        1899
    The Waking of Helen                                      1901
    The Way of Winning Anne                                  1899
    Young Si                                                 1901




A Case of Trespass


It was the forenoon of a hazy, breathless day, and Dan Phillips was
trouting up one of the back creeks of the Carleton pond. It was
somewhat cooler up the creek than out on the main body of water, for
the tall birches and willows, crowding down to the brim, threw cool,
green shadows across it and shut out the scorching glare, while a
stray breeze now and then rippled down the wooded slopes, rustling the
beech leaves with an airy, pleasant sound. Out in the pond the glassy water creamed and shimmered in the hot sun,
unrippled by the faintest breath of air. Across the soft, pearly tints
of the horizon blurred the smoke of the big factory chimneys that were
owned by Mr. Walters, to whom the pond and adjacent property also
belonged. Mr. Walters was a comparative stranger in Carleton, having but
recently purchased the factories from the heirs of the previous owner;
but he had been in charge long enough to establish a reputation for
sternness and inflexibility in all his business dealings. One or two of his employees, who had been discharged by him on what
they deemed insufficient grounds, helped to deepen the impression that
he was an unjust and arbitrary man, merciless to all offenders, and
intolerant of the slightest infringement of his cast-iron rules. Dan Phillips had been on the pond ever since sunrise. The trout had
risen well in the early morning, but as the day wore on, growing
hotter and hotter, they refused to bite, and for half an hour Dan had
not caught one. He had a goodly string of them already, however, and he surveyed them
with satisfaction as he rowed his leaky little skiff to the shore of
the creek. "Pretty good catch," he soliloquized. "Best I've had this summer, so
far. That big spotted one must weigh near a pound. He's a beauty. They're a good price over at the hotels now, too. I'll go home and
get my dinner and go straight over with them. That'll leave me time
for another try at them about sunset. Whew, how hot it is! I must take
Ella May home a bunch of them blue flags. They're real handsome!" He tied his skiff under the crowding alders, gathered a big bunch of
the purple flag lilies with their silky petals, and started homeward,
whistling cheerily as he stepped briskly along the fern-carpeted wood
path that wound up the hill under the beeches and firs. He was a freckled, sunburned lad of thirteen years. His neighbours all
said that Danny was "as smart as a steel trap," and immediately added
that they wondered where he got his smartness from--certainly not from
his father! The elder Phillips had been denominated "shiftless and slack-twisted"
by all who ever had any dealings with him in his unlucky, aimless
life--one of those improvident, easygoing souls who sit contentedly
down to breakfast with a very faint idea where their dinner is to come
from. When he had died, no one had missed him, unless it were his patient,
sad-eyed wife, who bravely faced her hard lot, and toiled
unremittingly to keep a home for her two children--Dan and a girl two
years younger, who was a helpless cripple, suffering from some form of
spinal disease. Dan, who was old and steady for his years, had gone manfully to work
to assist his mother. Though he had been disappointed in all his
efforts to obtain steady employment, he was active and obliging, and
earned many a small amount by odd jobs around the village, and by
helping the Carleton farmers in planting and harvest. For the last two years, however, his most profitable source of summer
income had been the trout pond. The former owner had allowed anyone
who wished to fish in his pond, and Dan made a regular business of it,
selling his trout at the big hotels over at Mosquito Lake. This, in
spite of its unattractive name, was a popular summer resort, and Dan
always found a ready market for his catch. When Mr. Walters purchased the property it somehow never occurred to
Dan that the new owner might not be so complaisant as his predecessor
in the matter of the best trouting pond in the country. To be sure, Dan often wondered why it was the pond was so deserted
this summer. He could not recall having seen a single person on it
save himself. Still, it did not cross his mind that there could be any
particular reason for this. He always fished up in the cool, dim creeks, which long experience had
taught him were best for trout, and came and went by a convenient wood
path; but he had no thought of concealment in so doing. He would not
have cared had all Carleton seen him. He had done very well with his fish so far, and prices for trout at
the Lake went up every day. Dan was an enterprising boy, and a general
favourite with the hotel owners. They knew that he could always be
depended on. Mrs. Phillips met him at the door when he reached home. "See, Mother," said Dan exultantly, as he held up his fish. "Just look
at that fellow, will you? A pound if he's an ounce! I ought to get a
good price for these, I can tell you. Let me have my dinner now, and
I'll go right over to the Lake with them." "It's a long walk for you, Danny," replied his mother pityingly, "and
it's too hot to go so far. I'm afraid you'll get sun-struck or
something. You'd better wait till the cool of the evening. You're
looking real pale and thin this while back." "Oh, I'm all right, Mother," assured Dan cheerfully. "I don't mind the
heat a bit. A fellow must put up with some inconveniences. Wait till I
bring home the money for these fish. And I mean to have another catch
tonight. It's you that's looking tired. I wish you didn't have to work
so hard, Mother. If I could only get a good place you could take it
easier. Sam French says that Mr. Walters wants a boy up there at the
factory, but I know I wouldn't do. I ain't big enough. Perhaps
something will turn up soon though. When our ship comes in, Mother,
we'll have our good times." He picked up his flags and went into the little room where his sister
lay. "See what I've brought you, Ella May!" he said, as he thrust the cool,
moist clusters into her thin, eager hands. "Did you ever see such
beauties?" "Oh, Dan, how lovely they are! Thank you ever so much! If you are
going over to the Lake this afternoon, will you please call at Mrs.
Henny's and get those nutmeg geranium slips she promised me? Just look
how nice my others are growing. The pink one is going to bloom." "I'll bring you all the geranium slips at the Lake, if you like. When
I get rich, Ella May, I'll build you a big conservatory, and I'll get
every flower in the world in it for you. You shall just live and sleep
among posies. Is dinner ready, Mother? Trouting's hungry work, I tell
you. What paper is this?" He picked up a folded newspaper from the table. "Oh, that's only an old Lake _Advertiser_," answered Mrs. Phillips, as
she placed the potatoes on the table and wiped her moist, hot face
with the corner of her gingham apron. "Letty Mills brought it in
around a parcel this morning. It's four weeks old, but I kept it to
read if I ever get time. It's so seldom we see a paper of any kind
nowadays. But I haven't looked at it yet. Why, Danny, what on earth is
the matter?" For Dan, who had opened the paper and glanced over the first page,
suddenly gave a choked exclamation and turned pale, staring stupidly
at the sheet before him. "See, Mother," he gasped, as she came up in alarm and looked over his
shoulder. This is what they read:

    Notice

    Anyone found fishing on my pond at Carleton after date will be
    prosecuted according to law, without respect of persons. June First. H.C. Walters. "Oh, Danny, what does it mean?" Dan went and carefully closed the door of Ella May's room before he
replied. His face was pale and his voice shaky. "Mean? Well, Mother, it just means that I've been stealing Mr.
Walters's trout all summer--_stealing_ them. That's what it means." "Oh, Danny! But you didn't know." "No, but I ought to have remembered that he was the new owner, and
have asked him. I never thought. Mother, what does 'prosecuted
according to law' mean?" "I don't know, I'm sure, Danny. But if this is so, there's only one
thing to be done. You must go straight to Mr. Walters and tell him all
about it." "Mother, I don't dare to. He is a dreadfully hard man. Sam French's
father says--"

"I wouldn't believe a word Sam French's father says about Mr. Walters!" said Mrs. Phillips firmly. "He's got a spite against him
because he was dismissed. Besides, Danny, it's the only right thing to
do. You know that. We're poor, but we have never done anything
underhand yet." "Yes, Mother, I know," said Dan, gulping his fear bravely down. "I'll
go, of course, right after dinner. I was only scared at first. I'll
tell you what I'll do. I'll clean these trout nicely and take them to
Mr. Walters, and tell him that, if he'll only give me time, I'll pay
him back every cent of money I got for all I sold this summer. Then
maybe he'll let me off, seeing as I didn't know about the notice." "I'll go with you, Danny." "No, I'll go alone, Mother. You needn't go with me," said Dan
heroically. To himself he said that his mother had troubles enough. He
would never subject her to the added ordeal of an interview with the
stern factory owner. He would beard the lion in his den himself, if it
had to be done. "Don't tell Ella May anything about it. It would worry her. And don't
cry, Mother, I guess it'll be all right. Let me have my dinner now and
I'll go straight off." Dan ate his dinner rapidly; then he carefully cleaned his trout, put
them in a long basket, with rhubarb leaves over them, and started with
an assumed cheerfulness very far from his real feelings. He had barely passed the gate when another boy came shuffling along--a
tall, raw-boned lad, with an insinuating smile and shifty, cunning
eyes. The newcomer nodded familiarly to Dan. "Hello, sonny. Going over to the Lake with your catch, are you? You'll
fry up before you get there. There'll be nothing left of you but a
crisp." "No, I'm not going to the Lake. I'm going up to the factory to see Mr. Walters." Sam French gave a long whistle of surprise. "Why, Dan, what's taking you there? You surely ain't thinking of
trying for that place, are you? Walters wouldn't look at you. Why, he
wouldn't take _me_! You haven't the ghost of a chance." "No, I'm not going for that. Sam, did you know that Mr. Walters had a
notice in the Lake _Advertiser_ that nobody could fish in his pond
this summer?" "Course I did--the old skinflint! He's too mean to live, that's what. He never goes near the pond himself. Regular dog in the manger, he is. Dad says--"

"Sam, why didn't you tell me about that notice?" "Gracious, didn't you know? I s'posed everybody did, and here I've
been taking you for the cutest chap this side of sunset--fishing away
up in that creek where no one could see you, and cutting home through
the woods on the sly. You don't mean to tell me you never saw that
notice?" "No, I didn't. Do you think I'd have gone near the pond if I had? I
never saw it till today, and I'm going straight to Mr. Walters now to
tell him about it." Sam French stopped short in the dusty road and stared at Dan in
undisguised amazement. "Dan Phillips," he ejaculated, "have you plum gone out of your mind? Boy alive, you needn't be afraid that I'd peach on you. I'm too blamed
glad to see anyone get the better of that old Walters, smart as he
thinks himself. Gee! To dream of going to him and telling him you've
been fishing in his pond! Why, he'll put you in jail. You don't know
what sort of a man he is. Dad says--"

"Never mind what your dad says, Sam. My mind's made up." "Dan, you chump, listen to me. That notice says 'prosecuted according
to law.' Why, Danny, he'll put you in prison, or fine you, or
something dreadful." "I can't help it if he does," said Danny stoutly. "You get out of
here, Sam French, and don't be trying to scare me. I mean to be
honest, and how can I be if I don't own up to Mr. Walters that I've
been stealing his trout all summer?" "Stealing, fiddlesticks! Dan, I used to think you were a chap with
some sense, but I see I was mistaken. You ain't done no harm. Walters
will never miss them trout. If you're so dreadful squeamish that you
won't fish no more, why, you needn't. But just let the matter drop and
hold your tongue about it. That's _my_ advice." "Well, it isn't my mother's, then. I mean to go by _hers_. You needn't
argue no more, Sam. I'm going." "Go, then!" said Sam, stopping short in disgust. "You're a big fool,
Dan, and serve you right if Walters lands you off to jail; but I don't
wish you no ill. If I can do anything for your family after you're
gone, I will, and I'll try and give your remains Christian burial--if
there are any remains. So long, Danny! Give my love to old Walters!" Dan was not greatly encouraged by this interview. He shrank more than
ever from the thought of facing the stern factory owner. His courage
had almost evaporated when he entered the office at the factory and
asked shakily for Mr. Walters. "He's in his office there," replied the clerk, "but he's very busy. Better leave your message with me." "I must see Mr. Walters himself, please," said Dan firmly, but with
inward trepidation. The clerk swung himself impatiently from his stool and ushered Dan
into Mr. Walters's private office. "Boy to see you, sir," he said briefly, as he closed the ground-glass
door behind him. Dan, dizzy and trembling, stood in the dreaded presence. Mr. Walters
was writing at a table covered with a businesslike litter of papers. He laid down his pen and looked up with a frown as the clerk vanished. He was a stern-looking man with deep-set grey eyes and a square,
clean-shaven chin. There was not an ounce of superfluous flesh on his
frame, and his voice and manner were those of the decided, resolute,
masterful man of business. He pointed to a capacious leather chair and said concisely, "What is
your business with me, boy?" Dan had carefully thought out a statement of facts beforehand, but
every word had vanished from his memory. He had only a confused,
desperate consciousness that he had a theft to confess and that it
must be done as soon as possible. He did not sit down. "Please, Mr. Walters," he began desperately, "I came to tell you--your
notice--I never saw it before--and I've been fishing on your pond all
summer--but I didn't know--honest--I've brought you all I caught
today--and I'll pay back for them all--some time." An amused, puzzled expression crossed Mr. Walters's noncommittal face. He pushed the leather chair forward. "Sit down, my boy," he said kindly. "I don't quite understand this
somewhat mixed-up statement of yours. You've been fishing on my pond,
you say. Didn't you see my notice in the _Advertiser_?" Dan sat down more composedly. The revelation was over and he was still
alive. "No, sir. We hardly ever see an _Advertiser_, and nobody told me. I'd
always been used to fishing there, and I never thought but what it was
all right to keep on. I know I ought to have remembered and asked you,
but truly, sir, I didn't mean to steal your fish. I used to sell them
over at the hotels. We saw the notice today, Mother and me, and I came
right up. I've brought you the trout I caught this morning, and--if
only you won't prosecute me, sir, I'll pay back every cent I got for
the others--every cent, sir--if you'll give me time." Mr. Walters passed his hand across his mouth to conceal something like
a smile. "Your name is Dan Phillips, isn't it?" he said irrelevantly, "and you
live with your mother, the Widow Phillips, down there at Carleton
Corners, I understand." "Yes, sir," said Dan, wondering how Mr. Walters knew so much about
him, and if these were the preliminaries of prosecution. Mr. Walters took up his pen and drew a blank sheet towards him. "Well, Dan, I put that notice in because I found that many people who
used to fish on my pond, irrespective of leave or licence, were
accustomed to lunch or camp on my property, and did not a little
damage. I don't care for trouting myself; I've no time for it. However, I hardly think you'll do much damage. You can keep on
fishing there. I'll give you a written permission, so that if any of
my men see you they won't interfere with you. As for these trout here,
I'll buy them from you at Mosquito Lake prices, and will say no more
about the matter. How will that do?" "Thank you, sir," stammered Dan. He could hardly believe his ears. He
took the slip of paper Mr. Walters handed to him and rose to his feet. "Wait a minute, Dan. How was it you came to tell me this? You might
have stopped your depredations, and I should not have been any the
wiser." "That wouldn't have been honest, sir," said Dan, looking squarely at
him. There was a brief silence. Mr. Walters thrummed meditatively on the
table. Dan waited wonderingly. Finally the factory owner said abruptly, "There's a vacant place for a
boy down here. I want it filled as soon as possible. Will you take
it?" "Mr. Walters! _Me!_" Dan thought the world must be turning upside
down. "Yes, you. You are rather young, but the duties are not hard or
difficult to learn. I think you'll do. I was resolved not to fill that
place until I could find a perfectly honest and trustworthy boy for
it. I believe I have found him. I discharged the last boy because he
lied to me about some trifling offence for which I would have forgiven
him if he had told the truth. I can bear with incompetency, but
falsehood and deceit I cannot and will not tolerate," he said, so
sternly that Dan's face paled. "I am convinced that you are incapable
of either. Will you take the place, Dan?" "I will if you think I can fill it, sir. I will do my best." "Yes, I believe you will. Perhaps I know more about you than you
think. Businessmen must keep their eyes open. We'll regard this matter
as settled then. Come up tomorrow at eight o'clock. And one word more,
Dan. You have perhaps heard that I am an unjust and hard master. I am
not the former, and you will never have occasion to find me the latter
if you are always as truthful and straightforward as you have been
today. You might easily have deceived me in this matter. That you did
not do so is the best and only recommendation I require. Take those
trout up to my house and leave them. That will do. Good afternoon." Dan somehow got his dazed self through the glass door and out of the
building. The whole interview had been such a surprise to him that he
was hardly sure whether or not he had dreamed it all. "I feel as if I were some person else," he said to himself, as he
started down the hot white road. "But Mother was right. I'll stick to
her motto. I wonder what Sam will say to this." A Christmas Inspiration


"Well, I really think Santa Claus has been very good to us all," said
Jean Lawrence, pulling the pins out of her heavy coil of fair hair and
letting it ripple over her shoulders. "So do I," said Nellie Preston as well as she could with a mouthful of
chocolates. "Those blessed home folks of mine seem to have divined by
instinct the very things I most wanted." It was the dusk of Christmas Eve and they were all in Jean Lawrence's
room at No. 16 Chestnut Terrace. No. 16 was a boarding-house, and
boarding-houses are not proverbially cheerful places in which to spend
Christmas, but Jean's room, at least, was a pleasant spot, and all the
girls had brought their Christmas presents in to show each other. Christmas came on Sunday that year and the Saturday evening mail at
Chestnut Terrace had been an exciting one. Jean had lighted the pink-globed lamp on her table and the mellow
light fell over merry faces as the girls chatted about their gifts. On
the table was a big white box heaped with roses that betokened a bit
of Christmas extravagance on somebody's part. Jean's brother had sent
them to her from Montreal, and all the girls were enjoying them in
common. No. 16 Chestnut Terrace was overrun with girls generally. But just now
only five were left; all the others had gone home for Christmas, but
these five could not go and were bent on making the best of it. Belle and Olive Reynolds, who were sitting on the bed--Jean could
never keep them off it--were High School girls; they were said to be
always laughing, and even the fact that they could not go home for
Christmas because a young brother had measles did not dampen their
spirits. Beth Hamilton, who was hovering over the roses, and Nellie Preston,
who was eating candy, were art students, and their homes were too far
away to visit. As for Jean Lawrence, she was an orphan, and had no
home of her own. She worked on the staff of one of the big city
newspapers and the other girls were a little in awe of her
cleverness, but her nature was a "chummy" one and her room was a
favourite rendezvous. Everybody liked frank, open-handed and hearted
Jean. "It was so funny to see the postman when he came this evening," said
Olive. "He just bulged with parcels. They were sticking out in every
direction." "We all got our share of them," said Jean with a sigh of content. "Even the cook got six--I counted." "Miss Allen didn't get a thing--not even a letter," said Beth quickly. Beth had a trick of seeing things that other girls didn't. "I forgot Miss Allen. No, I don't believe she did," answered Jean
thoughtfully as she twisted up her pretty hair. "How dismal it must be
to be so forlorn as that on Christmas Eve of all times. Ugh! I'm glad
I have friends." "I saw Miss Allen watching us as we opened our parcels and letters,"
Beth went on. "I happened to look up once, and such an expression as
was on her face, girls! It was pathetic and sad and envious all at
once. It really made me feel bad--for five minutes," she concluded
honestly. "Hasn't Miss Allen any friends at all?" asked Beth. "No, I don't think she has," answered Jean. "She has lived here for
fourteen years, so Mrs. Pickrell says. Think of that, girls! Fourteen
years at Chestnut Terrace! Is it any wonder that she is thin and
dried-up and snappy?" "Nobody ever comes to see her and she never goes anywhere," said Beth. "Dear me! She must feel lonely now when everybody else is being
remembered by their friends. I can't forget her face tonight; it
actually haunts me. Girls, how would you feel if you hadn't anyone
belonging to you, and if nobody thought about you at Christmas?" "Ow!" said Olive, as if the mere idea made her shiver. A little silence followed. To tell the truth, none of them liked Miss
Allen. They knew that she did not like them either, but considered
them frivolous and pert, and complained when they made a racket. "The skeleton at the feast," Jean called her, and certainly the
presence of the pale, silent, discontented-looking woman at the No. 16
table did not tend to heighten its festivity. Presently Jean said with a dramatic flourish, "Girls, I have an
inspiration--a Christmas inspiration!" "What is it?" cried four voices. "Just this. Let us give Miss Allen a Christmas surprise. She has not
received a single present and I'm sure she feels lonely. Just think
how we would feel if we were in her place." "That is true," said Olive thoughtfully. "Do you know, girls, this
evening I went to her room with a message from Mrs. Pickrell, and I do
believe she had been crying. Her room looked dreadfully bare and
cheerless, too. I think she is very poor. What are we to do, Jean?" "Let us each give her something nice. We can put the things just
outside of her door so that she will see them whenever she opens it. I'll give her some of Fred's roses too, and I'll write a Christmassy
letter in my very best style to go with them," said Jean, warming up
to her ideas as she talked. The other girls caught her spirit and entered into the plan with
enthusiasm. "Splendid!" cried Beth. "Jean, it is an inspiration, sure enough. Haven't we been horribly selfish--thinking of nothing but our own
gifts and fun and pleasure? I really feel ashamed." "Let us do the thing up the very best way we can," said Nellie,
forgetting even her beloved chocolates in her eagerness. "The shops
are open yet. Let us go up town and invest." Five minutes later five capped and jacketed figures were scurrying up
the street in the frosty, starlit December dusk. Miss Allen in her
cold little room heard their gay voices and sighed. She was crying by
herself in the dark. It was Christmas for everybody but her, she
thought drearily. In an hour the girls came back with their purchases. "Now, let's hold a council of war," said Jean jubilantly. "I hadn't
the faintest idea what Miss Allen would like so I just guessed wildly. I got her a lace handkerchief and a big bottle of perfume and a
painted photograph frame--and I'll stick my own photo in it for fun. That was really all I could afford. Christmas purchases have left my
purse dreadfully lean." "I got her a glove-box and a pin tray," said Belle, "and Olive got her
a calendar and Whittier's poems. And besides we are going to give her
half of that big plummy fruit cake Mother sent us from home. I'm sure
she hasn't tasted anything so delicious for years, for fruit cakes
don't grow on Chestnut Terrace and she never goes anywhere else for a
meal." Beth had bought a pretty cup and saucer and said she meant to give one
of her pretty water-colours too. Nellie, true to her reputation, had
invested in a big box of chocolate creams, a gorgeously striped candy
cane, a bag of oranges, and a brilliant lampshade of rose-coloured
crepe paper to top off with. "It makes such a lot of show for the money," she explained. "I am
bankrupt, like Jean." "Well, we've got a lot of pretty things," said Jean in a tone of
satisfaction. "Now we must do them up nicely. Will you wrap them in
tissue paper, girls, and tie them with baby ribbon--here's a box of
it--while I write that letter?" While the others chatted over their parcels Jean wrote her letter, and
Jean could write delightful letters. She had a decided talent in that
respect, and her correspondents all declared her letters to be things
of beauty and joy forever. She put her best into Miss Allen's
Christmas letter. Since then she has written many bright and clever
things, but I do not believe she ever in her life wrote anything more
genuinely original and delightful than that letter. Besides, it
breathed the very spirit of Christmas, and all the girls declared that
it was splendid. "You must all sign it now," said Jean, "and I'll put it in one of
those big envelopes; and, Nellie, won't you write her name on it in
fancy letters?" Which Nellie proceeded to do, and furthermore embellished the envelope
by a border of chubby cherubs, dancing hand in hand around it and a
sketch of No. 16 Chestnut Terrace in the corner in lieu of a stamp. Not content with this she hunted out a huge sheet of drawing paper and
drew upon it an original pen-and-ink design after her own heart. A
dudish cat--Miss Allen was fond of the No. 16 cat if she could be said
to be fond of anything--was portrayed seated on a rocker arrayed in
smoking jacket and cap with a cigar waved airily aloft in one paw
while the other held out a placard bearing the legend "Merry
Christmas." A second cat in full street costume bowed politely, hat in
paw, and waved a banner inscribed with "Happy New Year," while faintly
suggested kittens gambolled around the border. The girls laughed until
they cried over it and voted it to be the best thing Nellie had yet
done in original work. All this had taken time and it was past eleven o'clock. Miss Allen had
cried herself to sleep long ago and everybody else in Chestnut Terrace
was abed when five figures cautiously crept down the hall, headed by
Jean with a dim lamp. Outside of Miss Allen's door the procession
halted and the girls silently arranged their gifts on the floor. "That's done," whispered Jean in a tone of satisfaction as they
tiptoed back. "And now let us go to bed or Mrs. Pickrell, bless her
heart, will be down on us for burning so much midnight oil. Oil has
gone up, you know, girls." It was in the early morning that Miss Allen opened her door. But early
as it was, another door down the hall was half open too and five rosy
faces were peering cautiously out. The girls had been up for an hour
for fear they would miss the sight and were all in Nellie's room,
which commanded a view of Miss Allen's door. That lady's face was a study. Amazement, incredulity, wonder, chased
each other over it, succeeded by a glow of pleasure. On the floor
before her was a snug little pyramid of parcels topped by Jean's
letter. On a chair behind it was a bowl of delicious hot-house roses
and Nellie's placard. Miss Allen looked down the hall but saw nothing, for Jean had slammed
the door just in time. Half an hour later when they were going down to
breakfast Miss Allen came along the hall with outstretched hands to
meet them. She had been crying again, but I think her tears were happy
ones; and she was smiling now. A cluster of Jean's roses were pinned
on her breast. "Oh, girls, girls," she said, with a little tremble in her voice, "I
can never thank you enough. It was so kind and sweet of you. You don't
know how much good you have done me." Breakfast was an unusually cheerful affair at No. 16 that morning. There was no skeleton at the feast and everybody was beaming. Miss
Allen laughed and talked like a girl herself. "Oh, how surprised I was!" she said. "The roses were like a bit of
summer, and those cats of Nellie's were so funny and delightful. And
your letter too, Jean! I cried and laughed over it. I shall read it
every day for a year." After breakfast everyone went to Christmas service. The girls went
uptown to the church they attended. The city was very beautiful in the
morning sunshine. There had been a white frost in the night and the
tree-lined avenues and public squares seemed like glimpses of
fairyland. "How lovely the world is," said Jean. "This is really the very happiest Christmas morning I have ever
known," declared Nellie. "I never felt so really Christmassy in my
inmost soul before." "I suppose," said Beth thoughtfully, "that it is because we have
discovered for ourselves the old truth that it is more blessed to give
than to receive. I've always known it, in a way, but I never realized
it before." "Blessing on Jean's Christmas inspiration," said Nellie. "But, girls,
let us try to make it an all-the-year-round inspiration, I say. We can
bring a little of our own sunshine into Miss Allen's life as long as
we live with her." "Amen to that!" said Jean heartily. "Oh, listen, girls--the Christmas
chimes!" And over all the beautiful city was wafted the grand old message of
peace on earth and good will to all the world. A Christmas Mistake


"Tomorrow is Christmas," announced Teddy Grant exultantly, as he sat
on the floor struggling manfully with a refractory bootlace that was
knotted and tagless and stubbornly refused to go into the eyelets of
Teddy's patched boots. "Ain't I glad, though. Hurrah!" His mother was washing the breakfast dishes in a dreary, listless sort
of way. She looked tired and broken-spirited. Ted's enthusiasm seemed
to grate on her, for she answered sharply:

"Christmas, indeed. I can't see that it is anything for us to rejoice
over. Other people may be glad enough, but what with winter coming on
I'd sooner it was spring than Christmas. Mary Alice, do lift that
child out of the ashes and put its shoes and stockings on. Everything
seems to be at sixes and sevens here this morning." Keith, the oldest boy, was coiled up on the sofa calmly working out
some algebra problems, quite oblivious to the noise around him. But he
looked up from his slate, with his pencil suspended above an obstinate
equation, to declaim with a flourish:

    "Christmas comes but once a year,
    And then Mother wishes it wasn't here." "I don't, then," said Gordon, son number two, who was preparing his
own noon lunch of bread and molasses at the table, and making an
atrocious mess of crumbs and sugary syrup over everything. "I know one
thing to be thankful for, and that is that there'll be no school. We'll have a whole week of holidays." Gordon was noted for his aversion to school and his affection for
holidays. "And we're going to have turkey for dinner," declared Teddy, getting
up off the floor and rushing to secure his share of bread and
molasses, "and cranb'ry sauce and--and--pound cake! Ain't we, Ma?" "No, you are not," said Mrs. Grant desperately, dropping the dishcloth
and snatching the baby on her knee to wipe the crust of cinders and
molasses from the chubby pink-and-white face. "You may as well know it
now, children, I've kept it from you so far in hopes that something
would turn up, but nothing has. We can't have any Christmas dinner
tomorrow--we can't afford it. I've pinched and saved every way I could
for the last month, hoping that I'd be able to get a turkey for you
anyhow, but you'll have to do without it. There's that doctor's bill
to pay and a dozen other bills coming in--and people say they can't
wait. I suppose they can't, but it's kind of hard, I must say." The little Grants stood with open mouths and horrified eyes. No turkey
for Christmas! Was the world coming to an end? Wouldn't the government
interfere if anyone ventured to dispense with a Christmas celebration? The gluttonous Teddy stuffed his fists into his eyes and lifted up his
voice. Keith, who understood better than the others the look on his
mother's face, took his blubbering young brother by the collar and
marched him into the porch. The twins, seeing the summary proceeding,
swallowed the outcries they had intended to make, although they
couldn't keep a few big tears from running down their fat cheeks. Mrs. Grant looked pityingly at the disappointed faces about her. "Don't cry, children, you make me feel worse. We are not the only ones
who will have to do without a Christmas turkey. We ought to be very
thankful that we have anything to eat at all. I hate to disappoint
you, but it can't be helped." "Never mind, Mother," said Keith, comfortingly, relaxing his hold
upon the porch door, whereupon it suddenly flew open and precipitated
Teddy, who had been tugging at the handle, heels over head backwards. "We know you've done your best. It's been a hard year for you. Just
wait, though. I'll soon be grown up, and then you and these greedy
youngsters shall feast on turkey every day of the year. Hello, Teddy,
have you got on your feet again? Mind, sir, no more blubbering!" "When I'm a man," announced Teddy with dignity, "I'd just like to see
you put me in the porch. And I mean to have turkey all the time and I
won't give you any, either." "All right, you greedy small boy. Only take yourself off to school
now, and let us hear no more squeaks out of you. Tramp, all of you,
and give Mother a chance to get her work done." Mrs. Grant got up and fell to work at her dishes with a brighter face. "Well, we mustn't give in; perhaps things will be better after a
while. I'll make a famous bread pudding, and you can boil some
molasses taffy and ask those little Smithsons next door to help you
pull it. They won't whine for turkey, I'll be bound. I don't suppose
they ever tasted such a thing in all their lives. If I could afford
it, I'd have had them all in to dinner with us. That sermon Mr. Evans
preached last Sunday kind of stirred me up. He said we ought always
to try and share our Christmas joy with some poor souls who had never
learned the meaning of the word. I can't do as much as I'd like to. It
was different when your father was alive." The noisy group grew silent as they always did when their father was
spoken of. He had died the year before, and since his death the little
family had had a hard time. Keith, to hide his feelings, began to
hector the rest. "Mary Alice, do hurry up. Here, you twin nuisances, get off to school. If you don't you'll be late and then the master will give you a
whipping." "He won't," answered the irrepressible Teddy. "He never whips us, he
doesn't. He stands us on the floor sometimes, though," he added,
remembering the many times his own chubby legs had been seen to better
advantage on the school platform. "That man," said Mrs. Grant, alluding to the teacher, "makes me
nervous. He is the most abstracted creature I ever saw in my life. It
is a wonder to me he doesn't walk straight into the river some day. You'll meet him meandering along the street, gazing into vacancy, and
he'll never see you nor hear a word you say half the time." "Yesterday," said Gordon, chuckling over the remembrance, "he came in
with a big piece of paper he'd picked up on the entry floor in one
hand and his hat in the other--and he stuffed his hat into the
coal-scuttle and hung up the paper on a nail as grave as you please. Never knew the difference till Ned Slocum went and told him. He's
always doing things like that." Keith had collected his books and now marched his brothers and sisters
off to school. Left alone with the baby, Mrs. Grant betook herself to
her work with a heavy heart. But a second interruption broke the
progress of her dish-washing. "I declare," she said, with a surprised glance through the window, "if
there isn't that absent-minded schoolteacher coming through the yard! What can he want? Dear me, I do hope Teddy hasn't been cutting capers
in school again." For the teacher's last call had been in October and had been
occasioned by the fact that the irrepressible Teddy would persist in
going to school with his pockets filled with live crickets and in
driving them harnessed to strings up and down the aisle when the
teacher's back was turned. All mild methods of punishment having
failed, the teacher had called to talk it over with Mrs. Grant, with
the happy result that Teddy's behaviour had improved--in the matter of
crickets at least. But it was about time for another outbreak. Teddy had been unnaturally
good for too long a time. Poor Mrs. Grant feared that it was the calm
before a storm, and it was with nervous haste that she went to the
door and greeted the young teacher. He was a slight, pale, boyish-looking fellow, with an abstracted,
musing look in his large dark eyes. Mrs. Grant noticed with amusement
that he wore a white straw hat in spite of the season. His eyes were
directed to her face with his usual unseeing gaze. "Just as though he was looking through me at something a thousand
miles away," said Mrs. Grant afterwards. "I believe he was, too. His
body was right there on the step before me, but where his soul was is
more than you or I or anybody can tell." "Good morning," he said absently. "I have just called on my way to
school with a message from Miss Millar. She wants you all to come up
and have Christmas dinner with her tomorrow." "For the land's sake!" said Mrs. Grant blankly. "I don't understand." To herself she thought, "I wish I dared take him and shake him to find
if he's walking in his sleep or not." "You and all the children--every one," went on the teacher dreamily,
as if he were reciting a lesson learned beforehand. "She told me to
tell you to be sure and come. Shall I say that you will?" "Oh, yes, that is--I suppose--I don't know," said Mrs. Grant
incoherently. "I never expected--yes, you may tell her we'll come,"
she concluded abruptly. "Thank you," said the abstracted messenger, gravely lifting his hat
and looking squarely through Mrs. Grant into unknown regions. When he
had gone Mrs. Grant went in and sat down, laughing in a sort of
hysterical way. "I wonder if it is all right. Could Cornelia really have told him? She
must, I suppose, but it is enough to take one's breath." Mrs. Grant and Cornelia Millar were cousins, and had once been the
closest of friends, but that was years ago, before some spiteful
reports and ill-natured gossip had come between them, making only a
little rift at first that soon widened into a chasm of coldness and
alienation. Therefore this invitation surprised Mrs. Grant greatly. Miss Cornelia was a maiden lady of certain years, with a comfortable
bank account and a handsome, old-fashioned house on the hill behind
the village. She always boarded the schoolteachers and looked after
them maternally; she was an active church worker and a tower of
strength to struggling ministers and their families. "If Cornelia has seen fit at last to hold out the hand of
reconciliation I'm glad enough to take it. Dear knows, I've wanted to
make up often enough, but I didn't think she ever would. We've both
of us got too much pride and stubbornness. It's the Turner blood in us
that does it. The Turners were all so set. But I mean to do my part
now she has done hers." And Mrs. Grant made a final attack on the dishes with a beaming face. When the little Grants came home and heard the news, Teddy stood on
his head to express his delight, the twins kissed each other, and Mary
Alice and Gordon danced around the kitchen. Keith thought himself too big to betray any joy over a Christmas
dinner, but he whistled while doing the chores until the bare welkin
in the yard rang, and Teddy, in spite of unheard of misdemeanours, was
not collared off into the porch once. When the young teacher got home from school that evening he found the
yellow house full of all sorts of delectable odours. Miss Cornelia
herself was concocting mince pies after the famous family recipe,
while her ancient and faithful handmaiden, Hannah, was straining into
moulds the cranberry jelly. The open pantry door revealed a tempting
array of Christmas delicacies. "Did you call and invite the Smithsons up to dinner as I told you?" asked Miss Cornelia anxiously. "Yes," was the dreamy response as he glided through the kitchen and
vanished into the hall. Miss Cornelia crimped the edges of her pies delicately with a relieved
air. "I made certain he'd forget it," she said. "You just have to
watch him as if he were a mere child. Didn't I catch him yesterday
starting off to school in his carpet slippers? And in spite of me he
got away today in that ridiculous summer hat. You'd better set that
jelly in the out-pantry to cool, Hannah; it looks good. We'll give
those poor little Smithsons a feast for once in their lives if they
never get another." At this juncture the hall door flew open and Mr. Palmer appeared on
the threshold. He seemed considerably agitated and for once his eyes
had lost their look of space-searching. "Miss Millar, I am afraid I did make a mistake this morning--it has
just dawned on me. I am almost sure that I called at Mrs. Grant's and
invited her and her family instead of the Smithsons. And she said they
would come." Miss Cornelia's face was a study. "Mr. Palmer," she said, flourishing her crimping fork tragically, "do
you mean to say you went and invited Linda Grant here tomorrow? Linda
Grant, of all women in this world!" "I did," said the teacher with penitent wretchedness. "It was very
careless of me--I am very sorry. What can I do? I'll go down and tell
them I made a mistake if you like." "You can't do that," groaned Miss Cornelia, sitting down and wrinkling
up her forehead in dire perplexity. "It would never do in the world. For pity's sake, let me think for a minute." Miss Cornelia did think--to good purpose evidently, for her forehead
smoothed out as her meditations proceeded and her face brightened. Then she got up briskly. "Well, you've done it and no mistake. I don't
know that I'm sorry, either. Anyhow, we'll leave it as it is. But you
must go straight down now and invite the Smithsons too. And for pity's
sake, don't make any more mistakes." When he had gone Miss Cornelia opened her heart to Hannah. "I never
could have done it myself--never; the Turner is too strong in me. But
I'm glad it is done. I've been wanting for years to make up with
Linda. And now the chance has come, thanks to that blessed blundering
boy, I mean to make the most of it. Mind, Hannah, you never whisper a
word about its being a mistake. Linda must never know. Poor Linda! She's had a hard time. Hannah, we must make some more pies, and I must
go straight down to the store and get some more Santa Claus stuff;
I've only got enough to go around the Smithsons." When Mrs. Grant and her family arrived at the yellow house next
morning Miss Cornelia herself ran out bareheaded to meet them. The two
women shook hands a little stiffly and then a rill of long-repressed
affection trickled out from some secret spring in Miss Cornelia's
heart and she kissed her new-found old friend tenderly. Linda returned
the kiss warmly, and both felt that the old-time friendship was theirs
again. The little Smithsons all came and they and the little Grants sat down
on the long bright dining room to a dinner that made history in their
small lives, and was eaten over again in happy dreams for months. How those children did eat! And how beaming Miss Cornelia and
grim-faced, soft-hearted Hannah and even the absent-minded teacher
himself enjoyed watching them! After dinner Miss Cornelia distributed among the delighted little
souls the presents she had bought for them, and then turned them loose
in the big shining kitchen to have a taffy pull--and they had it to
their hearts' content! And as for the shocking, taffyfied state into
which they got their own rosy faces and that once immaculate
domain--well, as Miss Cornelia and Hannah never said one word about
it, neither will I. The four women enjoyed the afternoon in their own way, and the
schoolteacher buried himself in algebra to his own great satisfaction. When her guests went home in the starlit December dusk, Miss Cornelia
walked part of the way with them and had a long confidential talk with
Mrs. Grant. When she returned it was to find Hannah groaning in and
over the kitchen and the schoolteacher dreamily trying to clean some
molasses off his boots with the kitchen hairbrush. Long-suffering Miss
Cornelia rescued her property and despatched Mr. Palmer into the
woodshed to find the shoe-brush. Then she sat down and laughed. "Hannah, what will become of that boy yet? There's no counting on what
he'll do next. I don't know how he'll ever get through the world, I'm
sure, but I'll look after him while he's here at least. I owe him a
huge debt of gratitude for this Christmas blunder. What an awful mess
this place is in! But, Hannah, did you ever in the world see anything
so delightful as that little Tommy Smithson stuffing himself with plum
cake, not to mention Teddy Grant? It did me good just to see them." A Strayed Allegiance


"Will you go to the Cove with me this afternoon?" It was Marian Lesley who asked the question. Esterbrook Elliott unpinned with a masterful touch the delicate
cluster of Noisette rosebuds she wore at her throat and transferred
them to his buttonhole as he answered courteously: "Certainly. My
time, as you know, is entirely at your disposal." They were standing in the garden under the creamy bloom of drooping
acacia trees. One long plume of blossoms touched lightly the soft,
golden-brown coils of the girl's hair and cast a wavering shadow over
the beautiful, flower-like face beneath it. Esterbrook Elliott, standing before her, thought proudly that he had
never seen a woman who might compare with her. In every detail she
satisfied his critical, fastidious taste. There was not a discordant
touch about her. Esterbrook Elliott had always loved Marian Lesley--or thought he had. They had grown up together from childhood. He was an only son and she
an only daughter. It had always been an understood thing between the
two families that the boy and girl should marry. But Marian's father
had decreed that no positive pledge should pass between them until
Marian was twenty-one. Esterbrook accepted his mapped-out destiny and selected bride with the
conviction that he was an exceptionally lucky fellow. Out of all the
women in the world Marian was the very one whom he would have chosen
as mistress of his fine, old home. She had been his boyhood's ideal. He believed that he loved her sincerely, but he was not too much in
love to be blind to the worldly advantages of his marriage with his
cousin. His father had died two years previously, leaving him wealthy and
independent. Marian had lost her mother in childhood; her father died
when she was eighteen. Since then she had lived alone with her aunt. Her life was quiet and lonely. Esterbrook's companionship was all that
brightened it, but it was enough. Marian lavished on him all the rich,
womanly love of her heart. On her twenty-first birthday they were
formally betrothed. They were to be married in the following autumn. No shadow had drifted across the heaven of her happiness. She believed
herself secure in her lover's unfaltering devotion. True, at times she
thought his manner lacked a lover's passionate ardour. He was always
attentive and courteous. She had only to utter a wish to find that it
had been anticipated; he spent every spare minute at her side. Yet sometimes she half wished he would betray more lover-like
impatience and intensity. Were all lovers as calm and undemonstrative? She reproached herself for this incipient disloyalty as often as it
vexingly intruded its unwelcome presence across her inner
consciousness. Surely Esterbrook was fond and devoted enough to
satisfy the most exacting demands of affection. Marian herself was
somewhat undemonstrative and reserved. Passing acquaintances called
her cold and proud. Only the privileged few knew the rich depths of
womanly tenderness in her nature. Esterbrook thought that he fully appreciated her. As he had walked
homeward the night of their betrothal, he had reviewed with
unconscious criticism his mental catalogue of Marian's graces and good
qualities, admitting, with supreme satisfaction, that there was not
one thing about her that he could wish changed. This afternoon, under the acacias, they had been planning about their
wedding. There was no one to consult but themselves. They were to be married early in September and then go abroad. Esterbrook mapped out the details of their bridal tour with careful
thoughtfulness. They would visit all the old-world places that Marian
wished to see. Afterwards they would come back home. He discussed
certain changes he wished to make in the old Elliott mansion to fit it
for a young and beautiful mistress. He did most of the planning. Marian was content to listen in happy
silence. Afterwards she had proposed this walk to the Cove. "What particular object of charity have you found at the Cove now?" asked Esterbrook, with lazy interest, as they walked along. "Mrs. Barrett's little Bessie is very ill with fever," answered
Marian. Then, catching his anxious look, she hastened to add, "It is
nothing infectious--some kind of a slow, sapping variety. There is no
danger, Esterbrook." "I was not afraid for myself," he replied quietly. "My alarm was for
you. You are too precious to me, Marian, for me to permit you to risk
health and life, if it were dangerous. What a Lady Bountiful you are
to those people at the Cove. When we are married you must take me in
hand and teach me your creed of charity. I'm afraid I've lived a
rather selfish life. You will change all that, dear. You will make a
good man of me." "You are that now, Esterbrook," she said softly. "If you were not, I
could not love you." "It is a negative sort of goodness, I fear. I have never been tried or
tempted severely. Perhaps I should fail under the test." "I am sure you would not," answered Marian proudly. Esterbrook laughed; her faith in him was pleasant. He had no thought
but that he would prove worthy of it. The Cove, so-called, was a little fishing hamlet situated on the low,
sandy shore of a small bay. The houses, clustered in one spot, seemed
like nothing so much as larger shells washed up by the sea, so grey
and bleached were they from long exposure to sea winds and spray. Dozens of ragged children were playing about them, mingled with
several disreputable yellow curs that yapped noisily at the strangers. Down on the sandy strip of beach below the houses groups of men were
lounging about. The mackerel, season had not yet set in; the spring
herring netting was past. It was holiday time among the sea folks. They were enjoying it to the full, a happy, ragged colony, careless of
what the morrows might bring forth. Out beyond, the boats were at anchor, floating as gracefully on the
twinkling water as sea birds, their tall masts bowing landward on the
swell. A lazy, dreamful calm had fallen over the distant seas; the
horizon blues were pale and dim; faint purple hazes blurred the
outlines of far-off headlands and cliffs; the yellow sands sparkled in
the sunshine as if powdered with jewels. A murmurous babble of life buzzed about the hamlet, pierced through by
the shrill undertones of the wrangling children, most of whom had
paused in their play to scan the visitors with covert curiosity. Marian led the way to a house apart from the others at the very edge
of the shelving rock. The dooryard was scrupulously clean and
unlittered; the little footpath through it was neatly bordered by
white clam shells; several thrifty geraniums in bloom looked out from
the muslin-curtained windows. A weary-faced woman came forward to meet them. "Bessie's much the same, Miss Lesley," she said, in answer to Marian's
inquiry. "The doctor you sent was here today and did all he could for
her. He seemed quite hopeful. She don't complain or nothing--just lies
there and moans. Sometimes she gets restless. It's very kind of you to
come so often, Miss Lesley. Here, Magdalen, will you put this basket
the lady's brought up there on the shelf?" A girl, who had been sitting unnoticed with her back to the visitors,
at the head of the child's cot in one corner of the room, stood up and
slowly turned around. Marian and Esterbrook Elliott both started with
involuntary surprise. Esterbrook caught his breath like a man suddenly
awakened from sleep. In the name of all that was wonderful, who or
what could this girl be, so little in harmony with her surroundings? Standing in the crepuscular light of the corner, her marvellous beauty
shone out with the vivid richness of some rare painting. She was tall,
and the magnificent proportions of her figure were enhanced rather
than marred by the severely plain dress of dark print that she wore. The heavy masses of her hair, a shining auburn dashed with golden
foam, were coiled in a rich, glossy knot at the back of the
classically modelled head and rippled back from a low brow whose waxen
fairness even the breezes of the ocean had spared. The girl's face was a full, perfect oval, with features of faultless
regularity, and the large, full eyes were of tawny hazel, darkened
into inscrutable gloom in the dimness of the corner. Not even Marian Lesley's face was more delicately tinted, but not a
trace of colour appeared in the smooth, marble-like cheeks; yet the
waxen pallor bore no trace of disease or weakness, and the large,
curving mouth was of an intense crimson. She stood quite motionless. There was no trace of embarrassment or
self-consciousness in her pose. When Mrs. Barrett said, "This is my
niece, Magdalen Crawford," she merely inclined her head in grave,
silent acknowledgement. As she moved forward to take Marian's basket,
she seemed oddly out of place in the low, crowded room. Her presence
seemed to throw a strange restraint over the group. Marian rose and went over to the cot, laying her slender hand on the
hot forehead of the little sufferer. The child opened its brown eyes
questioningly. "How are you today, Bessie?" "Mad'len--I want Mad'len," moaned the little plaintive voice. Magdalen came over and stood beside Marian Lesley. "She wants me," she said in a low, thrilling voice; free from all
harsh accent or intonation. "I am the only one she seems to know
always. Yes, darling, Mad'len is here--right beside you. She will not
leave you." She knelt by the little cot and passed her arm under the child's neck,
drawing the curly head close to her throat with a tender, soothing
motion. Esterbrook Elliott watched the two women intently--the one standing by
the cot, arrayed in simple yet costly apparel, with her beautiful,
high-bred face, and the other, kneeling on the bare, sanded floor in
her print dress, with her splendid head bent low over the child and
the long fringe of burnished lashes sweeping the cold pallor of the
oval cheek. From the moment that Magdalen Crawford's haunting eyes had looked
straight into his for one fleeting second, an unnamable thrill of pain
and pleasure stirred his heart, a thrill so strong and sudden and
passionate that his face paled with emotion; the room seemed to swim
before his eyes in a mist out of which gleamed that wonderful face
with its mesmeric, darkly radiant eyes, burning their way into deeps
and abysses of his soul hitherto unknown to him. When the mist cleared away and his head grew steadier, he wondered at
himself. Yet he trembled in every limb and the only clear idea that
struggled out of his confused thoughts was an overmastering desire to
take that cold face between his hands and kiss it until its
passionless marble glowed into warm and throbbing life. "Who is that girl?" he said abruptly, when they had left the cottage. "She is the most beautiful woman I have ever seen--present company
always excepted," he concluded, with a depreciatory laugh. The delicate bloom on Marian's face deepened slightly. "You had much better to have omitted that last sentence," she said
quietly, "it was so palpably an afterthought. Yes, she is wonderfully
lovely--a strange beauty, I fancied. There seemed something odd and
uncanny about it to me. She must be Mrs. Barrett's niece. I remember
that when I was down here about a month ago Mrs. Barrett told me she
expected a niece of hers to live with her--for a time at least. Her
parents were both dead, the father having died recently. Mrs. Barrett
seemed troubled about her. She said that the girl had been well
brought up and used to better things than the Cove could give her, and
she feared that she would be very discontented and unhappy. I had
forgotten all about it until I saw the girl today. She certainly seems
to be a very superior person; she will find the Cove very lonely, I am
sure. It is not probable she will stay there long. I must see what I
can do for her, but her manner seemed rather repellent, don't you
think?" "Hardly," responded Esterbrook curtly. "She seemed surprisingly
dignified and self-possessed, I fancied, for a girl in her position. A
princess could not have looked and bowed more royally. There was not a
shadow of embarrassment in her manner, in spite of the incongruity of
her surroundings. You had much better leave her alone, Marian. In all
probability she would resent any condescension on your part. What
wonderful, deep, lovely eyes she has." Again the sensitive colour flushed Marian's cheek as his voice lapsed
unconsciously into a dreamy, retrospective tone, and a slight
restraint came over her manner, which did not depart. Esterbrook went
away at sunset. Marian asked him to remain for the evening, but he
pleaded some excuse. "I shall come tomorrow afternoon," he said, as he stooped to drop a
careless good-bye kiss on her face. Marian watched him wistfully as he rode away, with an unaccountable
pain in her heart. She felt more acutely than ever that there were
depths in her lover's nature that she was powerless to stir into
responsive life. Had any other that power? She thought of the girl at the Cove, with
her deep eyes and wonderful face. A chill of premonitory fear seized
upon her. "I feel exactly as if Esterbrook had gone away from me forever," she
said slowly to herself, stooping to brush her cheek against a
dew-cold, milk-white acacia bloom, "and would never come back to me
again. If that could happen, I wonder what there would be left to live
for?" *       *       *       *       *

Esterbrook Elliott meant, or honestly thought he meant, to go home
when he left Marian. Nevertheless, when he reached the road branching
off to the Cove he turned his horse down it with a flush on his dark
cheek. He realized that the motive of the action was disloyal to
Marian and he felt ashamed of his weakness. But the desire to see Magdalen Crawford once more and to look into the
depths of her eyes was stronger than all else, and overpowered every
throb of duty and resistance. He saw nothing of her when he reached the Cove. He could think of no
excuse for calling at the Barrett cottage, so he rode slowly past the
hamlet and along the shore. The sun, red as a smouldering ember, was half buried in the silken
violet rim of the sea; the west was a vast lake of saffron and rose
and ethereal green, through which floated the curved shallop of a thin
new moon, slowly deepening from lustreless white, through gleaming
silver, into burnished gold, and attended by one solitary, pearl-white
star. The vast concave of sky above was of violet, infinite and
flawless. Far out dusky amethystine islets clustered like gems on the
shining breast of the bay. The little pools of water along the low
shores glowed like mirrors of polished jacinth. The small,
pine-fringed headlands ran out into the water, cutting its lustrous
blue expanse like purple wedges. As Esterbrook turned one of them he saw Magdalen standing out on the
point of the next, a short distance away. Her back was towards him,
and her splendid figure was outlined darkly against the vivid sky. Esterbrook sprang from his horse and left the animal standing by
itself while he walked swiftly out to her. His heart throbbed
suffocatingly. He was conscious of no direct purpose save merely to
see her. She turned when he reached her with a slight start of surprise. His
footsteps had made no sound on the tide-rippled sand. For a few moments they faced each other so, eyes burning into eyes
with mute soul-probing and questioning. The sun had disappeared,
leaving a stain of fiery red to mark his grave; the weird, radiant
light was startlingly vivid and clear. Little crisp puffs and flakes
of foam scurried over the point like elfin things. The fresh wind,
blowing up the bay, tossed the lustrous rings of hair about Magdalen's
pale face; all the routed shadows of the hour had found refuge in her
eyes. Not a trace of colour appeared in her face under Esterbrook Elliott's
burning gaze. But when he said "Magdalen!" a single, hot scorch of
crimson flamed up into her cheeks protestingly. She lifted her hand
with a splendid gesture, but no word passed her lips. "Magdalen, have you nothing to say to me?" he asked, coming closer to
her with an imploring passion in his face never seen by Marian
Lesley's eyes. He reached out his hand, but she stepped back from his
touch. "What should I have to say to you?" "Say that you are glad to see me." "I am not glad to see you. You have no right to come here. But I knew
you would come." "You knew it? How?" "Your eyes told me so today. I am not blind--I can see further than
those dull fisher folks. Yes, I knew you would come. That is why I
came here tonight--so that you would find me alone and I could tell
you that you were not to come again." "Why must you tell me that, Magdalen?" "Because, as I have told you, you have no right to come." "But if I will not obey you? If I will come in defiance of your
prohibition?" She turned her steady luminous eyes on his pale, set face. "You would stamp yourself as a madman, then," she said coldly. "I know
that you are Miss Lesley's promised husband. Therefore, you are either
false to her or insulting to me. In either case the companionship of
Magdalen Crawford is not what you must seek. Go!" She turned away from him with an imperious gesture of dismissal. Esterbrook Elliott stepped forward and caught one firm, white wrist. "I shall not obey you," he said in a low, intense tone; his fine eyes
burned into hers. "You may send me away, but I will come back, again
and yet again until you have learned to welcome me. Why should you
meet me like an enemy? Why can we not be friends?" The girl faced him once more. "Because," she said proudly, "I am not your equal. There can be no
friendship between us. There ought not to be. Magdalen Crawford, the
fisherman's niece, is no companion for you. You will be foolish, as
well as disloyal, if you ever try to see me again. Go back to the
beautiful, high-bred woman you love and forget me. Perhaps you think I
am talking strangely. Perhaps you think me bold and unwomanly to speak
so plainly to you, a stranger. But there are some circumstances in
life when plain-speaking is best. I do not want to see you again. Now,
go back to your own world." Esterbrook Elliott slowly turned from her and walked in silence back
to the shore. In the shadows of the point he stopped to look back at
her, standing out like some inspired prophetess against the fiery
background of the sunset sky and silver-blue water. The sky overhead
was thick-sown with stars; the night breeze was blowing up from its
lair in distant, echoing sea caves. On his right the lights of the
Cove twinkled out through the dusk. "I feel like a coward and a traitor," he said slowly. "Good God, what
is this madness that has come over me? Is this my boasted strength of
manhood?" A moment later the hoof beats of his horse died away up the shore. Magdalen Crawford lingered on the point until the last dull red faded
out into the violet gloom of the June sea dusk, than which nothing can
be rarer or diviner, and listened to the moan and murmur of the sea
far out over the bay with sorrowful eyes and sternly set lips. The next day, when the afternoon sun hung hot and heavy over the
water, Esterbrook Elliott came again to the Cove. He found it
deserted. A rumour of mackerel had come, and every boat had sailed
out in the rose-red dawn to the fishing grounds. But down on a strip
of sparkling yellow sand he saw Magdalen Crawford standing, her hand
on the rope that fastened a small white dory to the fragment of a
half-embedded wreck. She was watching a huddle of gulls clustered on the tip of a narrow,
sandy spit running out to the left. She turned at the sound of his
hurried foot-fall behind her. Her face paled slightly, and into the
depths of her eyes leapt a passionate, mesmeric glow that faded as
quickly as it came. "You see I have come back in spite of your command, Magdalen." "I do see it," she answered in a gravely troubled voice. "You are a
madman who refuses to be warned." "Where are you going, Magdalen?" She had loosened the rope from the
wreck. "I am going to row over to Chapel Point for salt. They think the boats
will come in tonight loaded with mackerel--look at them away out there
by the score--and salt will be needed." "Can you row so far alone?" "Easily. I learned to row long ago--for a pastime then. Since coming
here I find it of great service to me." She stepped lightly into the tiny shallop and picked up an oar. The
brilliant sunshine streamed about her, burnishing the rich tints of
her hair into ruddy gold. She balanced herself to the swaying of the
dory with the grace of a sea bird. The man looking at her felt his
brain reel. "Good-bye, Mr. Elliott." For answer he sprang into the dory and, snatching an oar, pushed
against the old wreck with such energy that the dory shot out from the
shore like a foam bell. His sudden spring had set it rocking
violently. Magdalen almost lost her footing and caught blindly at his
arm. As her fingers closed on his wrist a thrill as of fire shot
through his every vein. "Why have you done this, Mr. Elliott? You must go back." "But I will not," he said masterfully, looking straight into her eyes
with an imperiousness that sat well upon him. "I am going to row you
over to Chapel Point. I have the oars--I will be master this once, at
least." For an instant her eyes flashed defiant protest, then drooped before
his. A sudden, hot blush crimsoned her pale face. His will had
mastered hers; the girl trembled from head to foot, and the proud,
sensitive, mouth quivered. Into the face of the man watching her breathlessly flashed a
triumphant, passionate joy. He put out his hand and gently pushed her
down into the seat. Sitting opposite, he took up the oars and pulled
out over the sheet of sparkling blue water, through which at first the
bottom of white sand glimmered wavily but afterwards deepened to
translucent, dim depths of greenness. His heart throbbed tumultuously. Once the thought of Marian drifted
across his mind like a chill breath of wind, but it was forgotten when
his eyes met Magdalen's. "Tell me about yourself, Magdalen," he said at last, breaking the
tremulous, charmed, sparkling silence. "There is nothing to tell," she answered with characteristic
straightforwardness. "My life has been a very uneventful one. I have
never been rich, or very well educated, but--it used to be different
from now. I had some chance before--before Father died." "You must have found it very lonely and strange when you came here
first." "Yes. At first I thought I should die--but I do not mind it now. I
have made friends with the sea; it has taught me a great deal. There
is a kind of inspiration in the sea. When one listens to its
never-ceasing murmur afar out there, always sounding at midnight and
midday, one's soul goes out to meet Eternity. Sometimes it gives me so
much pleasure that it is almost pain." She stopped abruptly. "I don't know why I am talking to you like this." "You are a strange girl, Magdalen. Have you no other companion than
the sea?" "No. Why should I wish to have? I shall not be here long." Elliott's face contracted with a spasm of pain. "You are not going away, Magdalen?" "Yes--in the fall. I have my own living to earn, you know. I am very
poor. Uncle and Aunt are very kind, but I cannot consent to burden
them any longer than I can help." A sigh that was almost a moan broke from Esterbrook Elliott's lips. "You must not go away, Magdalen. You must stay here--with me!" "You forget yourself," she said proudly. "How dare you speak to me so? Have you forgotten Miss Lesley? Or are you a traitor to us both?" Esterbrook made no answer. He bowed his pale, miserable face before
her, self-condemned. The breast of the bay sparkled with its countless gems like the breast
of a fair woman. The shores were purple and amethystine in the
distance. Far out, bluish, phantom-like sails clustered against the
pallid horizon. The dory danced like a feather over the ripples. They
were close under the shadow of Chapel Point. *       *       *       *       *

Marian Lesley waited in vain for her lover that afternoon. When he
came at last in the odorous dusk of the June night she met him on the
acacia-shadowed verandah with cold sweetness. Perhaps some subtle
woman-instinct whispered to her where and how he had spent the
afternoon, for she offered him no kiss, nor did she ask him why he had
failed to come sooner. His eyes lingered on her in the dim light, taking in every detail of
her sweet womanly refinement and loveliness, and with difficulty he
choked back a groan. Again he asked himself what madness had come over
him, and again for an answer rose up the vision of Magdalen Crawford's
face as he had seen it that day, crimsoning beneath his gaze. It was late when he left. Marian watched him out of sight, standing
under the acacias. She shivered as with a sudden chill. "I feel as I
think Vashti must have felt," she murmured aloud, "when, discrowned
and unqueened, she crept out of the gates of Shushan to hide her
broken heart. I wonder if Esther has already usurped my sceptre. Has
that girl at the Cove, with her pale, priestess-like face and
mysterious eyes, stolen his heart from me? Perhaps not, for it may
never have been mine. I know that Esterbrook Elliott will be true to
the letter of his vows to me, no matter what it may cost him. But I
want no pallid shadow of the love that belongs to another. The hour of
abdication is at hand, I fear. And what will be left for throneless
Vashti then?" Esterbrook Elliott, walking home through the mocking calm of the
night, fought a hard battle with himself. He was face to face with the truth at last--the bitter knowledge that
he had never loved Marian Lesley, save with a fond, brotherly
affection, and that he did love Magdalen Crawford with a passion that
threatened to sweep before it every vestige of his honour and
loyalty. He had seen her but three times--and his throbbing heart lay in the
hollow of her cold white hand. He shut his eyes and groaned. What madness. What unutterable folly! He
was not free--he was bound to another by every cord of honour and
self-respect. And, even were he free, Magdalen Crawford would be no
fit wife for him--in the eyes of the world, at least. A girl from the
Cove--a girl with little education and no social standing--aye! but he
loved her. He groaned again and again in his misery. Afar down the slope the bay
waters lay like an inky strip and the distant, murmurous plaint of the
sea came out of the stillness of the night; the lights at the Cove
glimmered faintly. In the week that followed he went to the Cove every day. Sometimes he
did not see Magdalen; at other times he did. But at the end of the
week he had conquered in the bitter, heart-crushing struggle with
himself. If he had weakly given way to the first mad sweep of a new
passion, the strength of his manhood reasserted itself at last. Faltering and wavering were over, though there was passionate pain in
his voice when he said at last, "I am not coming back again,
Magdalen." They were standing in the shadow of the pine-fringed point that ran
out to the left of the Cove. They had been walking together along the
shore, watching the splendour of the sea sunset that flamed and glowed
in the west, where there was a sea of mackerel clouds, crimson and
amber tinted, with long, ribbon-like strips of apple-green sky
between. They had walked in silence, hand in hand, as children might
have done, yet with the stir and throb of a mighty passion seething in
their hearts. Magdalen turned as Esterbrook spoke, and looked at him in a long
silence. The bay stretched out before them, tranced and shimmering; a
few stars shone down through the gloom of dusk. Right across the
translucent greens and roses and blues of the west hung a dark,
unsightly cloud, like the blurred outline of a monstrous bat. In the
dim, reflected light the girl's mournful face took on a weird,
unearthly beauty. She turned her eyes from Esterbrook Elliott's set
white face to the radiant gloom of the sea. "That is best," she answered at last, slowly. "Best--yes! Better that we had never met! I love you--you know
it--words are idle between us. I never loved before--I thought I did. I made a mistake and I must pay the penalty of that mistake. You
understand me?" "I understand," she answered simply. "I do not excuse myself--I have been weak and cowardly and disloyal. But I have conquered myself--I will be true to the woman to whom I am
pledged. You and I must not meet again. I will crush this madness to
death. I think I have been delirious ever since that day I saw you
first, Magdalen. My brain is clearer now. I see my duty and I mean to
do it at any cost. I dare not trust myself to say more. Magdalen, I
have much for which to ask your forgiveness." "There is nothing to forgive," she said steadily. "I have been as much
to blame as you. If I had been as resolute as I ought to have been--if
I had sent you away the second time as I did the first--this would not
have come to pass. I have been weak too, and I deserve to atone for my
weakness by suffering. There is only one path open to us. Esterbrook,
good-bye." Her voice quivered with an uncontrollable spasm of pain,
but the misty, mournful eyes did not swerve from his. 