



Produced by Alicia Williams, Jeannie Howse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1907 to 1908


Lucy Maud Montgomery was born at Clifton (now New London), Prince
Edward Island, Canada, on November 30, 1874. She achieved
international fame in her lifetime, putting Prince Edward Island and
Canada on the world literary map. Best known for her "Anne of Green
Gables" books, she was also a prolific writer of short stories and
poetry. She published some 500 short stories and poems and twenty
novels before her death in 1942. The Project Gutenberg collection of
her short stories was gathered from numerous sources and is presented
in chronological publishing order:

Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1896 to 1901
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1902 to 1903
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1904
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1905 to 1906
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1907 to 1908
Lucy Maud Montgomery Short Stories, 1909 to 1922


       *       *       *       *       *




Short Stories 1907 to 1908

    Millionaire's Proposal                                   1907
    A Substitute Journalist                                  1907
    Anna's Love Letters                                      1908
    Aunt Caroline's Silk Dress                               1907
    Aunt Susanna's Thanksgiving Dinner                       1907
    By Grace of Julius Caesar                                1908
    By the Rule of Contrary                                  1908
    Fair Exchange and No Robbery                             1907
    Four Winds                                               1908
    Marcella's Reward                                        1907
    Margaret's Patient                                       1908
    Matthew Insists on Puffed Sleeves                        1908
    Missy's Room                                             1907
    Ted's Afternoon Off                                      1907
    The Girl Who Drove the Cows                              1908
    The Doctor's Sweetheart                                  1908
    The End of the Young Family Feud                         1907
    The Genesis of the Doughnut Club                         1907
    The Growing Up of Cornelia                               1908
    The Old Fellow's Letter                                  1907
    The Parting of the Ways                                  1907
    The Promissory Note                                      1907
    The Revolt of Mary Isabel                                1908
    The Twins and a Wedding                                  1908




A Millionaire's Proposal


                                  Thrush Hill, Oct. 5, 18--. It is all settled at last, and in another week I shall have left
Thrush Hill. I am a little bit sorry and a great bit glad. I am going
to Montreal to spend the winter with Alicia. Alicia--it used to be plain Alice when she lived at Thrush Hill and
made her own dresses and trimmed her own hats--is my half-sister. She
is eight years older than I am. We are both orphans, and Aunt
Elizabeth brought us up here at Thrush Hill, the most delightful old
country place in the world, half smothered in big willows and poplars,
every one of which I have climbed in the early tomboy days of gingham
pinafores and sun-bonnets. When Alicia was eighteen she married Roger Gresham, a man of forty. The world said that she married him for his money. I dare say she did. Alicia was tired of poverty. I don't blame her. Very likely I shall do the same thing one of these
days, if I get the chance--for I too am tired of poverty. When Alicia went to Montreal she wanted to take me with her, but I
wanted to be outdoors, romping in the hay or running wild in the woods
with Jack. Jack Willoughby--Dr. John H. Willoughby, it reads on his office
door--was the son of our nearest neighbour. We were chums always, and
when he went away to college I was heartbroken. The vacations were the only joy of my life then. I don't know just when I began to notice a change in Jack, but when he
came home two years ago, a full-fledged M.D.--a great, tall,
broad-shouldered fellow, with the sweetest moustache, and lovely thick
black hair, just made for poking one's fingers through--I realized it
to the full. Jack was grown up. The dear old days of bird-nesting and
nutting and coasting and fishing and general delightful goings-on were
over forever. I was sorry at first. I wanted "Jack." "Dr. Willoughby" seemed too
distinguished and far away. I suppose he found a change in me, too. I had put on long skirts and
wore my hair up. I had also found out that I had a complexion, and
that sunburn was not becoming. I honestly thought I looked pretty, but
Jack surveyed me with decided disapprobation. "What have you done to yourself? You don't look like the same girl. I'd never know you in that rig-out, with all those flippery-trippery
curls all over your head. Why don't you comb your hair straight back,
and let it hang in a braided tail, like you used to?" This didn't suit me at all. When I expect a compliment and get
something quite different I always get snippy. So I said, with what I
intended to be crushing dignity, "that I supposed I wasn't the same
girl; I had grown up, and if he didn't like my curls he needn't look
at them. For my part, I thought them infinitely preferable to that
horrid, conceited-looking moustache he had grown." "I'll shave it off if it doesn't suit you," said Jack amiably. Jack is always so provokingly good-humoured. When you've taken pains
and put yourself out--even to the extent of fibbing about a
moustache--to exasperate a person, there is nothing more annoying than
to have him keep perfectly angelic. But after a while Jack and I adjusted ourselves to the change in each
other and became very good friends again. It was quite a different
friendship from the old, but it was very pleasant. Yes, it was; I
_will_ admit that much. I was provoked at Jack's determination to settle down for life in
Valleyfield, a horrible, humdrum, little country village. "You'll never make your fortune there, Jack," I said spitefully. "You'll just be a poor, struggling country doctor all your life, and
you'll be grey at forty." "I don't expect to make a fortune, Kitty," said Jack quietly. "Do you
think that is the one desirable thing? I shall never be a rich man. But riches are not the only thing that makes life pleasant." "Well, I think they have a good deal to do with it, anyhow," I
retorted. "It's all very well to pretend to despise wealth, but it's
generally a case of sour grapes. _I_ will own up honestly that I'd
_love_ to be rich." It always seems to make Jack blue and grumpy when I talk like that. I
suppose that is one reason why he never asked me to settle down in
life as a country doctor's wife. Another was, no doubt, that I always
nipped his sentimental sproutings religiously in the bud. Three weeks ago Alicia wrote to me, asking me to spend the winter with
her. Her letters always make me just gasp with longing for the life
they describe. Jack's face, when I told him about it, was so woebegone that I felt a
stab of remorse, even in the heyday of my delight. "Do you really mean it, Kitty? Are you going away to leave me?" "You won't miss me much," I said flippantly--I had a creepy, crawly
presentiment that a scene of some kind was threatening--"and I'm
awfully tired of Thrush Hill and country life, Jack. I suppose it is
horribly ungrateful of me to say so, but it is the truth." "I shall miss you," he said soberly. Somehow he had my hands in his. _How_ did he ever get them? I was sure
I had them safely tucked out of harm's way behind me. "You know,
Kitty, that I love you. I am a poor man--perhaps I may never be
anything else--and this may seem to you very presumptuous. But I
cannot let you go like this. Will you be my wife, dear?" Wasn't it horribly straightforward and direct? So like Jack! I tried
to pull my hands away, but he held them fast. There was nothing to do
but answer him. That "no" I had determined to say must be said, but,
oh! how woefully it did stick in my throat! And I honestly believe that by the time I got it out it would have
been transformed into a "yes," in spite of me, had it not been for a
certain paragraph in Alicia's letter which came providentially to my
mind:

    Not to flatter you, Katherine, you are a beauty, my dear--if
    your photo is to be trusted. If you have not discovered that
    fact before--how should you, indeed, in a place like Thrush
    Hill?--you soon will in Montreal. With your face and figure
    you will make a sensation. There is to be a nephew of the Sinclairs here this winter. He
    is an American, immensely wealthy, and will be the catch of
    the season. A word to the wise, etc. Don't get into any
    foolish entanglement down there. I have heard some gossip of
    you and our old playfellow, Jack Willoughby. I hope it is
    nothing but gossip. You can do better than that, Katherine. That settled Jack's fate, if there ever had been any doubt. "Don't talk like that, Jack," I said hurriedly. "It is all nonsense. I
think a great deal of you as a friend and--and--all that, you know. But I can never marry you." "Are you sure, Kitty?" said Jack earnestly. "Don't you care for me at
all?" It was horrid of Jack to ask that question! "No," I said miserably, "not--not in that way, Jack. Oh, don't ever
say anything like this to me again." He let go of my hands then, white to the lips. "Oh, don't look like that, Jack," I entreated. "I can't help it," he said in a low voice. "But I won't bother you
again, dear. It was foolish of me to expect--to hope for anything of
the sort. You are a thousand times too good for me, I know." "Oh, indeed I'm not, Jack," I protested. "If you knew how horrid I am,
really, you'd be glad and thankful for your escape. Oh, Jack, I wish
people never grew up." Jack smiled sadly. "Don't feel badly over this, Kitty. It isn't your fault. Good night,
dear." He turned my face up and kissed me squarely on the mouth. He had never
kissed me since the summer before he went away to college. Somehow it
didn't seem a bit the same as it used to; it was--nicer now. After he went away I came upstairs and had a good, comfortable howl. Then I buried the whole affair decently. I am not going to think of it
any more. I shall always have the highest esteem for Jack, and I hope he will
soon find some nice girl who will make him happy. Mary Carter would
jump at him, I know. To be sure, she is as homely as she can be and
live. But, then, Jack is always telling me how little he cares for
beauty, so I have no doubt she will suit him admirably. As for myself--well, I am ambitious. I don't suppose my ambition is a
very lofty one, but such as it is I mean to hunt it down. Come. Let me
put it down in black and white, once for all, and see how it looks:

I mean to marry the rich nephew of the Sinclairs. There! It is out, and I feel better. How mercenary and awful it looks
written out in cold blood like that. I wouldn't have Jack or Aunt
Elizabeth--dear, unworldly old soul--see it for the world. But I
wouldn't mind Alicia. Poor dear Jack! *       *       *       *       *

                                    Montreal, Dec. 16, 18--. This is a nice way to keep a journal. But the days when I could write
regularly are gone by. That was when I was at Thrush Hill. I am having a simply divine time. How in the world did I ever contrive
to live at Thrush Hill? To be sure, I felt badly enough that day in October when I left it. When the train left Valleyfield I just cried like a baby. Alicia and Roger welcomed me very heartily, and after the first week
of homesickness--I shiver yet when I think of it--was over, I settled
down to my new life as if I had been born to it. Alicia has a magnificent home and everything heart could wish
for--jewels, carriages, servants, opera boxes, and social position. Roger is a model husband apparently. I must also admit that he is a
model brother-in-law. I could feel Alicia looking me over critically the moment we met. I
trembled with suspense, but I was soon relieved. "Do you know, Katherine, I am glad to see that your photograph didn't
flatter you. Photographs so often do, I am positively surprised at the
way you have developed, my dear; you used to be such a scrawny little
brown thing. By the way, I hope there is nothing between you and Jack
Willoughby?" "No, of course not," I answered hurriedly. I had intended to tell
Alicia all about Jack, but when it came to the point I couldn't. "I am glad of that," said Alicia, with a relieved air. "Of course,
I've no doubt Jack is a good fellow enough. He was a nice boy. But he
would not be a suitable husband for you, Katherine." I knew that very well. That was just why I had refused him. But it
made me wince to hear Alicia say it. I instantly froze up--Alicia says
dignity is becoming to me--and Jack's name has never been mentioned
between us since. I made my bow to society at an "At Home" which Alicia gave for that
purpose. She drilled me well beforehand, and I think I acquitted
myself decently. Charlie Vankleek, whose verdict makes or mars every
debutante in his set, has approved of me. He called me a beauty, and
everybody now believes that I am one, and greets me accordingly. I met Gus Sinclair at Mrs. Brompton's dinner. Alicia declares it was a
case of love at first sight. If so, I must confess that it was all on
one side. Mr. Sinclair is undeniably ugly--even Alicia has to admit that--and
can't hold a candle to Jack in point of looks, for Jack, poor boy, was
handsome, if he were nothing else. But, as Alicia does not fail to
remind me, Mr. Sinclair's homeliness is well gilded. Apart from his appearance, I really liked him very much. He is a
gentlemanly little fellow--his head reaches about to my
shoulder--cultured and travelled, and can talk splendidly, which Jack
never could. He took me into dinner at Mrs. Brompton's, and was very attentive. You
may imagine how many angelic glances I received from the other
candidates for his favour. Since then I have been having the gayest time imaginable. Dances,
dinners, luncheons, afternoon teas, "functions" to no end, and all
delightful. Aunt Elizabeth writes to me, but I have never heard a word from Jack. He seems to have forgotten my existence completely. No doubt he has
consoled himself with Mary Carter. Well, that is all for the best, but I must say I did not think Jack
could have forgotten me so soon or so absolutely. Of course it does
not make the least difference to me. The Sinclairs and the Bromptons and the Curries are to dine here
tonight. I can see myself reflected in the long mirror before me, and
I really think my appearance will satisfy even Gus Sinclair's critical
eye. I am pale, as usual, I never have any colour. That used to be one
of Jack's grievances. He likes pink and white milkmaidish girls. My
"magnificent pallor" didn't suit him at all. But, what is more to the purpose, it suits Gus Sinclair. He admires
the statuesque style. *       *       *       *       *

                                    Montreal, Jan. 20, 18--. Here it is a whole month since my last entry. I am sitting here decked
out in "gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls" for Mrs. Currie's dance. These few minutes, after I emerge from the hands of my maid and before
the carriage is announced, are almost the only ones I ever have to
myself. I am having a good time still. Somehow, though, it isn't as exciting
as it used to be. I'm afraid I'm very changeable. I believe I must be
homesick. I'd love to get a glimpse of dear old Thrush Hill and Aunt Elizabeth,
and J--but, no! I will not write that. Mr. Sinclair has not spoken yet, but there is no doubt that he soon
will. Of course, I shall accept him when he does, and I coolly told
Alicia so when she just as coolly asked me what I meant to do. "Certainly, I shall marry him," I said crossly, for the subject always
irritates me. "Haven't I been laying myself out all winter to catch
him? That is the bold, naked truth, and ugly enough it is. My dearly
beloved sister, I mean to accept Mr. Sinclair, without any hesitation,
whenever I get the chance." "I give you credit for more sense than to dream of doing anything
else," said Alicia in relieved tones. "Katherine, you are a very lucky
girl." "Because I am going to marry a rich man for his money?" I said coldly. Sometimes I get snippy with Alicia these days. "No," said my half-sister in an exasperated way. "Why will you persist
in speaking in that way? You are very provoking. It is not likely I
would wish to see you throw yourself away on a poor man, and I'm sure
you must like Gus." "Oh, yes, I like him well enough," I said listlessly. "To be sure, I
did think once, in my salad days, that liking wasn't quite all in an
affair of this kind. I was absurd enough to imagine that love had
something to do with it." "Don't talk so nonsensically," said Alicia sharply. "Love! Well, of
course, you ought to love your husband, and you will. He loves you
enough, at all events." "Alicia," I said earnestly, looking her straight in the face and
speaking bluntly enough to have satisfied even Jack's love of
straightforwardness, "you married for money and position, so people
say. Are you happy?" For the first time that I remembered, Alicia blushed. She was very
angry. "Yes, I did marry for money," she said sharply, "and I don't regret
it. Thank heaven, I never was a fool." "Don't be vexed, Alicia," I entreated. "I only asked because--well, it
is no matter." *       *       *       *       *

                                    Montreal, Jan. 25, 18--. It is bedtime, but I am too excited and happy and miserable to sleep. Jack has been here--dear old Jack! How glad I was to see him. His coming was so unexpected. I was sitting alone in my room this
afternoon--I believe I was moping--when Bessie brought up his card. I
gave it one rapturous look and tore downstairs, passing Alicia in the
hall like a whirlwind, and burst into the drawing-room in a most
undignified way. "Jack!" I cried, holding out both hands to him in welcome. There he was, just the same old Jack, with his splendid big shoulders
and his lovely brown eyes. And his necktie was crooked, too; as soon
as I could get my hands free I put them up and straightened it out for
him. How nice and old-timey that was! "So you are glad to see me, Kitty?" he said as he squeezed my hands in
his big strong paws. "'Deed and 'deed I am, Jack. I thought you had forgotten me
altogether. And I've been so homesick and so--so everything," I said
incoherently. "And, oh, Jack, I've so many questions to ask I don't
know where to begin. Tell me all the Thrush Hill and Valleyfield news,
tell me everything that has happened since I left. How many people
have you killed off? And, oh, why didn't you come to see me before?" "I didn't think I should be wanted, Kitty," Jack answered quietly. "You seemed to be so absorbed in your new life that old friends and
interests were crowded out." "So I was at first," I answered penitently. "I was dazzled, you know. The glare was too much for my Thrush Hill brown. But it's different
now. How did you happen to come, Jack?" "I had to come to Montreal on business, and I thought it would be too
bad if I went back without coming to see what they had been doing in
Vanity Fair to my little playmate." "Well, what do you think they have been doing?" I asked saucily. I had on a particularly fetching gown and knew I was looking my best. Jack, however, looked me over with his head on one side. "Well, I don't know, Kitty," he said slowly. "That is a stunning sort
of dress you have on--not so pretty, though, as that old blue muslin
you used to wear last summer--and your hair is pretty good. But you
look rather disdainful and, after all, I believe I prefer Thrush Hill
Kitty." How like Jack that was. He never thought me really pretty, and he is
too honest to pretend he does. But I didn't care. I just laughed, and we sat down together and had a
long, delightful, chummy talk. Jack told me all the Valleyfield gossip, not forgetting to mention
that Mary Carter was going to be married to a minister in June. Jack
didn't seem to mind it a bit, so I guess he couldn't have been
particularly interested in Mary. In due time Alicia sailed in. I suppose she had found out from Bessie
who my caller was, and felt rather worried over the length of our
tete-a-tete. She greeted Jack very graciously, but with a certain polite
condescension of which she is past mistress. I am sure Jack felt it,
for, as soon as he decently could, he got up to go. Alicia asked him
to remain to dinner. "We are having a few friends to dine with us, but it is quite an
informal affair," she said sweetly. I felt that Jack glanced at me for the fraction of a second. But I
remembered that Gus Sinclair was coming too, and I did not look at
him. Then he declined quietly. He had a business engagement, he said. I suppose Alicia had noticed that look at me, for she showed her
claws. "Don't forget to call any time you are in Montreal," she said more
sweetly than ever. "I am sure Katherine will always be glad to see any
of her old friends, although some of her new ones _are_ proving very
absorbing--one, in especial. Don't blush, Katherine, I am sure Mr.
Willoughby won't tell any tales out of school to your old Valleyfield
friends." I was not blushing, and I was furious. It was really too bad of
Alicia, although I don't see why I need have cared. Alicia kept her eye on us both until Jack was fairly gone. Then she
remarked in the patronizing tone which I detest:

"Really, Katherine, Jack Willoughby has developed into quite a
passable-looking fellow, although he is rather shabby. But I suppose
he is poor." "Yes," I answered curtly, "he is poor, in everything except youth and
manhood and goodness and truth! But I suppose those don't count for
anything." Whereupon Alicia lifted her eyebrows and looked me over. Just at dusk a box arrived with Jack's compliments. It was full of
lovely white carnations, and must have cost the extravagant fellow
more than he has any business to waste on flowers. I was beast enough
to put them on when I went down to listen to another man's
love-making. This evening I sparkled and scintillated with unusual brilliancy, for
Jack's visit and my consequent crossing of swords with Alicia had
produced a certain elation of spirits. When Gus Sinclair was leaving
he asked if he might see me alone tomorrow afternoon. I knew what that meant, and a cold shiver went up and down my
backbone. But I looked down at him--spick-and-span and glossy--_his_
neckties are never crooked--and said, yes, he might come at three
o'clock. Alicia had noticed our aside--when did anything ever escape her?--and
when he was gone she asked, significantly, what secret he had been
telling me. "He wants to see me alone tomorrow afternoon. I suppose you know what
that means, Alicia?" "Ah," purred Alicia, "I congratulate you, my dear." "Aren't your congratulations a little premature?" I asked coldly. "I
haven't accepted him yet." "But you will?" "Oh, certainly. Isn't it what we've schemed and angled for? I'm very
well satisfied." And so I am. But I wish it hadn't come so soon after Jack's visit,
because I feel rather upset yet. Of course I like Gus Sinclair very
much, and I am sure I shall be very fond of him. Well, I must go to bed now and get my beauty sleep. I don't want to be
haggard and hollow-eyed at that important interview tomorrow--an
interview that will decide my destiny. *       *       *       *       *

                                   Thrush Hill, May 6, 18--. Well, it did decide it, but not exactly in the way I anticipated. I
can look back on the whole affair quite calmly now, but I wouldn't
live it over again for all the wealth of Ind. That day when Gus Sinclair came I was all ready for him. I had put on
my very prettiest new gown to do honour to the occasion, and Alicia
smilingly assured me I was looking very well. "And _so_ cool and composed. Will you be able to keep that up? Don't
you really feel a little nervous, Katherine?" "Not in the least," I said. "I suppose I ought to be, according to
traditions, but I never felt less flustered in my life." When Bessie brought up Gus Sinclair's card Alicia dropped a pecky
little kiss on my cheek, and pushed me toward the door. I went down
calmly, although I'll admit that my heart _was_ beating wildly. Gus
Sinclair was plainly nervous, but I was composed enough for both. You
would really have thought that I was in the habit of being proposed to
by a millionaire every day. "I suppose you know what I have come to say," he said, standing before
me, as I leaned gracefully back in a big chair, having taken care that
the folds of my dress fell just as they should. And then he proceeded to say it in a rather jumbled-up fashion, but
very sincerely. I remember thinking at the time that he must have composed the speech
in his head the night before, and rehearsed it several times, but was
forgetting it in spots. When he ended with the self-same question that Jack had asked me three
months before at Thrush Hill he stopped and took my hands. I looked up at him. His good, homely face was close to mine, and in
his eyes was an unmistakable look of love and tenderness. I opened my mouth to say yes. And then there came over me in one rush the most awful realization of
the sacrilege I was going to commit. I forgot everything except that I loved Jack Willoughby, and that I
could never, never marry anybody in the world except him. Then I pulled my hands away and burst into hysterical, undignified
tears. "I beg your pardon," said Mr. Sinclair. "I did not mean to startle
you. Have I been too abrupt? Surely you must have known--you must have
expected--"

"Yes--yes--I knew," I cried miserably, "and I intended right up to
this very minute to marry you. I'm so sorry--but I can't--I can't." "I don't understand," he said in a bewildered tone. "If you expected
it, then why--why--don't you care for me?" "No, that's just it," I sobbed. "I don't love you at all--and I do
love somebody else. But he is poor, and I hate poverty. So I refused
him, and I meant to marry you just because you are rich." Such a pained look came over his face. "I did not think this of you,"
he said in a low tone. "Oh, I know I have acted shamefully," I said. "You can't think any
worse of me than I do of myself. How you must despise me!" "No," he said, with a grim smile, "if I did it would be easier for me. I might not love you then. Don't distress yourself, Katherine. I do
not deny that I feel greatly hurt and disappointed, but I am glad you
have been true to yourself at last. Don't cry, dear." "You're very good," I answered disconsolately, "but all the same the
fact remains that I have behaved disgracefully to you, and I know you
think so. Oh, Mr. Sinclair, please, please, go away. I feel so
miserably ashamed of myself that I cannot look you in the face." "I am going, dear," he said gently. "I know all this must be very
painful to you, but it is not easy for me, either." "Can you forgive me?" I said wistfully. "Yes, my dear, completely. Do not let yourself be unhappy over this. Remember that I will always be your friend. Goodbye." He held out his hand and gave mine an earnest clasp. Then he went
away. I remained in the drawing-room, partly because I wanted to finish out
my cry, and partly because, miserable coward that I was, I didn't dare
face Alicia. Finally she came in, her face wreathed with anticipatory
smiles. But when her eyes fell on my forlorn, crumpled self she fairly
jumped. "Katherine, what is the matter?" she asked sharply. "Didn't Mr.
Sinclair--"

"Yes, he did," I said desperately. "And I've refused him. There now,
Alicia!" Then I waited for the storm to burst. It didn't all at once. The shock
was too great, and at first quite paralyzed my half-sister. "Katherine," she gasped, "are you crazy? Have you lost your senses?" "No, I've just come to them. It's true enough, Alicia. You can scold
all you like. I know I deserve it, and I won't flinch. I did really
intend to take him, but when it came to the point I couldn't. I didn't
love him." Then, indeed, the storm burst. I never saw Alicia so angry before, and
I never got so roundly abused. But even Alicia has her limits, and at
last she grew calmer. "You have behaved disgracefully," she concluded. "I am disgusted with
you. You have encouraged Gus Sinclair markedly right along, and now
you throw him over like this. I never dreamed that you were capable of
such unwomanly behaviour." "That's a hard word, Alicia," I protested feebly. She dealt me a withering glance. "It does not begin to be as hard as
your shameful conduct merits. To think of losing a fortune like that
for the sake of sentimental folly! I didn't think you were such a
consummate fool." "I suppose you absorbed all the sense of our family," I said drearily. "There now, Alicia, do leave me alone. I'm down in the very depths
already." "What do you mean to do now?" said Alicia scornfully. "Go back to
Valleyfield and marry that starving country doctor of yours, I
suppose?" I flared up then; Alicia might abuse me all she liked, but I wasn't
going to hear a word against Jack. "Yes, I will, if he'll have me," I said, and I marched out of the room
and upstairs, with my head very high. Of course I decided to leave Montreal as soon as I could. But I
couldn't get away within a week, and it was a very unpleasant one. Alicia treated me with icy indifference, and I knew I should never be
reinstated in her good graces. To my surprise, Roger took my part. "Let the girl alone," he told
Alicia. "If she doesn't love Sinclair, she was right in refusing him. I, for one, am glad that she has got enough truth and womanliness in
her to keep her from selling herself." Then he came to the library where I was moping, and laid his hand on
my head. "Little girl," he said earnestly, "no matter what anyone says to you,
never marry a man for his money or for any other reason on earth
except because you love him." This comforted me greatly, and I did not cry myself to sleep that
night as usual. At last I got away. I had telegraphed to Jack: "Am coming home
Wednesday; meet me at train," and I knew he would be there. How I
longed to see him again--dear, old, badly treated Jack. I got to Valleyfield just at dusk. It was a rainy evening, and
everything was slush and fog and gloom. But away up I saw the home
light at Thrush Hill, and Jack was waiting for me on the platform. "Oh, Jack!" I said, clinging to him, regardless of appearances. "Oh,
I'm so glad to be back." "That's right, Kitty. I knew you wouldn't forget us. How well you are
looking!" "I suppose I ought to be looking wretched," I said penitently. "I've
been behaving very badly, Jack. Wait till we get away from the crowd
and I'll tell you all about it." And I did. I didn't gloss over anything, but just confessed the whole truth. Jack
heard me through in silence, and then he kissed me. "Can you forgive me, Jack, and take me back?" I whispered, cuddling up
to him. And he said--but, on second thought, I will not write down what he
said. We are to be married in June. A Substitute Journalist


Clifford Baxter came into the sitting-room where Patty was darning
stockings and reading a book at the same time. Patty could do things
like that. The stockings were well darned too, and Patty understood
and remembered what she read. Clifford flung himself into a chair with a sigh of weariness. "Tired?" queried Patty sympathetically. "Yes, rather. I've been tramping about the wharves all day gathering
longshore items. But, Patty, I've got a chance at last. Tonight as I
was leaving the office Mr. Harmer gave me a real assignment for
tomorrow--two of them in fact, but only one of importance. I'm to go
and interview Mr. Keefe on this new railroad bill that's up before the
legislature. He's in town, visiting his old college friend, Mr. Reid,
and he's quite big game. I wouldn't have had the assignment, of
course, if there'd been anyone else to send, but most of the staff
will be away all day tomorrow to see about that mine explosion at
Midbury or the teamsters' strike at Bainsville, and I'm the only one
available. Harmer gave me a pretty broad hint that it was my chance to
win my spurs, and that if I worked up a good article out of it I'd
stand a fair show of being taken on permanently next month when Alsop
leaves. There'll be a shuffle all round then, you know. Everybody on
the staff will be pushed up a peg, and that will leave a vacant space
at the foot." Patty threw down her darning needle and clapped her hands with
delight. Clifford gazed at her admiringly, thinking that he had the
prettiest sister in the world--she was so bright, so eager, so rosy. "Oh, Clifford, how splendid!" she exclaimed. "Just as we'd begun to
give up hope too. Oh, you must get the position! You must hand in a
good write-up. Think what it means to us." "Yes, I know." Clifford dropped his head on his hand and stared
rather moodily at the lamp. "But my joy is chastened, Patty. Of course
I want to get the permanency, since it seems to be the only possible
thing, but you know my heart isn't really in newspaper work. The plain
truth is I don't like it, although I do my best. You know Father
always said I was a born mechanic. If I only could get a position
somewhere among machinery--that would be my choice. There's one vacant
in the Steel and Iron Works at Bancroft--but of course I've no chance
of getting it." "I know. It's too bad," said Patty, returning to her stockings with a
sigh. "I wish I were a boy with a foothold on the _Chronicle_. I
firmly believe that I'd make a good newspaper woman, if such a thing
had ever been heard of in Aylmer." "That you would. You've twice as much knack in that line as I have. You seem to know by instinct just what to leave out and put in. I
never do, and Harmer has to blue-pencil my copy mercilessly. Well,
I'll do my best with this, as it's very necessary I should get the
permanency, for I fear our family purse is growing very slim. Mother's
face has a new wrinkle of worry every day. It hurts me to see it." "And me," sighed Patty. "I do wish I could find something to do too. If only we both could get positions, everything would be all right. Mother wouldn't have to worry so. Don't say anything about this chance
to her until you see what comes of it. She'd only be doubly
disappointed if nothing did. What is your other assignment?" "Oh, I've got to go out to Bancroft on the morning train and write up
old Mr. Moreland's birthday celebration. He is a hundred years old,
and there's going to be a presentation and speeches and that sort of
thing. Nothing very exciting about it. I'll have to come back on the
three o'clock train and hurry out to catch my politician before he
leaves at five. Take a stroll down to meet my train, Patty. We can go
out as far as Mr. Reid's house together, and the walk will do you
good." The Baxters lived in Aylmer, a lively little town with two
newspapers, the _Chronicle_ and the _Ledger_. Between these two was a
sharp journalistic rivalry in the matter of "beats" and "scoops." In
the preceding spring Clifford had been taken on the _Chronicle_ on
trial, as a sort of general handyman. There was no pay attached to the
position, but he was getting training and there was the possibility of
a permanency in September if he proved his mettle. Mr. Baxter had died
two years before, and the failure of the company in which Mrs.
Baxter's money was invested had left the little family dependent on
their own resources. Clifford, who had cherished dreams of a course in
mechanical engineering, knew that he must give them up and go to the
first work that offered itself, which he did staunchly and
uncomplainingly. Patty, who hitherto had had no designs on a "career,"
but had been sunnily content to be a home girl and Mother's right
hand, also realized that it would be well to look about her for
something to do. She was not really needed so far as the work of the
little house went, and the whole burden must not be allowed to fall on
Clifford's eighteen-year-old shoulders. Patty was his senior by a
year, and ready to do her part unflinchingly. The next afternoon Patty went down to meet Clifford's train. When it
came, no Clifford appeared. Patty stared about her at the hurrying
throngs in bewilderment. Where was Clifford? Hadn't he come on the
train? Surely he must have, for there was no other until seven
o'clock. She must have missed him somehow. Patty waited until
everybody had left the station, then she walked slowly homeward. As
the _Chronicle_ office was on her way, she dropped in to see if
Clifford had reported there. She found nobody in the editorial offices except the office boy, Larry
Brown, who promptly informed her that not only had Clifford not
arrived, but that there was a telegram from him saying that he had
missed his train. Patty gasped in dismay. It was dreadful! "Where is Mr. Harmer?" she asked. "He went home as soon as the afternoon edition came out. He left
before the telegram came. He'll be furious when he finds out that
nobody has gone to interview that foxy old politician," said Larry,
who knew all about Clifford's assignment and its importance. "Isn't there anyone else here to go?" queried Patty desperately. Larry shook his head. "No, there isn't a soul in. We're mighty
short-handed just now on account of the explosion and the strike." Patty went downstairs and stood for a moment in the hall, rapt in
reflection. If she had been at home, she verily believed she would
have sat down and cried. Oh, it was too bad, too disappointing! Clifford would certainly lose all chance of the permanency, even if
the irate news editor did not discharge him at once. What could she
do? Could she do anything? She _must_ do something. "If I only could go in his place," moaned Patty softly to herself. Then she started. Why not? Why not go and interview the big man
herself? To be sure, she did not know a great deal about interviewing,
still less about railroad bills, and nothing at all about politics. But if she did her best it might be better than nothing, and might at
least save Clifford his present hold. With Patty, to decide was to act. She flew back to the reporters'
room, pounced on a pencil and tablet, and hurried off, her breath
coming quickly, and her eyes shining with excitement. It was quite a
long walk out to Mr. Reid's place and Patty was tired when she got
there, but her courage was not a whit abated. She mounted the steps
and rang the bell undauntedly. "Can I see Mr.--Mr.--Mr.--" Patty paused for a moment in dismay. She
had forgotten the name. The maid who had come to the door looked her
over so superciliously that Patty flushed with indignation. "The
gentleman who is visiting Mr. Reid," she said crisply. "I can't
remember his name, but I've come to interview him on behalf of the
_Chronicle_. Is he in?" "If you mean Mr. Reefer, he is," said the maid quite respectfully. Evidently the _Chronicle_'s name carried weight in the Reid
establishment. "Please come into the library. I'll go and tell him." Patty had just time to seat herself at the table, spread out her paper
imposingly, and assume a businesslike air when Mr. Reefer came in. He
was a tall, handsome old man with white hair, jet-black eyes, and a
mouth that made Patty hope she wouldn't stumble on any questions he
wouldn't want to answer. Patty knew she would waste her breath if she
did. A man with a mouth like that would never tell anything he didn't
want to tell. "Good afternoon. What can I do for you, madam?" inquired Mr. Reefer
with the air and tone of a man who means to be courteous, but has no
time or information to waste. Patty was almost overcome by the "Madam." For a moment, she quailed. She couldn't ask that masculine sphinx questions! Then the thought of
her mother's pale, careworn face flashed across her mind, and all her
courage came back with an inspiriting rush. She bent forward to look
eagerly into Mr. Reefer's carved, granite face, and said with a frank
smile:

"I have come to interview you on behalf of the _Chronicle_ about the
railroad bill. It was my brother who had the assignment, but he has
missed his train and I have come in his place because, you see, it is
so important to us. So much depends on this assignment. Perhaps Mr.
Harmer will give Clifford a permanent place on the staff if he turns
in a good article about you. He is only handyman now. I just couldn't
let him miss the chance--he might never have another. And it means so
much to us and Mother." "Are you a member of the _Chronicle_ staff yourself?" inquired Mr.
Reefer with a shade more geniality in his tone. "Oh, no! I've nothing to do with it, so you won't mind my being
inexperienced, will you? I don't know just what I should ask you, so
won't you please just tell me everything about the bill, and Mr.
Harmer can cut out what doesn't matter?" Mr. Reefer looked at Patty for a few moments with a face about as
expressive as a graven image. Perhaps he was thinking about the bill,
and perhaps he was thinking what a bright, vivid, plucky little girl
this was with her waiting pencil and her air that strove to be
businesslike, and only succeeded in being eager and hopeful and
anxious. "I'm not used to being interviewed myself," he said slowly, "so I
don't know very much about it. We're both green hands together, I
imagine. But I'd like to help you out, so I don't mind telling you
what I think about this bill, and its bearing on certain important
interests." Mr. Reefer proceeded to tell her, and Patty's pencil flew as she
scribbled down his terse, pithy sentences. She found herself asking
questions too, and enjoying it. For the first time, Patty thought she
might rather like politics if she understood them--and they did not
seem so hard to understand when a man like Mr. Reefer explained them. For half an hour he talked to her, and at the end of that time Patty
was in full possession of his opinion on the famous railroad bill in
all its aspects. "There now, I'm talked out," said Mr. Reefer. "You can tell your news
editor that you know as much about the railroad bill as Andrew Reefer
knows. I hope you'll succeed in pleasing him, and that your brother
will get the position he wants. But he shouldn't have missed that
train. You tell him that. Boys with important things to do mustn't
miss trains. Perhaps it's just as well he did in this case though,
but tell him not to let it happen again." Patty went straight home, wrote up her interview in ship-shape form,
and took it down to the _Chronicle_ office. There she found Mr.
Harmer, scowling blackly. The little news editor looked to be in a
rather bad temper, but he nodded not unkindly to Patty. Mr. Harmer
knew the Baxters well and liked them, although he would have
sacrificed them all without a qualm for a "scoop." "Good evening, Patty. Take a chair. That brother of yours hasn't
turned up yet. The next time I give him an assignment, he'll manage to
be on hand in time to do it." "Oh," cried Patty breathlessly, "please, Mr. Harmer, I have the
interview here. I thought perhaps I could do it in Clifford's place,
and I went out to Mr. Reid's and saw Mr. Reefer. He was very kind
and--"

"Mr. who?" fairly shouted Mr. Harmer. "Mr. Reefer--Mr. Andrew Reefer. He told me to tell you that this
article contained all he knew or thought about the railroad bill
and--"

But Mr. Harmer was no longer listening. He had snatched the neatly
written sheets of Patty's report and was skimming over them with a
practised eye. Then Patty thought he must have gone crazy. He danced
around the office, waving the sheets in the air, and then he dashed
frantically up the stairs to the composing room. Ten minutes later, he returned and shook the mystified Patty by the
hand. "Patty, it's the biggest beat we've ever had! We've scooped not only
the _Ledger_, but every other newspaper in the country. How did you do
it? How did you ever beguile or bewitch Andrew Reefer into giving you
an interview?" "Why," said Patty in utter bewilderment, "I just went out to Mr.
Reid's and asked for the gentleman who was visiting there--I'd
forgotten his name--and Mr. Reefer came down and I told him my
brother had been detailed to interview him on behalf of the
_Chronicle_ about the bill, and that Clifford had missed his train,
and wouldn't he let me interview him in his place and excuse my
inexperience--and he did." "It wasn't Andrew Reefer I told Clifford to interview," laughed Mr.
Harmer. "It was John C. Keefe. I didn't know Reefer was in town, but
even if I had I wouldn't have thought it a particle of use to send a
man to him. He has never consented to be interviewed before on any
known subject, and he's been especially close-mouthed about this bill,
although men from all the big papers in the country have been after
him. He is notorious on that score. Why, Patty, it's the biggest
journalistic fish that has ever been landed in this office. Andrew
Reefer's opinion on the bill will have a tremendous influence. We'll
run the interview as a leader in a special edition that is under way
already. Of course, he must have been ready to give the information to
the public or nothing would have induced him to open his mouth. But to
think that we should be the first to get it! Patty, you're a brick!" Clifford came home on the seven o'clock train, and Patty was there to
meet him, brimful of her story. But Clifford also had a story to tell
and got his word in first. "Now, Patty, don't scold until you hear why I missed the train. I met
Mr. Peabody of the Steel and Iron Company at Mr. Moreland's and got
into conversation with him. When he found out who I was, he was
greatly interested and said Father had been one of his best friends
when they were at college together. I told him about wanting to get
the position in the company, and he had me go right out to the works
and see about it. And, Patty, I have the place. Goodbye to the grind
of newspaper items and fillers. I tried to get back to the station at
Bancroft in time to catch the train but I couldn't, and it was just as
well, for Mr. Keefe was suddenly summoned home this afternoon, and
when the three-thirty train from town stopped at Bancroft he was on
it. I found that out and I got on, going to the next station with him
and getting my interview after all. It's here in my notebook, and I
must hurry up to the office and hand it in. I suppose Mr. Harmer will
be very much vexed until he finds that I have it." "Oh, no. Mr. Harmer is in a very good humour," said Patty with dancing
eyes. Then she told her story. The interview with Mr. Reefer came out with glaring headlines, and the
_Chronicle_ had its hour of fame and glory. The next day Mr. Harmer
sent word to Patty that he wanted to see her. "So Clifford is leaving," he said abruptly when she entered the
office. "Well, do you want his place?" "Mr. Harmer, are you joking?" demanded Patty in amazement. "Not I. That stuff you handed in was splendidly written--I didn't have
to use the pencil more than once or twice. You have the proper
journalist instinct all right. We need a lady on the staff anyhow, and
if you'll take the place it's yours for saying so, and the permanency
next month." "I'll take it," said Patty promptly and joyfully. "Good. Go down to the Symphony Club rehearsal this afternoon and
report it. You've just ten minutes to get there," and Patty joyfully
and promptly departed. Anna's Love Letters


"Are you going to answer Gilbert's letter tonight, Anna?" asked Alma
Williams, standing in the pantry doorway, tall, fair, and grey-eyed,
with the sunset light coming down over the dark firs, through the
window behind her, and making a primrose nimbus around her shapely
head. Anna, dark, vivid, and slender, was perched on the edge of the table,
idly swinging her slippered foot at the cat's head. She smiled
wickedly at Alma before replying. "I am not going to answer it tonight or any other night," she said,
twisting her full, red lips in a way that Alma had learned to dread. Mischief was ripening in Anna's brain when that twist was out. "What do you mean?" asked Alma anxiously. "Just what I say, dear," responded Anna, with deceptive meekness. "Poor Gilbert is gone, and I don't intend to bother my head about him
any longer. He was amusing while he lasted, but of what use is a beau
two thousand miles away, Alma?" Alma was patient--outwardly. It was never of any avail to show
impatience with Anna. "Anna, you are talking foolishly. Of course you are going to answer
his letter. You are as good as engaged to him. Wasn't that practically
understood when he left?" "No, no, dear," and Anna shook her sleek black head with the air of
explaining matters to an obtuse child. "_I_ was the only one who
understood. Gil _mis_understood. He thought that I would really wait
for him until he should have made enough money to come home and pay
off the mortgage. I let him think so, because I hated to hurt his
little feelings. But now it's off with the old love and on with a new
one for me." "Anna, you cannot be in earnest!" exclaimed Alma. But she was afraid that Anna was in earnest. Anna had a wretched
habit of being in earnest when she said flippant things. "You don't mean that you are not going to write to Gilbert at
all--after all you promised?" Anna placed her elbows daintily on the top of the rocking chair,
dropped her pointed chin in her hands, and looked at Alma with black
demure eyes. "I--do--mean--just--that," she said slowly. "I never mean to marry
Gilbert Murray. This is final, Alma, and you need not scold or coax,
because it would be a waste of breath. Gilbert is safely out of the
way, and now I am going to have a good time with a few other
delightful men creatures in Exeter." Anna nodded decisively, flashed a smile at Alma, picked up her cat,
and went out. At the door she turned and looked back, with the big
black cat snuggled under her chin. "If you think Gilbert will feel very badly over his letter not being
answered, you might answer it yourself, Alma," she said teasingly. "There it is"--she took the letter from the pocket of her ruffled
apron and threw it on a chair. "You may read it if you want to; it
isn't really a love letter. I told Gilbert he wasn't to write silly
letters. Come, pussy, I'm going to get ready for prayer meeting. We've
got a nice, new, young, good-looking minister in Exeter, pussy, and
that makes prayer meeting _very_ interesting." Anna shut the door, her departing laugh rippling mockingly through the
dusk. Alma picked up Gilbert Murray's letter and went to her room. She
wanted to cry, since she could not shake Anna. Even if she could have
shook her, it would only have made her more perverse. Anna was in
earnest; Alma knew that, even while she hoped and believed that it was
but the earnestness of a freak that would pass in time. Anna had had
one like it a year ago, when she had cast Gilbert off for three
months, driving him distracted by flirting with Charlie Moore. Then
she had suddenly repented and taken him back. Alma thought that this
whim would run its course likewise and leave a repentant Anna. But
meanwhile everything might be spoiled. Gilbert might not prove
forgiving a second time. Alma would have given much if she could only have induced Anna to
answer Gilbert's letter, but coaxing Anna to do anything was a very
sure and effective way of preventing her from doing it. *       *       *       *       *

Alma and Anna had lived alone at the old Williams homestead ever since
their mother's death four years before. Exeter matrons thought this
hardly proper, since Alma, in spite of her grave ways, was only
twenty-four. The farm was rented, so that Alma's only responsibilities
were the post office which she kept, and that harum-scarum beauty of
an Anna. The Murray homestead adjoined theirs. Gilbert Murray had grown up with
Alma; they had been friends ever since she could remember. Alma loved
Gilbert with a love which she herself believed to be purely sisterly,
and which nobody else doubted could be, since she had been at pains to
make a match--Exeter matrons' phrasing--between Gil and Anna, and was
manifestly delighted when Gilbert obligingly fell in love with the
latter. There was a small mortgage on the Murray place which Mr. Murray senior
had not been able to pay off. Gilbert determined to get rid of it, and
his thoughts turned to the west. His father was an active, hale old
man, quite capable of managing the farm in Gilbert's absence. Alexander MacNair had gone to the west two years previously and got
work on a new railroad. He wrote to Gilbert to come too, promising him
plenty of work and good pay. Gilbert went, but before going he had
asked Anna to marry him. It was the first proposal Anna had ever had, and she managed it quite
cleverly, from her standpoint. She told Gilbert that he must wait
until he came home again before settling that, meanwhile, they would
be _very_ good friends--emphasized with a blush--and that he might
write to her. She kissed him goodbye, and Gilbert, honest fellow, was
quite satisfied. When an Exeter girl had allowed so much to be
inferred, it was understood to be equivalent to an engagement. Gilbert
had never discerned that Anna was not like the other Exeter girls, but
was a law unto herself. Alma sat down by her window and looked out over the lane where the
slim wild cherry trees were bronzing under the autumn frosts. Her lips
were very firmly set. Something must be done. But what? Alma's heart was set on this marriage for two reasons. Firstly, if
Anna married Gilbert she would be near her all her life. She could not
bear the thought that some day Anna might leave her and go far away to
live. In the second and largest place, she desired the marriage
because Gilbert did. She had always been desirous, even in the old,
childish play-days, that Gilbert should get just exactly what he
wanted. She had always taken a keen, strange delight in furthering his
wishes. Anna's falseness would surely break his heart, and Alma winced at the
thought of his pain. There was one thing she could do. Anna's tormenting suggestion had
fallen on fertile soil. Alma balanced pros and cons, admitting the
risk. But she would have taken a tenfold larger risk in the hope of
holding secure Anna's place in Gilbert's affections until Anna herself
should come to her senses. When it grew quite dark and Anna had gone lilting down the lane on her
way to prayer meeting, Alma lighted her lamp, read Gilbert's
letter--and answered it. Her handwriting was much like Anna's. She
signed the letter "A. Williams," and there was nothing in it that
might not have been written by her to Gilbert; but she knew that
Gilbert would believe Anna had written it, and she intended him so to
believe. Alma never did a thing halfway when she did it at all. At
first she wrote rather constrainedly but, reflecting that in any case
Anna would have written a merely friendly letter, she allowed her
thoughts to run freely, and the resulting epistle was an excellent one
of its kind. Alma had the gift of expression and more brains than
Exeter people had ever imagined she possessed. When Gilbert read that
letter a fortnight later he was surprised to find that Anna was so
clever. He had always, with a secret regret, thought her much inferior
to Alma in this respect, but that delightful letter, witty, wise,
fanciful, was the letter of a clever woman. When a year had passed Alma was still writing to Gilbert the letters
signed "A. Williams." She had ceased to fear being found out, and she
took a strange pleasure in the correspondence for its own sake. At
first she had been quakingly afraid of discovery. When she smuggled
the letters addressed in Gilbert's handwriting to Miss Anna Williams
out of the letter packet and hid them from Anna's eyes, she felt as
guilty as if she were breaking all the laws of the land at once. To be
sure, she knew that she would have to confess to Anna some day, when
the latter repented and began to wish she had written to Gilbert, but
that was a very different thing from premature disclosure. But Anna had as yet given no sign of such repentance, although Alma
looked for it anxiously. Anna was having the time of her life. She was
the acknowledged beauty of five settlements, and she went forward on
her career of conquest quite undisturbed by the jealousies and
heart-burnings she provoked on every side. One moonlight night she went for a sleigh-drive with Charlie Moore of
East Exeter--and returned to tell Alma that they were married! "I knew you would make a fuss, Alma, because you don't like Charlie,
so we just took matters into our own hands. It was so much more
romantic, too. I'd always said I'd never be married in any of your
dull, commonplace ways. You might as well forgive me and be nice right
off, Alma, because you'd have to do it anyway, in time. Well, you do
look surprised!" *       *       *       *       *

Alma accepted the situation with an apathy that amazed Anna. The truth
was that Alma was stunned by a thought that had come to her even while
Anna was speaking. "Gilbert will find out about the letters now, and despise me." Nothing else, not even the fact that Anna had married shiftless
Charlie Moore, seemed worth while considering beside this. The fear
and shame of it haunted her like a nightmare; she shrank every morning
from the thought of all the mail that was coming that day, fearing
that there would be an angry, puzzled letter from Gilbert. He must
certainly soon hear of Anna's marriage; he would see it in the home
paper, other correspondents in Exeter would write him of it. Alma grew
sick at heart thinking of the complications in front of her. When Gilbert's letter came she left it for a whole day before she
could summon courage to open it. But it was a harmless epistle after
all; he had not yet heard of Anna's marriage. Alma had at first no
thought of answering it, yet her fingers ached to do so. Now that Anna
was gone, her loneliness was unbearable. She realized how much
Gilbert's letters had meant to her, even when written to another
woman. She could bear her life well enough, she thought, if she only
had his letters to look forward to. No more letters came from Gilbert for six weeks. Then came one,
alarmed at Anna's silence, anxiously asking the reason for it; Gilbert
had heard no word of the marriage. He was working in a remote district
where newspapers seldom penetrated. He had no other correspondent in
Exeter now; except his mother, and she, not knowing that he supposed
himself engaged to Anna had forgotten to mention it. Alma answered that letter. She told herself recklessly that she would
keep on writing to him until he found out. She would lose his
friendship anyhow, when that occurred, but meanwhile she would have
the letters a little longer. She could not learn to live without them
until she had to. The correspondence slipped back into its old groove. The harassed look
which Alma's face had worn, and which Exeter people had attributed to
worry over Anna, disappeared. She did not even feel lonely, and
reproached herself for lack of proper feeling in missing Anna so
little. Besides, to her horror and dismay, she detected in herself a
strange undercurrent of relief at the thought that Gilbert could never
marry Anna now! She could not understand it. Had not that marriage
been her dearest wish for years? Why then should she feel this strange
gladness at the impossibility of its fulfilment? Altogether, Alma
feared that her condition of mind and morals must be sadly askew. Perhaps, she thought mournfully, this perversion of proper feeling was
her punishment for the deception she had practised. She had
deliberately done evil that good might come, and now the very
imaginations of her heart were stained by that evil. Alma cried
herself to sleep many a night in her repentance, but she kept on
writing to Gilbert, for all that. The winter passed, and the spring and summer waned, and Alma's outward
life flowed as smoothly as the currents of the seasons, broken only by
vivid eruptions from Anna, who came over often from East Exeter,
glorying in her young matronhood, "to cheer Alma up." Alma, so said
Exeter people, was becoming unsociable and old maidish. She lost her
liking for company, and seldom went anywhere among her neighbours. Her
once frequent visits across the yard to chat with old Mrs. Murray
became few and far between. She could not bear to hear the old lady
talking about Gilbert, and she was afraid that some day she would be
told that he was coming home. Gilbert's home-coming was the nightmare
dread that darkened poor Alma's whole horizon. *       *       *       *       *

One October day, two years after Gilbert's departure, Alma, standing
at her window in the reflected glow of a red maple outside, looked
down the lane and saw him striding up it! She had had no warning of
his coming. His last letter, dated three weeks back, had not hinted at
it. Yet there he was--and with him Alma's Nemesis. She was very calm. Now that the worst had come, she felt quite strong
to meet it. She would tell Gilbert the truth, and he would go away in
anger and never forgive her, but she deserved it. As she went
downstairs, the only thing that really worried her was the thought of
the pain Gilbert would suffer when she told him of Anna's
faithlessness. She had seen his face as he passed under her window,
and it was the face of a blithe man who had not heard any evil
tidings. It was left to her to tell him; surely, she thought
apathetically, that was punishment enough for what she had done. With her hand on the doorknob, she paused to wonder what she should
say when he asked her why she had not told him of Anna's marriage when
it occurred--why she had still continued the deception when it had no
longer an end to serve. Well, she would tell him the truth--that it
was because she could not bear the thought of giving up writing to
him. It was a humiliating thing to confess, but that did not
matter--nothing mattered now. She opened the door. Gilbert was standing on the big round door-stone under the red
maple--a tall, handsome young fellow with a bronzed face and laughing
eyes. His exile had improved him. Alma found time and ability to
reflect that she had never known Gilbert was so fine-looking. He put his arm around her and kissed her cheek in his frank delight at
seeing her again. Alma coldly asked him in. Her face was still as pale
as when she came downstairs, but a curious little spot of fiery red
blossomed out where Gilbert's lips had touched it. Gilbert followed her into the sitting-room and looked about eagerly. "When did you come home?" she said slowly. "I did not know you were
expected." "Got homesick, and just came! I wanted to surprise you all," he
answered, laughing. "I arrived only a few minutes ago. Just took time
to hug my mother, and here I am. Where's Anna?" The pent-up retribution of two years descended on Alma's head in the
last question of Gilbert's. But she did not flinch. She stood straight
before him, tall and fair and pale, with the red maple light streaming
in through the open door behind her, staining her light house-dress
and mellowing the golden sheen of her hair. Gilbert reflected that
Alma Williams was really a very handsome girl. These two years had
improved her. What splendid big grey eyes she had! He had always
wished that Anna's eyes had not been quite so black. "Anna is not here," said Alma. "She is married." "Married!" Gilbert sat down suddenly on a chair and looked at Alma in
bewilderment. "She has been married for a year," said Alma steadily. "She married
Charlie Moore of East Exeter, and has been living there ever since." "Then," said Gilbert, laying hold of the one solid fact that loomed
out of the mist of his confused understanding, "why did she keep on
writing letters to me after she was married?" "She never wrote to you at all. It was I that wrote the letters." Gilbert looked at Alma doubtfully. Was she crazy? There was something
odd about her, now that he noticed, as she stood rigidly there, with
that queer red spot on her face, a strange fire in her eyes, and that
weird reflection from the maple enveloping her like an immaterial
flame. "I don't understand," he said helplessly. Still standing there, Alma told the whole story, giving full
explanations, but no excuses. She told it clearly and simply, for she
had often pictured this scene to herself and thought out what she must
say. Her memory worked automatically, and her tongue obeyed it
promptly. To herself she seemed like a machine, talking mechanically,
while her soul stood on one side and listened. When she had finished there was a silence lasting perhaps ten seconds. To Alma it seemed like hours. Would Gilbert overwhelm her with angry
reproaches, or would he simply rise up and leave her in unutterable
contempt? It was the most tragic moment of her life, and her whole
personality was strung up to meet it and withstand it. "Well, they were good letters, anyhow," said Gilbert finally;
"interesting letters," he added, as if by way of a meditative
afterthought. It was so anti-climactic that Alma broke into an hysterical giggle,
cut short by a sob. She dropped into a chair by the table and flung
her hands over her face, laughing and sobbing softly to herself. Gilbert rose and walked to the door, where he stood with his back to
her until she regained her self-control. Then he turned and looked
down at her quizzically. Alma's hands lay limply in her lap, and her eyes were cast down, with
tears glistening on the long fair lashes. She felt his gaze on her. "Can you ever forgive me, Gilbert?" she said humbly. "I don't know that there is much to forgive," he answered. "I have
some explanations to make too and, since we're at it, we might as well
get them all over and have done with them. Two years ago I did
honestly think I was in love with Anna--at least when I was round
where she was. She had a taking way with her. But, somehow, even then,
when I wasn't with her she seemed to kind of grow dim and not count
for so awful much after all. I used to wish she was more like
you--quieter, you know, and not so sparkling. When I parted from her
that last night before I went west, I did feel very bad, and she
seemed very dear to me, but it was six weeks from that before
her--your--letter came, and in that time she seemed to have faded out
of my thoughts. Honestly, I wasn't thinking much about her at all. Then came the letter--and it was a splendid one, too. I had never
thought that Anna could write a letter like that, and I was as pleased
as Punch about it. The letters kept coming, and I kept on looking for
them more and more all the time. I fell in love all over again--with
the writer of those letters. I thought it was Anna, but since you
wrote the letters, it must have been with you, Alma. I thought it was
because she was growing more womanly that she could write such
letters. That was why I came home. I wanted to get acquainted all over
again, before she grew beyond me altogether--I wanted to find the real
Anna the letters showed me. I--I--didn't expect this. But I don't care
if Anna is married, so long as the girl who wrote those letters isn't. It's you I love, Alma." He bent down and put his arm about her, laying his cheek against hers. The little red spot where his kiss had fallen was now quite drowned
out in the colour that rushed over her face. "If you'll marry me, Alma, I'll forgive you," he said. A little smile escaped from the duress of Alma's lips and twitched her
dimples. "I'm willing to do anything that will win your forgiveness, Gilbert,"
she said meekly. Aunt Caroline's Silk Dress


Patty came in from her walk to the post office with cheeks finely
reddened by the crisp air. Carry surveyed her with pleasure. Of late
Patty's cheeks had been entirely too pale to please Carry, and Patty
had not had a very good appetite. Once or twice she had even
complained of a headache. So Carry had sent her to the office for a
walk that night, although the post office trip was usually Carry's own
special constitutional, always very welcome to her after a weary day
of sewing on other people's pretty dresses. Carry never sewed on pretty dresses for herself, for the simple reason
that she never had any pretty dresses. Carry was twenty-two--and
feeling forty, her last pretty dress had been when she was a girl of
twelve, before her father had died. To be sure, there was the silk
organdie Aunt Kathleen had sent her, but that was fit only for
parties, and Carry never went to any parties. "Did you get any mail, Patty?" she asked unexpectantly. There was
never much mail for the Lea girls. "Yes'm," said Patty briskly. "Here's the _Weekly Advocate_, and a
patent medicine almanac with all your dreams expounded, _and_ a letter
for Miss Carry M. Lea. It's postmarked Enfield, and has a suspiciously
matrimonial look. I'm sure it's an invitation to Chris Fairley's
wedding. Hurry up and see, Caddy." Carry, with a little flush of excitement on her face, opened her
letter. Sure enough, it contained an invitation "to be present at the
marriage of Christine Fairley." "How jolly!" exclaimed Patty. "Of course you'll go, Caddy. You'll have
a chance to wear that lovely organdie of yours at last." "It was sweet of Chris to invite me," said Carry. "I really didn't
expect it." "Well, I did. Wasn't she your most intimate friend when she lived in
Enderby?" "Oh, yes, but it is four years since she left, and some people might
forget in four years. But I might have known Chris wouldn't. Of course
I'll go." "And you'll make up your organdie?" "I shall have to," laughed Carry, forgetting all her troubles for a
moment, and feeling young and joyous over the prospect of a festivity. "I haven't another thing that would do to wear to a wedding. If I
hadn't that blessed organdie I couldn't go, that's all." "But you have it, and it will look lovely made up with a tucked skirt. Tucks are so fashionable now. And there's that lace of mine you can
have for a bertha. I want you to look just right, you see. Enfield is
a big place, and there will be lots of grandees at the wedding. Let's
get the last fashion sheet and pick out a design right away. Here's
one on the very first page that would be nice. You could wear it to
perfection, Caddy you're so tall and slender. It wouldn't suit a plump
and podgy person like myself at all." Carry liked the pattern, and they had an animated discussion over it. But, in the end, Carry sighed, and pushed the sheet away from her,
with all the brightness gone out of face. "It's no use, Patty. I'd forgotten for a few minutes, but it's all
come back now. I can't think of weddings and new dresses, when the
thought of that interest crowds everything else out. It's due next
month--fifty dollars--and I've only ten saved up. I can't make forty
dollars in a month, even if I had any amount of sewing, and you know
hardly anyone wants sewing done just now. I don't know what we shall
do. Oh, I suppose we can rent a couple of rooms in the village and
_exist_ in them. But it breaks my heart to think of leaving our old
home." "Perhaps Mr. Kerr will let us have more time," suggested Patty, not
very hopefully. The sparkle had gone out of her face too. Patty loved
their little home as much as Carry did. "You know he won't. He has been only too anxious for an excuse to
foreclose, this long time. He wants the land the house is on. Oh, if I
only hadn't been sick so long in the summer--just when everybody had
sewing to do. I've tried so hard to catch up, but I couldn't." Carry's
voice broke in a sob. Patty leaned over the table and patted her sister's glossy dark hair
gently. "You've worked too hard, dearie. You've just gone to skin and bone. Oh, I know how hard it is! I can't bear to think of leaving this dear
old spot either. If we could only induce Mr. Kerr to give us a year's
grace! I'd be teaching then, and we could easily pay the interest and
some of the principal too. Perhaps he will if we both go to him and
coax very hard. Anyway, don't worry over it till after the wedding. I
want you to go and have a good time. You never have good times,
Carry." "Neither do you," said Carry rebelliously. "You never have anything
that other girls have, Patty--not even pretty clothes." "Deed, and I've lots of things to be thankful for," said Patty
cheerily. "Don't you fret about me. I'm vain enough to think I've got
some brains anyway, and I'm a-meaning to do something with them too. Now I think I'll go upstairs and study this evening. It will be warm
enough there tonight, and the noise of the machine rather bothers me." Patty whisked out, and Carry knew she should go to her sewing. But she
sat a long while at the table in dismal thought. She was so tired, and
so hopeless. It had been such a hard struggle, and it seemed now as if
it would all come to naught. For five years, ever since her mother's
death, Carry had supported herself and Patty by dressmaking. They had
been a hard five years of pinching and economizing and going without,
for Enderby was only a small place, and there were two other
dressmakers. Then there was always the mortgage to devour everything. Carry had kept it at bay till now, but at last she was conquered. She
had had typhoid fever in the spring and had not been able to work for
a long time. Indeed, she had gone to work before she should. The
doctor's bill was yet unpaid, but Dr. Hamilton had told her to take
her time. Carry knew she would not be pressed for that, and next year
Patty would be able to help her. But next year would be too late. The
dear little home would be lost then. When Carry roused herself from her sad reflections, she saw a crumpled
note lying on the floor. She picked it up and absently smoothed it
out. Seeing Patty's name at the top she was about to lay it aside
without reading it, but the lines were few, and the sense of them
flashed into Carry's brain. The note was an invitation to Clare
Forbes's party! The Lea girls had known that the Forbes girls were
going to give a party, but they had not expected that Patty would be
invited. Of course, Clare Forbes was in Patty's class at school and
was always very nice and friendly with her. But then the Forbes set
was not the Lea set. Carry ran upstairs to Patty's room. "Patty, you dropped this on the
floor. I couldn't help seeing what it was. 