

E-text prepared by Earle C. Beach
and revised by Joseph E. Loewenstein, M.D. Editorial note:

      This volume is the only work of O. Henry which approaches
      being a novel. The stories are related and should be read
      in the sequence in which they occur in the text. Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration. See 2777-h.htm or 2777-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/7/7/2777/2777-h/24910-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/7/7/2777/2777-h.zip)





CABBAGES AND KINGS

by

O. HENRY

Author of "The Four Million," "The Voice of the City,"
"The Trimmed Lamp," "Strictly Business," "Whirligigs," Etc. [ILLUSTRATION: "A little saint with a color more lightful
than orange" (frontispiece)]




"The time has come," the Walrus said,
   "To talk of many things;
Of shoes and ships and sealing-wax,
   And cabbages and kings." THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER





CONTENTS

          THE PROEM: BY THE CARPENTER
       I. "FOX-IN-THE-MORNING"
      II. THE LOTUS AND THE BOTTLE
     III. SMITH
      IV. CAUGHT
       V. CUPID'S EXILE NUMBER TWO
      VI. THE PHONOGRAPH AND THE GRAFT
     VII. MONEY MAZE
    VIII. THE ADMIRAL
      IX. THE FLAG PARAMOUNT
       X. THE SHAMROCK AND THE PALM
      XI. THE REMNANTS OF THE CODE
     XII. SHOES
    XIII. SHIPS
     XIV. MASTERS OF ARTS
      XV. DICKY
     XVI. ROUGE ET NOIR
    XVII. TWO RECALLS
   XVIII. THE VITAGRAPHOSCOPE




THE PROEM

BY THE CARPENTER


They will tell you in Anchuria, that President Miraflores, of that
volatile republic, died by his own hand in the coast town of Coralio;
that he had reached thus far in flight from the inconveniences of
an imminent revolution; and that one hundred thousand dollars,
government funds, which he carried with him in an American leather
valise as a souvenir of his tempestuous administration, was never
afterward recovered. For a _real_, a boy will show you his grave. It is back of the town
near a little bridge that spans a mangrove swamp. A plain slab of
wood stands at its head. Some one has burned upon the headstone with
a hot iron this inscription:


    RAMON ANGEL DE LAS CRUZES

          Y MIRAFLORES

   PRESIDENTE DE LA REPUBLICA

           DE ANCHURIA

      QUE SEA SU JUEZ DIOS


It is characteristic of this buoyant people that they pursue no man
beyond the grave. "Let God be his judge!" --Even with the hundred
thousand unfound, though greatly coveted, the hue and cry went no
further than that. To the stranger or the guest the people of Coralio will relate the
story of the tragic end of their former president; how he strove to
escape from the country with the public funds and also with Dona
Isabel Guilbert, the young American opera singer; and how, being
apprehended by members of the opposing political party in Coralio,
he shot himself through the head rather than give up the funds, and,
in consequence, the Senorita Guilbert. They will relate further
that Dona Isabel, her adventurous bark of fortune shoaled by the
simultaneous loss of her distinguished admirer and the souvenir
hundred thousand, dropped anchor on this stagnant coast, awaiting a
rising tide. They say, in Coralio, that she found a prompt and prosperous tide
in the form of Frank Goodwin, an American resident of the town, an
investor who had grown wealthy by dealing in the products of the
country--a banana king, a rubber prince, a sarsaparilla, indigo, and
mahogany baron. The Senorita Guilbert, you will be told, married
Senor Goodwin one month after the president's death, thus, in the
very moment when Fortune had ceased to smile, wresting from her a
gift greater than the prize withdrawn. Of the American, Don Frank Goodwin, and of his wife the natives have
nothing but good to say. Don Frank has lived among them for years,
and has compelled their respect. His lady is easily queen of what
social life the sober coast affords. The wife of the governor of the
district, herself, who was of the proud Castilian family of Monteleon
y Dolorosa de los Santos y Mendez, feels honoured to unfold her
napkin with olive-hued, ringed hands at the table of Senora Goodwin. Were you to refer (with your northern prejudices) to the vivacious
past of Mrs. Goodwin when her audacious and gleeful abandon in light
opera captured the mature president's fancy, or to her share in that
statesman's downfall and malfeasance, the Latin shrug of the shoulder
would be your only answer and rebuttal. What prejudices there were
in Coralio concerning Senora Goodwin seemed now to be in her favour,
whatever they had been in the past. It would seem that the story is ended, instead of begun; that the
close of a tragedy and the climax of a romance have covered the ground
of interest; but, to the more curious reader it shall be some slight
instruction to trace the close threads that underlie the ingenuous
web of circumstances. The headpiece bearing the name of President Miraflores is daily
scrubbed with soap-bark and sand. An old half-breed Indian tends the
grave with fidelity and the dawdling minuteness of inherited sloth. He chops down the weeds and ever-springing grass with his machete, he
plucks ants and scorpions and beetles from it with his horny fingers,
and sprinkles its turf with water from the plaza fountain. There is
no grave anywhere so well kept and ordered. Only by following out the underlying threads will it be made clear
why the old Indian, Galvez, is secretly paid to keep green the
grave of President Miraflores by one who never saw that unfortunate
statesman in life or in death, and why that one was wont to walk in
the twilight, casting from a distance looks of gentle sadness upon
that unhonoured mound. Elsewhere than at Coralio one learns of the impetuous career
of Isabel Guilbert. New Orleans gave her birth and the mingled
French and Spanish creole nature that tinctured her life with such
turbulence and warmth. She had little education, but a knowledge of
men and motives that seemed to have come by instinct. Far beyond the
common woman was she endowed with intrepid rashness, with a love for
the pursuit of adventure to the brink of danger, and with desire for
the pleasures of life. Her spirit was one to chafe under any curb;
she was Eve after the fall, but before the bitterness of it was felt. She wore life as a rose in her bosom. Of the legion of men who had been at her feet it was said that but
one was so fortunate as to engage her fancy. To President Miraflores,
the brilliant but unstable ruler of Anchuria, she yielded the key to
her resolute heart. How, then, do we find her (as the Coralians would
have told you) the wife of Frank Goodwin, and happily living a life
of dull and dreamy inaction? The underlying threads reach far, stretching across the sea. Following them out it will be made plain why "Shorty" O'Day, of the
Columbia Detective Agency, resigned his position. And, for a lighter
pastime, it shall be a duty and a pleasing sport to wander with Momus
beneath the tropic stars where Melpomene once stalked austere. Now to
cause laughter to echo from those lavish jungles and frowning crags
where formerly rang the cries of pirates' victims; to lay aside pike
and cutlass and attack with quip and jollity; to draw one saving
titter of mirth from the rusty casque of Romance--this were pleasant
to do in the shade of the lemon-trees on that coast that is curved
like lips set for smiling. For there are yet tales of the Spanish Main. That segment of
continent washed by the tempestuous Caribbean, and presenting to the
sea a formidable border of tropical jungle topped by the overweening
Cordilleras, is still begirt by mystery and romance. In past times
buccaneers and revolutionists roused the echoes of its cliffs, and
the condor wheeled perpetually above where, in the green groves,
they made food for him with their matchlocks and toledos. Taken and
retaken by sea rovers, by adverse powers and by sudden uprising of
rebellious factions, the historic 300 miles of adventurous coast has
scarcely known for hundreds of years whom rightly to call its master. Pizarro, Balboa, Sir Francis Drake, and Bolivar did what they could
to make it a part of Christendom. Sir John Morgan, Lafitte and other
eminent swash-bucklers bombarded and pounded it in the name of
Abaddon. The game still goes on. The guns of the rovers are silenced; but the
tintype man, the enlarged photograph brigand, the kodaking tourist
and the scouts of the gentle brigade of fakirs have found it out, and
carry on the work. The hucksters of Germany, France, and Sicily now
bag its small change across their counters. Gentleman adventurers
throng the waiting-rooms of its rulers with proposals for railways
and concessions. The little _opera-bouffe_ nations play at government
and intrigue until some day a big, silent gunboat glides into the
offing and warns them not to break their toys. And with these changes
comes also the small adventurer, with empty pockets to fill, light of
heart, busy-brained--the modern fairy prince, bearing an alarm clock
with which, more surely than by the sentimental kiss, to awaken the
beautiful tropics from their centuries' sleep. Generally he wears a
shamrock, which he matches pridefully against the extravagant palms;
and it is he who has driven Melpomene to the wings, and set Comedy to
dancing before the footlights of the Southern Cross. So, there is a little tale to tell of many things. Perhaps to the
promiscuous ear of the Walrus it shall come with most avail; for in
it there are indeed shoes and ships and sealing-wax and cabbage-palms
and presidents instead of kings. Add to these a little love and counterplotting, and scatter
everywhere throughout the maze a trail of tropical dollars--dollars
warmed no more by the torrid sun than by the hot palms of the scouts
of Fortune--and, after all, here seems to be Life, itself, with talk
enough to weary the most garrulous of Walruses. I

"FOX-IN-THE-MORNING"


Coralio reclined, in the mid-day heat, like some vacuous beauty
lounging in a guarded harem. The town lay at the sea's edge on a
strip of alluvial coast. It was set like a little pearl in an emerald
band. Behind it, and seeming almost to topple, imminent, above it,
rose the sea-following range of the Cordilleras. In front the sea
was spread, a smiling jailer, but even more incorruptible than the
frowning mountains. The waves swished along the smooth beach; the
parrots screamed in the orange and ceiba-trees; the palms waved their
limber fronds foolishly like an awkward chorus at the prima donna's
cue to enter. Suddenly the town was full of excitement. A native boy dashed down a
grass-grown street, shrieking: "_Busca el Senor Goodwin. Ha venido un
telegrafo por el!_"

The word passed quickly. Telegrams do not often come to anyone in
Coralio. The cry for Senor Goodwin was taken up by a dozen officious
voices. The main street running parallel to the beach became
populated with those who desired to expedite the delivery of the
despatch. Knots of women with complexions varying from palest olive
to deepest brown gathered at street corners and plaintively carolled:
"_Un telegrafo por Senor Goodwin!_" The _comandante_, Don Senor el
Coronel Encarnacion Rios, who was loyal to the Ins and suspected
Goodwin's devotion to the Outs, hissed: "Aha!" and wrote in his
secret memorandum book the accusive fact that Senor Goodwin had on
that momentous date received a telegram. In the midst of the hullabaloo a man stepped to the door of a small
wooden building and looked out. Above the door was a sign that read
"Keogh and Clancy"--a nomenclature that seemed not to be indigenous
to that tropical soil. The man in the door was Billy Keogh, scout
of fortune and progress and latter-day rover of the Spanish Main. Tintypes and photographs were the weapons with which Keogh and Clancy
were at that time assailing the hopeless shores. Outside the shop
were set two large frames filled with specimens of their art and
skill. Keogh leaned in the doorway, his bold and humorous countenance
wearing a look of interest at the unusual influx of life and sound
into the street. When the meaning of the disturbance became clear to
him he placed a hand beside his mouth and shouted: "Hey! Frank!" in
such a robustious voice that the feeble clamour of the natives was
drowned and silenced. Fifty yards away, on the seaward side of the street, stood the abode
of the consul for the United States. Out from the door of this
building tumbled Goodwin at the call. He had been smoking with
Willard Geddie, the consul, on the back porch of the consulate, which
was conceded to be the coolest spot in Coralio. "Hurry up," shouted Keogh. "There's a riot in town on account of a
telegram that's come for you. You want to be careful about these
things, my boy. It won't do to trifle with the feelings of the
public this way. You'll be getting a pink note some day with violet
scent on it; and then the country'll be steeped in the throes of a
revolution." Goodwin had strolled up the street and met the boy with the message. The ox-eyed women gazed at him with shy admiration, for his type drew
them. He was big, blonde, and jauntily dressed in white linen, with
buckskin _zapatos_. His manner was courtly, with a sort of kindly
truculence in it, tempered by a merciful eye. When the telegram had
been delivered, and the bearer of it dismissed with a gratuity, the
relieved populace returned to the contiguities of shade from which
curiosity had drawn it--the women to their baking in the mud ovens
under the orange-trees, or to the interminable combing of their
long, straight hair; the men to their cigarettes and gossip in the
cantinas. Goodwin sat on Keogh's doorstep, and read his telegram. It was from
Bob Englehart, an American, who lived in San Mateo, the capital city
of Anchuria, eighty miles in the interior. Englehart was a gold
miner, an ardent revolutionist and "good people." That he was a man
of resource and imagination was proven by the telegram he had sent. It had been his task to send a confidential message to his friend in
Coralio. This could not have been accomplished in either Spanish or
English, for the eye politic in Anchuria was an active one. The Ins
and the Outs were perpetually on their guard. But Englehart was a
diplomatist. There existed but one code upon which he might make
requisition with promise of safety--the great and potent code of
Slang. So, here is the message that slipped, unconstrued, through
the fingers of curious officials, and came to the eye of Goodwin:


   His Nibs skedaddled yesterday per jack-rabbit line with all
   the coin in the kitty and the bundle of muslin he's spoony
   about. The boodle is six figures short. Our crowd in good
   shape, but we need the spondulicks. You collar it. The main
   guy and the dry goods are headed for the briny. You know
   what to do. BOB. This screed, remarkable as it was, had no mystery for Goodwin. He
was the most successful of the small advance-guard of speculative
Americans that had invaded Anchuria, and he had not reached that
enviable pinnacle without having well exercised the arts of foresight
and deduction. He had taken up political intrigue as a matter of
business. He was acute enough to wield a certain influence among
the leading schemers, and he was prosperous enough to be able to
purchase the respect of the petty office-holders. There was always
a revolutionary party; and to it he had always allied himself; for
the adherents of a new administration received the rewards of their
labours. There was now a Liberal party seeking to overturn President
Miraflores. If the wheel successfully revolved, Goodwin stood to
win a concession to 30,000 manzanas of the finest coffee lands in
the interior. Certain incidents in the recent career of President
Miraflores had excited a shrewd suspicion in Goodwin's mind that the
government was near a dissolution from another cause than that of a
revolution, and now Englehart's telegram had come as a corroboration
of his wisdom. The telegram, which had remained unintelligible to the Anchurian
linguists who had applied to it in vain their knowledge of Spanish
and elemental English, conveyed a stimulating piece of news to
Goodwin's understanding. It informed him that the president of the
republic had decamped from the capital city with the contents of the
treasury. Furthermore, that he was accompanied in his flight by that
winning adventuress Isabel Guilbert, the opera singer, whose troupe
of performers had been entertained by the president at San Mateo
during the past month on a scale less modest than that with which
royal visitors are often content. The reference to the "jack-rabbit
line" could mean nothing else than the mule-back system of transport
that prevailed between Coralio and the capital. The hint that the
"boodle" was "six figures short" made the condition of the national
treasury lamentably clear. Also it was convincingly true that the
ingoing party--its way now made a pacific one--would need the
"spondulicks." Unless its pledges should be fulfilled, and the spoils
held for the delectation of the victors, precarious indeed, would
be the position of the new government. Therefore it was exceeding
necessary to "collar the main guy," and recapture the sinews of war
and government. Goodwin handed the message to Keogh. "Read that, Billy," he said. "It's from Bob Englehart. Can you manage
the cipher?" Keogh sat in the other half of the doorway, and carefully perused the
telegram. "'Tis not a cipher," he said, finally. "'Tis what they call
literature, and that's a system of language put in the mouths
of people that they've never been introduced to by writers of
imagination. The magazines invented it, but I never knew before that
President Norvin Green had stamped it with the seal of his approval. 'Tis now no longer literature, but language. The dictionaries tried,
but they couldn't make it go for anything but dialect. Sure, now that
the Western Union indorses it, it won't be long till a race of people
will spring up that speaks it." "You're running too much to philology, Billy," said Goodwin. "Do you
make out the meaning of it?" "Sure," replied the philosopher of Fortune. "All languages come easy
to the man who must know 'em. I've even failed to misunderstand an
order to evacuate in classical Chinese when it was backed up by the
muzzle of a breech-loader. This little literary essay I hold in my
hands means a game of Fox-in-the-Morning. Ever play that, Frank, when
you was a kid?" "I think so," said Goodwin, laughing. "You join hands all 'round,
and--"

"You do not," interrupted Keogh. "You've got a fine sporting game
mixed up in your head with 'All Around the Rosebush.' The spirit of
'Fox-in-the-Morning' is opposed to the holding of hands. I'll tell
you how it's played. This president man and his companion in play,
they stand up over in San Mateo, ready for the run, and shout:
'Fox-in-the-Morning!' Me and you, standing here, we say: 'Goose and
the Gander!' They say: 'How many miles is it to London town?' We say:
'Only a few, if your legs are long enough. How many comes out?' They
say: 'More than you're able to catch.' And then the game commences." "I catch the idea," said Goodwin. "It won't do to let the goose
and gander slip through our fingers, Billy; their feathers are too
valuable. Our crowd is prepared and able to step into the shoes of
the government at once; but with the treasury empty we'd stay in
power about as long as a tenderfoot would stick on an untamed bronco. We must play the fox on every foot of the coast to prevent their
getting out of the country." "By the mule-back schedule," said Keogh, "it's five days down from
San Mateo. We've got plenty of time to set our outposts. There's only
three places on the coast where they can hope to sail from--here and
Solitas and Alazan. They're the only points we'll have to guard. It's
as easy as a chess problem--fox to play, and mate in three moves. Oh,
goosey, goosey, gander, whither do you wander? By the blessing of the
literary telegraph the boodle of this benighted fatherland shall be
preserved to the honest political party that is seeking to overthrow
it." The situation had been justly outlined by Keogh. The down trail
from the capital was at all times a weary road to travel. A
jiggety-joggety journey it was; ice-cold and hot, wet and dry. The
trail climbed appalling mountains, wound like a rotten string about
the brows of breathless precipices, plunged through chilling snow-fed
streams, and wriggled like a snake through sunless forests teeming
with menacing insect and animal life. After descending to the
foothills it turned to a trident, the central prong ending at Alazan. Another branched off to Coralio; the third penetrated to Solitas. Between the sea and the foothills stretched the five miles breadth of
alluvial coast. Here was the flora of the tropics in its rankest and
most prodigal growth. Spaces here and there had been wrested from the
jungle and planted with bananas and cane and orange groves. The rest
was a riot of wild vegetation, the home of monkeys, tapirs, jaguars,
alligators and prodigious reptiles and insects. Where no road was cut
a serpent could scarcely make its way through the tangle of vines and
creepers. Across the treacherous mangrove swamps few things without
wings could safely pass. Therefore the fugitives could hope to reach
the coast only by one of the routes named. "Keep the matter quiet, Billy," advised Goodwin. "We don't want
the Ins to know that the president is in flight. I suppose Bob's
information is something of a scoop in the capital as yet. Otherwise
he would not have tried to make his message a confidential one; and
besides, everybody would have heard the news. I'm going around now to
see Dr. Zavalla, and start a man up the trail to cut the telegraph
wire." As Goodwin rose, Keogh threw his hat upon the grass by the door and
expelled a tremendous sigh. "What's the trouble, Billy?" asked Goodwin, pausing. "That's the
first time I ever heard you sigh." "'Tis the last," said Keogh. "With that sorrowful puff of wind I
resign myself to a life of praiseworthy but harassing honesty. What
are tintypes, if you please, to the opportunities of the great
and hilarious class of ganders and geese? Not that I would be a
president, Frank--and the boodle he's got is too big for me to
handle--but in some ways I feel my conscience hurting me for
addicting myself to photographing a nation instead of running away
with it. Frank, did you ever see the 'bundle of muslin' that His
Excellency has wrapped up and carried off?" "Isabel Guilbert?" said Goodwin, laughing. "No, I never did. From
what I've heard of her, though, I imagine that she wouldn't stick at
anything to carry her point. Don't get romantic, Billy. Sometimes I
begin to fear that there's Irish blood in your ancestry." "I never saw her either," went on Keogh; "but they say she's got all
the ladies of mythology, sculpture, and fiction reduced to chromos. They say she can look at a man once, and he'll turn monkey and climb
trees to pick cocoanuts for her. Think of that president man with
Lord knows how many hundreds of thousands of dollars in one hand, and
this muslin siren in the other, galloping down hill on a sympathetic
mule amid songbirds and flowers! And here is Billy Keogh, because he
is virtuous, condemned to the unprofitable swindle of slandering the
faces of missing links on tin for an honest living! 'Tis an injustice
of nature." "Cheer up," said Goodwin. "You are a pretty poor fox to be envying a
gander. Maybe the enchanting Guilbert will take a fancy to you and
your tintypes after we impoverish her royal escort." "She could do worse," reflected Keogh; "but she won't. 'Tis not a
tintype gallery, but the gallery of the gods that she's fitted to
adorn. She's a very wicked lady, and the president man is in luck. But I hear Clancy swearing in the back room for having to do all the
work." And Keogh plunged for the rear of the "gallery," whistling
gaily in a spontaneous way that belied his recent sigh over the
questionable good luck of the flying president. Goodwin turned from the main street into a much narrower one that
intersected it at a right angle. These side streets were covered by a growth of thick, rank grass,
which was kept to a navigable shortness by the machetes of the
police. Stone sidewalks, little more than a ledge in width, ran along
the base of the mean and monotonous adobe houses. At the outskirts
of the village these streets dwindled to nothing; and here were set
the palm-thatched huts of the Caribs and the poorer natives, and the
shabby cabins of negroes from Jamaica and the West India islands. A
few structures raised their heads above the red-tiled roofs of the
one-story houses--the bell tower of the _Calaboza_, the Hotel de los
Estranjeros, the residence of the Vesuvius Fruit Company's agent,
the store and residence of Bernard Brannigan, a ruined cathedral in
which Columbus had once set foot, and, most imposing of all, the
Casa Morena--the summer "White House" of the President of Anchuria. On the principal street running along the beach--the Broadway
of Coralio--were the larger stores, the government _bodega_ and
post-office, the _cuartel_, the rum-shops and the market place. On his way Goodwin passed the house of Bernard Brannigan. It was a
modern wooden building, two stories in height. The ground floor was
occupied by Brannigan's store, the upper one contained the living
apartments. A wide cool porch ran around the house half way up its
outer walls. A handsome, vivacious girl neatly dressed in flowing
white leaned over the railing and smiled down upon Goodwin. She was
no darker than many an Andalusian of high descent; and she sparkled
and glowed like a tropical moonlight. "Good evening, Miss Paula," said Goodwin, taking off his hat, with
his ready smile. There was little difference in his manner whether
he addressed women or men. Everybody in Coralio liked to receive the
salutation of the big American. "Is there any news, Mr. Goodwin? Please don't say no. Isn't it
warm? I feel just like Mariana in her moated grange--or was it a
range?--it's hot enough." "No, there's no news to tell, I believe," said Goodwin, with a
mischievous look in his eye, "except that old Geddie is getting
grumpier and crosser every day. If something doesn't happen to
relieve his mind I'll have to quit smoking on his back porch--and
there's no other place available that is cool enough." "He isn't grumpy," said Paula Brannigan, impulsively, "when he--"

But she ceased suddenly, and drew back with a deepening colour; for
her mother had been a _mestizo_ lady, and the Spanish blood had
brought to Paula a certain shyness that was an adornment to the other
half of her demonstrative nature. II

THE LOTUS AND THE BOTTLE


Willard Geddie, consul for the United States in Coralio, was working
leisurely on his yearly report. Goodwin, who had strolled in as he
did daily for a smoke on the much coveted porch, had found him so
absorbed in his work that he departed after roundly abusing the
consul for his lack of hospitality. "I shall complain to the civil service department," said
Goodwin;--"or is it a department?--perhaps it's only a theory. One
gets neither civility nor service from you. You won't talk; and
you won't set out anything to drink. What kind of a way is that of
representing your government?" Goodwin strolled out and across to the hotel to see if he could bully
the quarantine doctor into a game on Coralio's solitary billiard
table. His plans were completed for the interception of the fugitives
from the capital; and now it was but a waiting game that he had to
play. The consul was interested in his report. He was only twenty-four; and
he had not been in Coralio long enough for his enthusiasm to cool in
the heat of the tropics--a paradox that may be allowed between Cancer
and Capricorn. So many thousand bunches of bananas, so many thousand oranges and
cocoanuts, so many ounces of gold dust, pounds of rubber, coffee,
indigo and sarsaparilla--actually, exports were twenty per cent. greater than for the previous year! A little thrill of satisfaction ran through the consul. Perhaps, he
thought, the State Department, upon reading his introduction, would
notice--and then he leaned back in his chair and laughed. He was
getting as bad as the others. For the moment he had forgotten that
Coralio was an insignificant town in an insignificant republic lying
along the by-ways of a second-rate sea. He thought of Gregg, the
quarantine doctor, who subscribed for the London _Lancet_, expecting
to find it quoting his reports to the home Board of Health concerning
the yellow fever germ. The consul knew that not one in fifty of his
acquaintances in the States had ever heard of Coralio. He knew that
two men, at any rate, would have to read his report--some underling
in the State Department and a compositor in the Public Printing
Office. Perhaps the typesticker would note the increase of commerce
in Coralio, and speak of it, over the cheese and beer, to a friend. He had just written: "Most unaccountable is the supineness of the
large exporters in the United States in permitting the French and
German houses to practically control the trade interests of this
rich and productive country"--when he heard the hoarse notes of a
steamer's siren. Geddie laid down his pen and gathered his Panama hat and umbrella. By
the sound he knew it to be the _Valhalla_, one of the line of fruit
vessels plying for the Vesuvius Company. Down to _ninos_ of five
years, everyone in Coralio could name you each incoming steamer by
the note of her siren. The consul sauntered by a roundabout, shaded way to the beach. By
reason of long practice he gauged his stroll so accurately that
by the time he arrived on the sandy shore the boat of the customs
officials was rowing back from the steamer, which had been boarded
and inspected according to the laws of Anchuria. There is no harbour at Coralio. Vessels of the draught of the
_Valhalla_ must ride at anchor a mile from shore. When they take on
fruit it is conveyed on lighters and freighter sloops. At Solitas,
where there was a fine harbour, ships of many kinds were to be seen,
but in the roadstead off Coralio scarcely any save the fruiters
paused. Now and then a tramp coaster, or a mysterious brig from
Spain, or a saucy French barque would hang innocently for a few
days in the offing. Then the custom-house crew would become doubly
vigilant and wary. At night a sloop or two would be making strange
trips in and out along the shore; and in the morning the stock of
Three-Star Hennessey, wines and drygoods in Coralio would be found
vastly increased. It has also been said that the customs officials
jingled more silver in the pockets of their red-striped trousers, and
that the record books showed no increase in import duties received. The customs boat and the _Valhalla_ gig reached the shore at the same
time. When they grounded in the shallow water there was still five
yards of rolling surf between them and dry sand. Then half-clothed
Caribs dashed into the water, and brought in on their backs the
_Valhalla's_ purser and the little native officials in their cotton
undershirts, blue trousers with red stripes, and flapping straw hats. At college Geddie had been a treasure as a first-baseman. He now
closed his umbrella, stuck it upright in the sand, and stooped,
with his hands resting upon his knees. The purser, burlesquing
the pitcher's contortions, hurled at the consul the heavy roll of
newspapers, tied with a string, that the steamer always brought for
him. Geddie leaped high and caught the roll with a sounding "thwack." The loungers on the beach--about a third of the population of the
town--laughed and applauded delightedly. Every week they expected to
see that roll of papers delivered and received in that same manner,
and they were never disappointed. Innovations did not flourish in
Coralio. The consul re-hoisted his umbrella and walked back to the consulate. This home of a great nation's representative was a wooden structure
of two rooms, with a native-built gallery of poles, bamboo and
nipa palm running on three sides of it. One room was the official
apartment, furnished chastely with a flat-top desk, a hammock, and
three uncomfortable cane-seated chairs. Engravings of the first and
latest president of the country represented hung against the wall. The other room was the consul's living apartment. It was eleven o'clock when he returned from the beach, and therefore
breakfast time. Chanca, the Carib woman who cooked for him, was just
serving the meal on the side of the gallery facing the sea--a spot
famous as the coolest in Coralio. The breakfast consisted of shark's
fin soup, stew of land crabs, breadfruit, a boiled iguana steak,
aguacates, a freshly cut pineapple, claret and coffee. Geddie took his seat, and unrolled with luxurious laziness his bundle
of newspapers. Here in Coralio for two days or longer he would read
of goings-on in the world very much as we of the world read those
whimsical contributions to inexact science that assume to portray the
doings of the Martians. After he had finished with the papers they
would be sent on the rounds of the other English-speaking residents
of the town. The paper that came first to his hand was one of those bulky
mattresses of printed stuff upon which the readers of certain New
York journals are supposed to take their Sabbath literary nap. Opening this the consul rested it upon the table, supporting its
weight with the aid of the back of a chair. Then he partook of his
meal deliberately, turning the leaves from time to time and glancing
half idly at the contents. Presently he was struck by something familiar to him in a picture--a
half-page, badly printed reproduction of a photograph of a vessel. Languidly interested, he leaned for a nearer scrutiny and a view of
the florid headlines of the column next to the picture. Yes; he was not mistaken. The engraving was of the eight-hundred-ton
yacht _Idalia_, belonging to "that prince of good fellows, Midas
of the money market, and society's pink of perfection, J. Ward
Tolliver." Slowly sipping his black coffee, Geddie read the column of print. Following a listed statement of Mr. Tolliver's real estate and bonds,
came a description of the yacht's furnishings, and then the grain of
news no bigger than a mustard seed. Mr. Tolliver, with a party of
favoured guests, would sail the next day on a six weeks' cruise along
the Central American and South American coasts and among the Bahama
Islands. Among the guests were Mrs. Cumberland Payne and Miss Ida
Payne, of Norfolk. The writer, with the fatuous presumption that was demanded of him
by his readers, had concocted a romance suited to their palates. He bracketed the names of Miss Payne and Mr. Tolliver until he had
well-nigh read the marriage ceremony over them. He played coyly and
insinuatingly upon the strings of "_on dit_" and "Madame Rumour"
and "a little bird" and "no one would be surprised," and ended with
congratulations. Geddie, having finished his breakfast, took his papers to the edge of
the gallery, and sat there in his favourite steamer chair with his
feet on the bamboo railing. He lighted a cigar, and looked out upon
the sea. He felt a glow of satisfaction at finding he was so little
disturbed by what he had read. He told himself that he had conquered
the distress that had sent him, a voluntary exile, to this far
land of the lotus. He could never forget Ida, of course; but there
was no longer any pain in thinking about her. When they had had
that misunderstanding and quarrel he had impulsively sought this
consulship, with the desire to retaliate upon her by detaching
himself from her world and presence. He had succeeded thoroughly in
that. During the twelve months of his life in Coralio no word had
passed between them, though he had sometimes heard of her through the
dilatory correspondence with the few friends to whom he still wrote. Still he could not repress a little thrill of satisfaction at knowing
that she had not yet married Tolliver or anyone else. But evidently
Tolliver had not yet abandoned hope. Well, it made no difference to him now. He had eaten of the lotus. He
was happy and content in this land of perpetual afternoon. Those old
days of life in the States seemed like an irritating dream. He hoped
Ida would be as happy as he was. The climate as balmy as that of
distant Avalon; the fetterless, idyllic round of enchanted days;
the life among this indolent, romantic people--a life full of music,
flowers, and low laughter; the influence of the imminent sea and
mountains, and the many shapes of love and magic and beauty that
bloomed in the white tropic nights--with all he was more than
content. Also, there was Paula Brannigan. Geddie intended to marry Paula--if, of course, she would consent;
but he felt rather sure that she would do that. Somehow, he kept
postponing his proposal. Several times he had been quite near to it;
but a mysterious something always held him back. Perhaps it was only
the unconscious, instinctive conviction that the act would sever the
last tie that bound him to his old world. He could be very happy with Paula. Few of the native girls could be
compared with her. She had attended a convent school in New Orleans
for two years; and when she chose to display her accomplishments no
one could detect any difference between her and the girls of Norfolk
and Manhattan. But it was delicious to see her at home dressed, as
she sometimes was, in the native costume, with bare shoulders and
flowing sleeves. Bernard Brannigan was the great merchant of Coralio. Besides his
store, he maintained a train of pack mules, and carried on a lively
trade with the interior towns and villages. He had married a native
lady of high Castilian descent, but with a tinge of Indian brown
showing through her olive cheek. The union of the Irish and the
Spanish had produced, as it so often has, an offshoot of rare beauty
and variety. They were very excellent people indeed, and the upper
story of their house was ready to be placed at the service of Geddie
and Paula as soon as he should make up his mind to speak about it. By the time two hours were whiled away the consul tired of reading. The papers lay scattered about him on the gallery. Reclining there,
he gazed dreamily out upon an Eden. A clump of banana plants
interposed their broad shields between him and the sun. The gentle
slope from the consulate to the sea was covered with the dark-green
foliage of lemon-trees and orange-trees just bursting into bloom. A
lagoon pierced the land like a dark, jagged crystal, and above it a
pale ceiba-tree rose almost to the clouds. The waving cocoanut palms
on the beach flared their decorative green leaves against the slate
of an almost quiescent sea. His senses were cognizant of brilliant
scarlet and ochres amid the vert of the coppice, of odours of
fruit and bloom and the smoke from Chanca's clay oven under the
calabash-tree; of the treble laughter of the native women in their
huts, the song of the robin, the salt taste of the breeze, the
diminuendo of the faint surf running along the shore--and, gradually,
of a white speck, growing to a blur, that intruded itself upon the
drab prospect of the sea. Lazily interested, he watched this blur increase until it became
the _Idalia_ steaming at full speed, coming down the coast. Without
changing his position he kept his eyes upon the beautiful white yacht
as she drew swiftly near, and came opposite to Coralio. Then, sitting
upright, he saw her float steadily past and on. Scarcely a mile of
sea had separated her from the shore. He had seen the frequent flash
of her polished brass work and the stripes of her deck-awnings--so
much, and no more. Like a ship on a magic lantern slide the _Idalia_
had crossed the illuminated circle of the consul's little world, and
was gone. Save for the tiny cloud of smoke that was left hanging
over the brim of the sea, she might have been an immaterial thing, a
chimera of his idle brain. Geddie went into his office and sat down to dawdle over his report. If the reading of the article in the paper had left him unshaken,
this silent passing of the _Idalia_ had done for him still more. It had brought the calm and peace of a situation from which all
uncertainty had been erased. He knew that men sometimes hope without
being aware of it. Now, since she had come two thousand miles and had
passed without a sign, not even his unconscious self need cling to
the past any longer. After dinner, when the sun was low behind the mountains, Geddie
walked on the little strip of beach under the cocoanuts. The wind was
blowing mildly landward, and the surface of the sea was rippled by
tiny wavelets. A miniature breaker, spreading with a soft "swish" upon the sand
brought with it something round and shiny that rolled back again as
the wave receded. The next influx beached it clear, and Geddie picked
it up. The thing was a long-necked wine bottle of colourless glass. The cork had been driven in tightly to the level of the mouth, and
the end covered with dark-red sealing-wax. The bottle contained only
what seemed to be a sheet of paper, much curled from the manipulation
it had undergone while being inserted. In the sealing-wax was the
impression of a seal--probably of a signet-ring, bearing the initials
of a monogram; but the impression had been hastily made, and the
letters were past anything more certain than a shrewd conjecture. Ida
Payne had always worn a signet-ring in preference to any other finger
decoration. Geddie thought he could make out the familiar "I P"; and
a queer sensation of disquietude went over him. More personal and
intimate was this reminder of her than had been the sight of the
vessel she was doubtless on. He walked back to his house, and set the
bottle on his desk. Throwing off his hat and coat, and lighting a lamp--for the night had
crowded precipitately upon the brief twilight--he began to examine
his piece of sea salvage. By holding the bottle near the light and turning it judiciously, he
made out that it contained a double sheet of note-paper filled with
close writing; further, that the paper was of the same size and shade
as that always used by Ida; and that, to the best of his belief, the
handwriting was hers. The imperfect glass of the bottle so distorted
the rays of light that he could read no word of the writing; but
certain capital letters, of which he caught comprehensive glimpses,
were Ida's, he felt sure. There was a little smile both of perplexity and amusement in Geddie's
eyes as he set the bottle down, and laid three cigars side by side
on his desk. He fetched his steamer chair from the gallery, and
stretched himself comfortably. He would smoke those three cigars
while considering the problem. For it amounted to a problem. He almost wished that he had not found
the bottle; but the bottle was there. Why should it have drifted in
from the sea, whence come so many disquieting things, to disturb his
peace? In this dreamy land, where time seemed so redundant, he had fallen
into the habit of bestowing much thought upon even trifling matters. He began to speculate upon many fanciful theories concerning the
story of the bottle, rejecting each in turn. Ships in danger of wreck or disablement sometimes cast forth such
precarious messengers calling for aid. But he had seen the _Idalia_
not three hours before, safe and speeding. Suppose the crew had
mutinied and imprisoned the passengers below, and the message was
one begging for succour! But, premising such an improbable outrage,
would the agitated captives have taken the pains to fill four pages
of note-paper with carefully penned arguments to their rescue. Thus by elimination he soon rid the matter of the more unlikely
theories, and was reduced--though aversely--to the less assailable
one that the bottle contained a message to himself. Ida knew he was
in Coralio; she must have launched the bottle while the yacht was
passing and the wind blowing fairly toward the shore. As soon as Geddie reached this conclusion a wrinkle came between his
brows and a stubborn look settled around his mouth. He sat looking
out through the doorway at the gigantic fire-flies traversing the
quiet streets. If this was a message to him from Ida, what could it mean save an
overture toward a reconciliation? And if that, why had she not used
the same methods of the post instead of this uncertain and even
flippant means of communication? A note in an empty bottle, cast into
the sea! There was something light and frivolous about it, if not
actually contemptuous. The thought stirred his pride and subdued whatever emotions had been
resurrected by the finding of the bottle. Geddie put on his coat and hat and walked out. He followed a street
that led him along the border of the little plaza where a band was
playing and people were rambling, care-free and indolent. Some
timorous _senoritas_ scurrying past with fire-flies tangled in the
jetty braids of their hair glanced at him with shy, flattering eyes. The air was languorous with the scent of jasmin and orange-blossoms. The consul stayed his steps at the house of Bernard Brannigan. Paula
was swinging in a hammock on the gallery. She rose from it like a
bird from its nest. The colour came to her cheek at the sound of
Geddie's voice. He was charmed at the sight of her costume--a flounced muslin dress,
with a little jacket of white flannel, all made with neatness and
style. He suggested a stroll, and they walked out to the old Indian
well on the hill road. They sat on the curb, and there Geddie made
the expected but long-deferred speech. Certain though he had been
that she would not say him nay, he was thrilled with joy at the
completeness and sweetness of her surrender. Here was surely a heart
made for love and steadfastness. Here was no caprice or questionings
or captious standards of convention. When Geddie kissed Paula at her door that night he was happier than
he had ever been before. "Here in this hollow lotus land, ever to
live and lie reclined" seemed to him, as it has seemed to many
mariners, the best as well as the easiest. His future would be an
ideal one. He had attained a Paradise without a serpent. His Eve
would be indeed a part of him, unbeguiled, and therefore more
beguiling. He had made his decision to-night, and his heart was full
of serene, assured content. Geddie went back to his house whistling that finest and saddest love
song, "La Golondrina." At the door his tame monkey leaped down from
his shelf, chattering briskly. The consul turned to his desk to get
him some nuts he usually kept there. Reaching in the half-darkness,
his hand struck against the bottle. He started as if he had touched
the cold rotundity of a serpent. He had forgotten that the bottle was there. He lighted the lamp and fed the monkey. Then, very deliberately, he
lighted a cigar, and took the bottle in his hand, and walked down the
path to the beach. There was a moon, and the sea was glorious. The breeze had shifted,
as it did each evening, and was now rushing steadily seaward. Stepping to the water's edge, Geddie hurled the unopened bottle far
out into the sea. It disappeared for a moment, and then shot upward
twice its length. Geddie stood still, watching it. The moonlight was
so bright that he could see it bobbing up and down with the little
waves. Slowly it receded from the shore, flashing and turning as it
went. The wind was carrying it out to sea. Soon it became a mere
speck, doubtfully discerned at irregular intervals; and then the
mystery of it was swallowed up by the greater mystery of the ocean. Geddie stood still upon the beach, smoking and looking out upon the
water. "Simon!--Oh, Simon!--wake up there, Simon!" bawled a sonorous voice
at the edge of the water. Old Simon Cruz was a half-breed fisherman and smuggler who lived in a
hut on the beach. Out of his earliest nap Simon was thus awakened. He slipped on his shoes and went outside. Just landing from one of
the _Valhalla's_ boats was the third mate of that vessel, who was an
acquaintance of Simon's, and three sailors from the fruiter. "Go up, Simon," called the mate, "and find Dr. Gregg or Mr. Goodwin
or anybody that's a friend to Mr. Geddie, and bring 'em here at
once." "Saints of the skies!" said Simon, sleepily, "nothing has happened to
Mr. Geddie?" "He's under that tarpauling," said the mate, pointing to the boat,
"and he's rather more than half drownded. We seen him from the
steamer nearly a mile out from shore, swimmin' like mad after a
bottle that was floatin' in the water, outward bound. We lowered the
gig and started for him. He nearly had his hand on the bottle, when
he gave out and went under. We pulled him out in time to save him,
maybe; but the doctor is the one to decide that." "A bottle?" said the old man, rubbing his eyes. He was not yet fully
awake. "Where is the bottle?" "Driftin' along out there some'eres," said the mate, jerking his
thumb toward the sea. "Get on with you, Simon." III

SMITH


Goodwin and the ardent patriot, Zavalla, took all the precautions
that their foresight could contrive to prevent the escape of
President Miraflores and his companion. They sent trusted messengers
up the coast to Solitas and Alazan to warn the local leaders of the
flight, and to instruct them to patrol the water line and arrest
the fugitives at all hazards should they reveal themselves in that
territory. After this was done there remained only to cover the
district about Coralio and await the coming of the quarry. The nets
were well spread. The roads were so few, the opportunities for
embarkation so limited, and the two or three probable points of exit
so well guarded that it would be strange indeed if there should slip
through the meshes so much of the country's dignity, romance, and
collateral. The president would, without doubt, move as secretly
as possible, and endeavour to board a vessel by stealth from some
secluded point along the shore. On the fourth day after the receipt of Englehart's telegram the
_Karlsefin_, a Norwegian steamer chartered by the New Orleans fruit
trade, anchored off Coralio with three hoarse toots of her siren. The
_Karlsefin_ was not one of the line operated by the Vesuvius Fruit
Company. She was something of a dilettante, doing odd jobs for a
company that was scarcely important enough to figure as a rival to
the Vesuvius. The movements of the _Karlsefin_ were dependent upon
the state of the market. Sometimes she would ply steadily between the
Spanish Main and New Orleans in the regular transport of fruit; next
she would be making erratic trips to Mobile or Charleston, or even
as far north as New York, according to the distribution of the fruit
supply. Goodwin lounged upon the beach with the usual crowd of idlers that
had gathered to view the steamer. Now that President Miraflores might
be expected to reach the borders of his abjured country at any time,
the orders were to keep a strict and unrelenting watch. Every vessel
that approached the shores might now be considered a possible means
of escape for the fugitives; and an eye was kept even on the sloops
and dories that belonged to the sea-going contingent of Coralio. Goodwin and Zavalla moved everywhere, but without ostentation,
watching the loopholes of escape. The customs officials crowded importantly into their boat and rowed
out to the _Karlsefin_. A boat from the steamer landed her purser
with his papers, and took out the quarantine doctor with his green
umbrella and clinical thermometer. Next a swarm of Caribs began to
load upon lighters the thousands of bunches of bananas heaped upon
the shore and row them out to the steamer. The _Karlsefin_ had
no passenger list, and was soon done with the attention of the
authorities. The purser declared that the steamer would remain at
anchor until morning, taking on her fruit during the night. The
_Karlsefin_ had come, he said, from New York, to which port her
latest load of oranges and cocoanuts had been conveyed. Two or three
of the freighter sloops were engaged to assist in the work, for the
captain was anxious to make a quick return in order to reap the
advantage offered by a certain dearth of fruit in the States. About four o'clock in the afternoon another of those marine monsters,
not very familiar in those waters, hove in sight, following the
fateful _Idalia_--a graceful steam yacht, painted a light buff,
clean-cut as a steel engraving. The beautiful vessel hovered off
shore, see-sawing the waves as lightly as a duck in a rain barrel. A swift boat manned by a crew in uniform came ashore, and a
stocky-built man leaped to the sands. The new-comer seemed to turn a disapproving eye upon the rather
motley congregation of native Anchurians, and made his way at once
toward Goodwin, who was the most conspicuously Anglo-Saxon figure
present. Goodwin greeted him with courtesy. Conversation developed that the newly landed one was named Smith,
and that he had come in a yacht. A meagre biography, truly; for the
yacht was most apparent; and the "Smith" not beyond a reasonable
guess before the revelation. Yet to the eye of Goodwin, who had seen
several things, there was a discrepancy between Smith and his yacht. A bullet-headed man Smith was, with an oblique, dead eye and the
moustache of a cocktail-mixer. And unless he had shifted costumes
before putting off for shore he had affronted the deck of his correct
vessel clad in a pearl-gray derby, a gay plaid suit and vaudeville
neckwear. Men owning pleasure yachts generally harmonize better with
them. Smith looked business, but he was no advertiser. He commented upon
the scenery, remarking upon its fidelity to the pictures in the
geography; and then inquired for the United States consul. Goodwin
pointed out the starred-and-striped bunting hanging above the little
consulate, which was concealed behind the orange-trees. "Mr. Geddie, the consul, will be sure to be there," said Goodwin. "He
was very nearly drowned a few days ago while taking a swim in the
sea, and the doctor has ordered him to remain indoors for some time." Smith plowed his way through the sand to the consulate, his
haberdashery creating violent discord against the smooth tropical
blues and greens. Geddie was lounging in his hammock, somewhat pale of face and languid
in pose. On that night when the _Valhalla's_ boat had brought him
ashore apparently drenched to death by the sea, Doctor Gregg and his
other friends had toiled for hours to preserve the little spark of
life that remained to him. The bottle, with its impotent message, was
gone out to sea, and the problem that it had provoked was reduced
to a simple sum in addition--one and one make two, by the rule of
arithmetic; one by the rule of romance. There is a quaint old theory that man may have two souls--a
peripheral one which serves ordinarily, and a central one which is
stirred only at certain times, but then with activity and vigour. While under the domination of the former a man will shave, vote, pay
taxes, give money to his family, buy subscription books and comport
himself on the average plan. But let the central soul suddenly become
dominant, and he may, in the twinkling of an eye, turn upon the
partner of his joys with furious execration; he may change his
politics while you could snap your fingers; he may deal out deadly
insult to his dearest friend; he may get him, instanter, to a
monastery or a dance hall; he may elope, or hang himself--or he may
write a song or poem, or kiss his wife unasked, or give his funds to
the search of a microbe. Then the peripheral soul will return; and we
have our safe, sane citizen again. It is but the revolt of the Ego
against Order; and its effect is to shake up the atoms only that they
may settle where they belong. Geddie's revulsion had been a mild one--no more than a swim in a
summer sea after so inglorious an object as a drifting bottle. And
now he was himself again. Upon his desk, ready for the post, was a
letter to his government tendering his resignation as consul, to be
effective as soon as another could be appointed in his place. For
Bernard Brannigan, who never did things in a half-way manner, was to
take Geddie at once for a partner in his very profitable and various
enterprises; and Paula was happily engaged in plans for refurnishing
and decorating the upper story of the Brannigan house. The consul rose from his hammock when he saw the conspicuous stranger
in his door. "Keep your seat, old man," said the visitor, with an airy wave of his
large hand. "My name's Smith; and I've come in a yacht. You are the
consul--is that right? A big, cool guy on the beach directed me here. Thought I'd pay my respects to the flag." "Sit down," said Geddie. "I've been admiring your craft ever since it
came in sight. Looks like a fast sailer. What's her tonnage?" "Search me!" said Smith. "I don't know what she weighs in at. But
she's got a tidy gait. The _Rambler_--that's her name--don't take the
dust of anything afloat. This is my first trip on her. I'm taking a
squint along this coast just to get an idea of the countries where
the rubber and red pepper and revolutions come from. I had no idea
there was so much scenery down here. Why, Central Park ain't in it
with this neck of the woods. I'm from New York. They get monkeys, and
cocoanuts, and parrots down here--is that right?" "We have them all," said Geddie. "I'm quite sure that our fauna and
flora would take a prize over Central Park." "Maybe they would," admitted Smith, cheerfully. "I haven't seen them
yet. But I guess you've got us skinned on the animal and vegetation
question. You don't have much travel here, do you?" "Travel?" queried the consul. "I suppose you mean passengers on the
steamers. No; very few people land in Coralio. An investor now and
then--tourists and sight-seers generally go further down the coast to
one of the larger towns where there is a harbour." "I see a ship out there loading up with bananas," said Smith. "Any
passengers come on her?" "That's the _Karlsefin_," said the consul. "She's a tramp
fruiter--made her last trip to New York, I believe. No; she brought
no passengers. I saw her boat come ashore, and there was no one. About the only exciting recreation we have here is watching steamers
when they arrive; and a passenger on one of them generally causes
the whole town to turn out. If you are going to remain in Coralio
a while, Mr. Smith, I'll be glad to take you around to meet some
people. There are four or five American chaps that are good to know,
besides the native high-fliers." "Thanks," said the yachtsman, "but I wouldn't put you to the trouble. I'd like to meet the guys you speak of, but I won't be here long
enough to do much knocking around. That cool gent on the beach spoke
of a doctor; can you tell me where I could find him? The _Rambler_
ain't quite as steady on her feet as a Broadway hotel; and a fellow
gets a touch of seasickness now and then. Thought I'd strike the
croaker for a handful of the little sugar pills, in case I need 'em." "You will be apt to find Dr. Gregg at the hotel," said the consul. "You can see it from the door--it's that two-story building with the
balcony, where the orange-trees are." The Hotel de los Estranjeros was a dreary hostelry, in great disuse
both by strangers and friends. It stood at a corner of the Street of
the Holy Sepulchre. A grove of small orange-trees crowded against one
side of it, enclosed by a low, rock wall over which a tall man might
easily step. The house was of plastered adobe, stained a hundred
shades of colour by the salt breeze and the sun. Upon its upper
balcony opened a central door and two windows containing broad
jalousies instead of sashes. The lower floor communicated by two doorways with the narrow,
rock-paved sidewalk. The _pulperia_--or drinking shop--of the
proprietress, Madama Timotea Ortiz, occupied the ground floor. On the
bottles of brandy, _anisada_, Scotch "smoke" and inexpensive wines
behind the little counter the dust lay thick save where the fingers
of infrequent customers had left irregular prints. The upper story
contained four or five guest-rooms which were rarely put to their
destined use. Sometimes a fruit-grower, riding in from his plantation
to confer with his agent, would pass a melancholy night in the dismal
upper story; sometimes a minor native official on some trifling
government quest would have his pomp and majesty awed by Madama's
sepulchral hospitality. But Madama sat behind her bar content, not
desiring to quarrel with Fate. If anyone required meat, drink or
lodging at the Hotel de los Estranjeros they had but to come, and be
served. _Esta bueno._ If they came not, why, then, they came not. _Esta bueno._

As the exceptional yachtsman was making his way down the precarious
sidewalk of the Street of the Holy Sepulchre, the solitary permanent
guest of that decaying hotel sat at its door, enjoying the breeze
from the sea. Dr. Gregg, the quarantine physician, was a man of fifty or sixty,
with a florid face and the longest beard between Topeka and Terra
del Fuego. He held his position by virtue of an appointment by the
Board of Health of a seaport city in one of the Southern states. That city feared the ancient enemy of every Southern seaport--the
yellow fever--and it was the duty of Dr. Gregg to examine crew and
passengers of every vessel leaving Coralio for preliminary symptoms. The duties were light, and the salary, for one who lived in Coralio,
ample. Surplus time there was in plenty; and the good doctor added
to his gains by a large private practice among the residents of the
coast. The fact that he did not know ten words of Spanish was no
obstacle; a pulse could be felt and a fee collected without one being
a linguist. Add to the description the facts that the doctor had
a story to tell concerning the operation of trepanning which no
listener had ever allowed him to conclude, and that he believed
in brandy as a prophylactic; and the special points of interest
possessed by Dr. Gregg will have become exhausted. The doctor had dragged a chair to the sidewalk. He was coatless, and
he leaned back against the wall and smoked, while he stroked his
beard. Surprise came into his pale blue eyes when he caught sight of
Smith in his unusual and prismatic clothes. "You're Dr. Gregg--is that right?" said Smith, feeling the dog's head
pin in his tie. "The constable--I mean the consul, told me you hung
out at this caravansary. My name's Smith; and I came in a yacht. Taking a cruise around, looking at the monkeys and pineapple-trees. Come inside and have a drink, Doc. This cafe looks on the blink, but
I guess it can set out something wet." "I will join you, sir, in just a taste of brandy," said Dr. Gregg,
rising quickly. "I find that as a prophylactic a little brandy is
almost a necessity in this climate." As they turned to enter the _pulperia_ a native man, barefoot,
glided noiselessly up and addressed the doctor in Spanish. He was
yellowish-brown, like an over-ripe lemon; he wore a cotton shirt and
ragged linen trousers girded by a leather belt. His face was like an
animal's, live and wary, but without promise of much intelligence. This man jabbered with animation and so much seriousness that it
seemed a pity that his words were to be wasted. Dr. Gregg felt his pulse. "You sick?" he inquired. "_Mi mujer esta enferma en la casa_," said the man, thus endeavouring
to convey the news, in the only language open to him, that his wife
lay ill in her palm-thatched hut. The doctor drew a handful of capsules filled with a white powder from
his trousers pocket. He counted out ten of them into the native's
hand, and held up his forefinger impressively. "Take one," said the doctor, "every two hours." He then held up two
fingers, shaking them emphatically before the native's face. Next he
pulled out his watch and ran his finger round its dial twice. Again
the two fingers confronted the patient's nose. "Two--two--two hours,"
repeated the doctor. "_Si, Senor_," said the native, sadly. He pulled a cheap silver watch from his own pocket and laid it in
the doctor's hand. "Me bring," said he, struggling painfully with
his scant English, "other watchy to-morrow." Then he departed
downheartedly with his capsules. "A very ignorant race of people, sir," said the doctor, as he slipped
the watch into his pocket. "He seems to have mistaken my directions
for taking the physic for the fee. However, it is all right. He owes
me an account, anyway. The chances are that he won't bring the other
watch. You can't depend on anything they promise you. About that
drink, now? How did you come to Coralio, Mr. Smith? I was not aware
that any boats except the _Karlsefin_ had arrived for some days." The two leaned against the deserted bar; and Madama set out a bottle
without waiting for the doctor's order. There was no dust on it. After they had drank twice Smith said:

"You say there were no passengers on the _Karlsefin_, Doc? Are you
sure about that? It seems to me I heard somebody down on the beach
say that there was one or two aboard." "They were mistaken, sir. I myself went out and put all hands through
a medical examination, as usual. The _Karlsefin_ sails as soon as she
gets her bananas loaded, which will be about daylight in the morning,
and she got everything ready this afternoon. No, sir, there was no
passenger list. Like that Three-Star? A French schooner landed two
slooploads of it a month ago. If any customs duties on it went to the
distinguished republic of Anchuria you may have my hat. If you won't
have another, come out and let's sit in the cool a while. It isn't
often we exiles get a chance to talk with somebody from the outside
world." The doctor brought out another chair to the sidewalk for his new
acquaintance. The two seated themselves. "You are a man of the world," said Dr. Gregg; "a man of travel and
experience. Your decision in a matter of ethics and, no doubt, on
the points of equity, ability and professional probity should be of
value. I would be glad if you will listen to the history of a case
that I think stands unique in medical annals. "About nine years ago, while I was engaged in the practice of
medicine in my native city, I was called to treat a case of contusion
of the skull. I made the diagnosis that a splinter of bone was
pressing upon the brain, and that the surgical operation known as
trepanning was required. However, as the patient was a gentleman of
wealth and position, I called in for consultation Dr.--"

Smith rose from his chair, and laid a hand, soft with apology, upon
the doctor's shirt sleeve. "Say, Doc," he said, solemnly, "I want to hear that story. You've got
me interested; and I don't want to miss the rest of it. I know it's a
loola by the way it begins; and I want to tell it at the next meeting
of the Barney O'Flynn Association, if you don't mind. But I've got
one or two matters to attend to first. If I get 'em attended to
in time I'll come right back and hear you spiel the rest before
bedtime--is that right?" "By all means," said the doctor, "get your business attended to,
and then return. I shall wait up for you. You see, one of the most
prominent physicians at the consultation diagnosed the trouble as a
blood clot; another said it was an abscess, but I--"

"Don't tell me now, Doc. Don't spoil the story. Wait till I come
back. I want to hear it as it runs off the reel--is that right?" The mountains reached up their bulky shoulders to receive the level
gallop of Apollo's homing steeds, the day died in the lagoons and
in the shadowed banana groves and in the mangrove swamps, where the
great blue crabs were beginning to crawl to land for their nightly
ramble. And it died, at last, upon the highest peaks. Then the brief
twilight, ephemeral as the flight of a moth, came and went; the
Southern Cross peeped with its topmost eye above a row of palms,
and the fire-flies heralded with their torches the approach of
soft-footed night. In the offing the _Karlsefin_ swayed at anchor, her lights seeming
to penetrate the water to countless fathoms with their shimmering,
lanceolate reflections. The Caribs were busy loading her by means of
the great lighters heaped full from the piles of fruit ranged upon
the shore. On the sandy beach, with his back against a cocoanut-tree and the
stubs of many cigars lying around him, Smith sat waiting, never
relaxing his sharp gaze in the direction of the steamer. The incongruous yachtsman had concentrated his interest upon the
innocent fruiter. Twice had he been assured that no passengers had
come to Coralio on board of her. And yet, with a persistence not to
be attributed to an idling voyager, he had appealed the case to the
higher court of his own eyesight. Surprisingly like some gay-coated
lizard, he crouched at the foot of the cocoanut palm, and with the
beady, shifting eyes of the selfsame reptile, sustained his espionage
on the _Karlsefin_. On the white sands a whiter gig belonging to the yacht was drawn up,
guarded by one of the white-ducked crew. Not far away in a _pulperia_
on the shore-following Calle Grande three other sailors swaggered
with their cues around Coralio's solitary billiard-table. The boat
lay there as if under orders to be ready for use at any moment. There
was in the atmosphere a hint of expectation, of waiting for something
to occur, which was foreign to the air of Coralio. Like some passing bird of brilliant plumage, Smith alights on this
palmy shore but to preen his wings for an instant and then to fly
away upon silent pinions. When morning dawned there was no Smith, no
waiting gig, no yacht in the offing. Smith left no intimation of his
mission there, no footprints to show where he had followed the trail
of his mystery on the sands of Coralio that night. He came; he spake
his strange jargon of the asphalt and the cafes; he sat under the
cocoanut-tree, and vanished. The next morning Coralio, Smithless,
ate its fried plantain and said: "The man of pictured clothing went
himself away." With the _siesta_ the incident passed, yawning, into
history. So, for a time, must Smith pass behind the scenes of the play. He
comes no more to Coralio nor to Doctor Gregg, who sits in vain,
wagging his redundant beard, waiting to enrich his derelict audience
with his moving tale of trepanning and jealousy. But prosperously to the lucidity of these loose pages, Smith shall
flutter among them again. In the nick of time he shall come to tell
us why he strewed so many anxious cigar stumps around the cocoanut
palm that night. This he must do; for, when he sailed away before
the dawn in his yacht _Rambler_, he carried with him the answer to a
riddle so big and preposterous that few in Anchuria had ventured even
to propound it. IV

CAUGHT


The plans for the detention of the flying President Miraflores
and his companion at the coast line seemed hardly likely to fail. Dr. Zavalla himself had gone to the port of Alazan to establish a
guard at that point. At Solitas the Liberal patriot Varras could be
depended upon to keep close watch. Goodwin held himself responsible
for the district about Coralio. The news of the president's flight had been disclosed to no one in
the coast towns save trusted members of the ambitious political party
that was desirous of succeeding to power. The telegraph wire running
from San Mateo to the coast had been cut far up on the mountain trail
by an emissary of Zavalla's. Long before this could be repaired and
word received along it from the capital the fugitives would have
reached the coast and the question of escape or capture been solved. Goodwin had stationed armed sentinels at frequent intervals along the
shore for a mile in each direction from Coralio. They were instructed
to keep a vigilant lookout during the night to prevent Miraflores
from attempting to embark stealthily by means of some boat or sloop
found by chance at the water's edge. A dozen patrols walked the
streets of Coralio unsuspected, ready to intercept the truant
official should he show himself there. Goodwin was very well convinced that no precautions had been
overlooked. He strolled about the streets that bore such
high-sounding names and were but narrow, grass-covered lanes, lending
his own aid to the vigil that had been intrusted to him by Bob
Englehart. The town had begun the tepid round of its nightly diversions. A few
leisurely dandies, clad in white duck, with flowing neckties, and
swinging slim bamboo canes, threaded the grassy by-ways toward the
houses of their favoured senoritas. Those who wooed the art of music
dragged tirelessly at whining concertinas, or fingered lugubrious
guitars at doors and windows. An occasional soldier from the
_cuartel_, with flapping straw hat, without coat or shoes, hurried
by, balancing his long gun like a lance in one hand. From every
density of the foliage the giant tree frogs sounded their loud and
irritating clatter. Further out, where the by-ways perished at the
brink of the jungle, the guttural cries of marauding baboons and the
coughing of the alligators in the black estuaries fractured the vain
silence of the wood. By ten o'clock the streets were deserted. The oil lamps that had
burned, a sickly yellow, at random corners, had been extinguished
by some economical civic agent. Coralio lay sleeping calmly between
toppling mountains and encroaching sea like a stolen babe in the arms
of its abductors. Somewhere over in that tropical darkness--perhaps
already threading the profundities of the alluvial lowlands--the high
adventurer and his mate were moving toward land's end. The game of
Fox-in-the-Morning should be coming soon to its close. Goodwin, at his deliberate gait, passed the long, low _cuartel_ where
Coralio's contingent of Anchuria's military force slumbered, with its
bare toes pointed heavenward. There was a law that no civilian might
come so near the headquarters of that citadel of war after nine
o'clock, but Goodwin was always forgetting the minor statutes. "_Quien vive?_" shrieked the sentinel, wrestling prodigiously with
his lengthy musket. "_Americano_," growled Goodwin, without turning his head, and passed
on, unhalted. To the right he turned, and to the left up the street that ultimately
reached the Plaza Nacional. When within the toss of a cigar stump
from the intersecting Street of the Holy Sepulchre, he stopped
suddenly in the pathway. He saw the form of a tall man, clothed in black and carrying a large
valise, hurry down the cross-street in the direction of the beach. And Goodwin's second glance made him aware of a woman at the man's
elbow on the farther side, who seemed to urge forward, if not even to
assist, her companion in their swift but silent progress. They were
no Coralians, those two. Goodwin followed at increased speed, but without any of the artful
tactics that are so dear to the heart of the sleuth. The American was
too broad to feel the instinct of the detective. He stood as an agent
for the people of Anchuria, and but for political reasons he would
have demanded then and there the money. It was the design of his
party to secure the imperilled fund, to restore it to the treasury
of the country, and to declare itself in power without bloodshed or
resistance. The couple halted at the door of the Hotel de los Estranjeros, and
the man struck upon the wood with the impatience of one unused to his
entry being stayed. Madama was long in response; but after a time her
light showed, the door was opened, and the guests housed. Goodwin stood in the quiet street, lighting another cigar. In
two minutes a faint gleam began to show between the slats of the
jalousies in the upper story of the hotel. "They have engaged rooms,"
said Goodwin to himself. "So, then, their arrangements for sailing
have yet to be made." At that moment there came along one Esteban Delgado, a barber, an
enemy to existing government, a jovial plotter against stagnation
in any form. This barber was one of Coralio's saddest dogs, often
remaining out of doors as late as eleven, post meridian. He was a
partisan Liberal; and he greeted Goodwin with flatulent importance as
a brother in the cause. But he had something important to tell. "What think you, Don Frank!" he cried, in the universal tone of the
conspirator. "I have to-night shaved _la barba_--what you call the
'weeskers' of the _Presidente_ himself, of this countree! Consider! He sent for me to come. In the poor _casita_ of an old woman he
awaited me--in a verree leetle house in a dark place. _Carramba!_--el
Senor Presidente to make himself thus secret and obscured! I think he
desired not to be known--but, _carajo!_ can you shave a man and not
see his face? This gold piece he gave me, and said it was to be all
quite still. I think, Don Frank, there is what you call a chip over
the bug." "Have you ever seen President Miraflores before?" asked Goodwin. "But once," answered Esteban. "He is tall; and he had weeskers,
verree black and sufficient." "Was anyone else present when you shaved him?" "An old Indian woman, Senor, that belonged with the _casa_, and one
senorita--a ladee of so much beautee!--_ah, Dios!_"

"All right, Esteban," said Goodwin. "It's very lucky that
you happened along with your tonsorial information. The new
administration will be likely to remember you for this." Then in a few words he made the barber acquainted with the crisis
into which the affairs of the nation had culminated, and instructed
him to remain outside, keeping watch upon the two sides of the hotel
that looked upon the street, and observing whether anyone should
attempt to leave the house by any door or window. Goodwin himself
went to the door through which the guests had entered, opened it and
stepped inside. Madama had returned downstairs from her journey above to see after
the comfort of her lodgers. Her candle stood upon the bar. She was
about to take a thimbleful of rum as a solace for having her rest
disturbed. She looked up without surprise or alarm as her third
caller entered. "Ah! it is the Senor Goodwin. Not often does he honour my poor house
by his presence." "I must come oftener," said Goodwin, with the Goodwin smile. "I hear
that your cognac is the best between Belize to the north and Rio to
the south. Set out the bottle, Madama, and let us have the proof in
_un vasito_ for each of us." "My _aguardiente_," said Madama, with pride, "is the best. It grows,
in beautiful bottles, in the dark places among the banana-trees. _Si,
Senor._ Only at midnight can they be picked by sailor-men who bring
them, before daylight comes, to your back door. Good _aguardiente_ is
a verree difficult fruit to handle, Senor Goodwin." Smuggling, in Coralio, was much nearer than competition to being the
life of trade. One spoke of it slyly, yet with a certain conceit,
when it had been well accomplished. "You have guests in the house to-night," said Goodwin, laying a
silver dollar upon the counter. "Why not?" said Madama, counting the change. "Two; but the smallest
while finished to arrive. One senor, not quite old, and one senorita
of sufficient handsomeness. To their rooms they have ascended, not
desiring the to-eat nor the to-drink. Two rooms--_Numero_ 9 and
_Numero_ 10." "I was expecting that gentleman and that lady," said Goodwin. "I have
important _negocios_ that must be transacted. Will you allow me to
see them?" "Why not?" sighed Madama, placidly. "Why should not Senor Goodwin
ascend and speak to his friends? _Esta bueno._ Room _Numero_ 9 and
room _Numero_ 10." Goodwin loosened in his coat pocket the American revolver that he
carried, and ascended the steep, dark stairway. In the hallway above, the saffron light from a hanging lamp allowed
him to select the gaudy numbers on the doors. He turned the knob of
Number 9, entered and closed the door behind him. If that was Isabel Guilbert seated by the table in that poorly
furnished room, report had failed to do her charms justice. She
rested her head upon one hand. Extreme fatigue was signified in every
line of her figure; and upon her countenance a deep perplexity was
written. Her eyes were gray-irised, and of that mould that seems to
have belonged to the orbs of all the famous queens of hearts. Their
whites were singularly clear and brilliant, concealed above the
irises by heavy horizontal lids, and showing a snowy line below them. Such eyes denote great nobility, vigour, and, if you can conceive of
it, a most generous selfishness. She looked up when the American
entered with an expression of surprised inquiry, but without alarm. Goodwin took off his hat and seated himself, with his characteristic
deliberate ease, upon a corner of the table. He held a lighted cigar
between his fingers. He took this familiar course because he was sure
that preliminaries would be wasted upon Miss Guilbert. He knew her
history, and the small part that the conventions had played in it. "Good evening," he said. "Now, madame, let us come to business at
once. You will observe that I mention no names, but I know who is in
the next room, and what he carries in that valise. That is the point
which brings me here. I have come to dictate terms of surrender." The lady neither moved nor replied, but steadily regarded the cigar
in Goodwin's hand. "We," continued the dictator, thoughtfully regarding the neat
buckskin shoe on his gently swinging foot--"I speak for a
considerable majority of the people--demand the return of the stolen
funds belonging to them. Our terms go very little further than that. They are very simple. As an accredited spokesman, I promise that our
interference will cease if they are accepted. Give up the money, and
you and your companion will be permitted to proceed wherever you
will. In fact, assistance will be given you in the matter of securing
a passage by any outgoing vessel you may choose. It is on my personal
responsibility that I add congratulations to the gentleman in Number
10 upon his taste in feminine charms." Returning his cigar to his mouth, Goodwin observed her, and saw that
her eyes followed it and rested upon it with icy and significant
concentration. Apparently she had not heard a word he had said. He
understood, tossed the cigar out the window, and, with an amused
laugh, slid from the table to his feet. "That is better," said the lady. "It makes it possible for me to
listen to you. For a second lesson in good manners, you might now
tell me by whom I am being insulted." "I am sorry," said Goodwin, leaning one hand on the table, "that my
time is too brief for devoting much of it to a course of etiquette. Come, now; I appeal to your good sense. You have shown yourself,
in more than one instance, to be well aware of what is to your
advantage. This is an occasion that demands the exercise of your
undoubted intelligence. There is no mystery here. I am Frank Goodwin;
and I have come for the money. I entered this room at a venture. Had
I entered the other I would have had it before now. Do you want it in
words? The gentleman in Number 10 has betrayed a great trust. He has
robbed his people of a large sum, and it is I who will prevent their
losing it. I do not say who that gentleman is; but if I should be
forced to see him and he should prove to be a certain high official
of the republic, it will be my duty to arrest him. The house is
guarded. I am offering you liberal terms. It is not absolutely
necessary that I confer personally with the gentleman in the next
room. Bring me the valise containing the money, and we will call the
affair ended." The lady arose from her chair and stood for a moment, thinking
deeply. "Do you live here, Mr. Goodwin?" she asked, presently. "Yes." "What is your authority for this intrusion?" "I am an instrument of the republic. I was advised by wire of the
movements of the--gentleman in Number 10." "May I ask you two or three questions? I believe you to be a man more
apt to be truthful than--timid. What sort of a town is this--Coralio,
I think they call it?" "Not much of a town," said Goodwin, smiling. "A banana town, as they
run. Grass huts, 'dobes, five or six two-story houses, accommodations
limited, population half-breed Spanish and Indian, Caribs and
blackamoors. No sidewalks to speak of, no amusements. Rather unmoral. That's an offhand sketch, of course." "Are there any inducements, say in a social or in a business way, for
people to reside here?" "Oh, yes," answered Goodwin, smiling broadly. "There are no afternoon
teas, no hand-organs, no department stores--and there is no
extradition treaty." "He told me," went on the lady, speaking as if to herself, and with
a slight frown, "that there were towns on this coast of beauty and
importance; that there was a pleasing social order--especially an
American colony of cultured residents." "There is an American colony," said Goodwin, gazing at her in some
wonder. "Some of the members are all right. Some are fugitives
from justice from the States. I recall two exiled bank presidents,
one army paymaster under a cloud, a couple of manslayers, and a
widow--arsenic, I believe, was the suspicion in her case. I myself
complete the colony, but, as yet, I have not distinguished myself by
any particular crime." "Do not lose hope," said the lady, dryly; "I see nothing in your
actions to-night to guarantee you further obscurity. Some mistake
has been made; I do not know just where. But _him_ you shall not
disturb to-night. The journey has fatigued him so that he has fallen
asleep, I think, in his clothes. You talk of stolen money! I do not
understand you. Some mistake has been made. I will convince you. Remain where you are and I will bring you the valise that you seem to
covet so, and show it to you." She moved toward the closed door that connected the two rooms, but
stopped, and half turned and bestowed upon Goodwin a grave, searching
look that ended in a quizzical smile. "You force my door," she said, "and you follow your ruffianly
behaviour with the basest accusations; and yet"--she hesitated, as if
to reconsider what she was about to say--"and yet--it is a puzzling
thing--I am sure there has been some mistake." She took a step toward the door, but Goodwin stayed her by a light
touch upon her arm. I have said before that women turned to look at
him in the streets. He was the viking sort of man, big, good-looking,
and with an air of kindly truculence. She was dark and proud, glowing
or pale as her mood moved her. I do not know if Eve were light or
dark, but if such a woman had stood in the garden I know that the
apple would have been eaten. This woman was to be Goodwin's fate,
and he did not know it; but he must have felt the first throes of
destiny, for, as he faced her, the knowledge of what report named her
turned bitter in his throat. "If there has been any mistake," he said, hotly, "it was yours. I do
not blame the man who has lost his country, his honour, and is about
to lose the poor consolation of his stolen riches as much as I blame
you, for, by Heaven! I can very well see how he was brought to it. I can understand, and pity him. It is such women as you that strew
this degraded coast with wretched exiles, that make men forget their
trusts, that drag--"

The lady interrupted him with a weary gesture. "There is no need to continue your insults," she said, coldly. "I do not understand what you are saying, nor do I know what mad
blunder you are making; but if the inspection of the contents of
a gentleman's portmanteau will rid me of you, let us delay it no
longer." She passed quickly and noiselessly into the other room, and returned
with the heavy leather valise, which she handed to the American with
an air of patient contempt. Goodwin set the valise quickly upon the table and began to unfasten
the straps. The lady stood by, with an expression of infinite scorn
and weariness upon her face. The valise opened wide to a powerful, sidelong wrench. Goodwin
dragged out two or three articles of clothing, exposing the bulk of
its contents--package after package of tightly packed United States
bank and treasury notes of large denomination. Reckoning from the
high figures written upon the paper bands that bound them, the total
must have come closely upon the hundred thousand mark. Goodwin glanced swiftly at the woman, and saw, with surprise and a
thrill of pleasure that he wondered at, that she had experienced
an unmistakable shock. Her eyes grew wide, she gasped, and leaned
heavily against the table. She had been ignorant, then, he inferred,
that her companion had looted the government treasury. But why, he
angrily asked himself, should he be so well pleased to think this
wandering and unscrupulous singer not so black as report had painted
her? A noise in the other room startled them both. The door swung open,
and a tall, elderly, dark complexioned man, recently shaven, hurried
into the room. All the pictures of President Miraflores represent him as the
possessor of a luxuriant supply of dark and carefully tended
whiskers; but the story of the barber, Esteban, had prepared Goodwin
for the change. The man stumbled in from the dark room, his eyes blinking at the
lamplight, and heavy from sleep. "What does this mean?" he demanded in excellent English, with a keen
and perturbed look at the American--"robbery?" "Very near it," answered Goodwin. "But I rather think I'm in time to
prevent it. I represent the people to whom this money belongs, and
I have come to convey it back to them." He thrust his hand into a
pocket of his loose, linen coat. The other man's hand went quickly behind him. "Don't draw," called Goodwin, sharply; "I've got you covered from my
pocket." The lady stepped forward, and laid one hand upon the shoulder of
her hesitating companion. She pointed to the table. "Tell me the
truth--the truth," she said, in a low voice. "Whose money is that?" The man did not answer. He gave a deep, long-drawn sigh, leaned and
kissed her on the forehead, stepped back into the other room and
closed the door. Goodwin foresaw his purpose, and jumped for the door, but the report
of the pistol echoed as his hand touched the knob. A heavy fall
followed, and some one swept him aside and struggled into the room of
the fallen man. A desolation, thought Goodwin, greater than that derived from
the loss of cavalier and gold must have been in the heart of the
enchantress to have wrung from her, in that moment, the cry of one
turning to the all-forgiving, all-comforting earthly consoler--to
have made her call out from that bloody and dishonoured room--"Oh,
mother, mother, mother!" But there was an alarm outside. The barber, Esteban, at the sound
of the shot, had raised his voice; and the shot itself had aroused
half the town. A pattering of feet came up the street, and official
orders rang out on the still air. Goodwin had a duty to perform. Circumstances had made him the custodian of his adopted country's
treasure. Swiftly cramming the money into the valise, he closed it,
leaned far out of the window and dropped it into a thick orange-tree
in the little inclosure below. They will tell you in Coralio, as they delight in telling the
stranger, of the conclusion of that tragic flight. They will tell
you how the upholders of the law came apace when the alarm was
sounded--the _Comandante_ in red slippers and a jacket like a head
waiter's and girded sword, the soldiers with their interminable guns,
followed by outnumbering officers struggling into their gold lace and
epaulettes; the barefooted policemen (the only capables in the lot),
and ruffled citizens of every hue and description. They say that the countenance of the dead man was marred sadly by the
effects of the shot; but he was identified as the fallen president
by both Goodwin and the barber Esteban. On the next morning messages
began to come over the mended telegraph wire; and the story of the
flight from the capital was given out to the public. In San Mateo the
revolutionary party had seized the sceptre of government, without
opposition, and the _vivas_ of the mercurial populace quickly effaced
the interest belonging to the unfortunate Miraflores. They will relate to you how the new government sifted the towns and
raked the roads to find the valise containing Anchuria's surplus
capital, which the president was known to have carried with him, but
all in vain. In Coralio Senor Goodwin himself led the searching party
which combed that town as carefully as a woman combs her hair; but
the money was not found. So they buried the dead man, without honours, back of the town near
the little bridge that spans the mangrove swamp; and for a _real_ a
boy will show you his grave. They say that the old woman in whose hut
the barber shaved the president placed the wooden slab at his head,
and burned the inscription upon it with a hot iron. You will hear also that Senor Goodwin, like a tower of strength,
shielded Dona Isabel Guilbert through those subsequent distressful
days; and that his scruples as to her past career (if he had any)
vanished; and her adventuresome waywardness (if she had any) left
her, and they were wedded and were happy. The American built a home on a little foothill near the town. It is a
conglomerate structure of native woods that, exported, would be worth
a fortune, and of brick, palm, glass, bamboo and adobe. There is a
paradise of nature about it; and something of the same sort within. The natives speak of its interior with hands uplifted in admiration. There are floors polished like mirrors and covered with hand-woven
Indian rugs of silk fibre, tall ornaments and pictures, musical
instruments and papered walls--"figure-it-to-yourself!" they exclaim. But they cannot tell you in Coralio (as you shall learn) what became
of the money that Frank Goodwin dropped into the orange-tree. But
that shall come later; for the palms are fluttering in the breeze,
bidding us to sport and gaiety. V

CUPID'S EXILE NUMBER TWO


The United States of America, after looking over its stock of
consular timber, selected Mr. John De Graffenreid Atwood, of
Dalesburg, Alabama, for a successor to Willard Geddie, resigned. Without prejudice to Mr. Atwood, it will have to be acknowledged
that, in this instance, it was the man who sought the office. As with
the self-banished Geddie, it was nothing less than the artful smiles
of lovely woman that had driven Johnny Atwood to the desperate
expedient of accepting office under a despised Federal Government so
that he might go far, far away and never see again the false, fair
face that had wrecked his young life. The consulship at Coralio
seemed to offer a retreat sufficiently removed and romantic enough
to inject the necessary drama into the pastoral scenes of Dalesburg
life. It was while playing the part of Cupid's exile that Johnny added his
handiwork to the long list of casualties along the Spanish Main by
his famous manipulation of the shoe market, and his unparalleled feat
of elevating the most despised and useless weed in his own country
from obscurity to be a valuable product in international commerce. The trouble began, as trouble often begins instead of ending, with a
romance. In Dalesburg there was a man named Elijah Hemstetter, who
kept a general store. His family consisted of one daughter called
Rosine, a name that atoned much for "Hemstetter." This young woman
was possessed of plentiful attractions, so that the young men of the
community were agitated in their bosoms. Among the more agitated
was Johnny, the son of Judge Atwood, who lived in the big colonial
mansion on the edge of Dalesburg. It would seem that the desirable Rosine should have been pleased to
return the affection of an Atwood, a name honoured all over the state
long before and since the war. It does seem that she should have
gladly consented to have been led into that stately but rather empty
colonial mansion. But not so. There was a cloud on the horizon, a
threatening, cumulus cloud, in the shape of a lively and shrewd young
farmer in the neighbourhood who dared to enter the lists as a rival
to the high-born Atwood. One night Johnny propounded to Rosine a question that is considered
of much importance by the young of the human species. The accessories
were all there--moonlight, oleanders, magnolias, the mock-bird's
song. Whether or no the shadow of Pinkney Dawson, the prosperous
young farmer, came between them on that occasion is not known; but
Rosine's answer was unfavourable. Mr. John De Graffenreid Atwood
bowed till his hat touched the lawn grass, and went away with his
head high, but with a sore wound in his pedigree and heart. A
Hemstetter refuse an Atwood! Zounds! Among other accidents of that year was a Democratic president. Judge
Atwood was a warhorse of Democracy. Johnny persuaded him to set the
wheels moving for some foreign appointment. He would go away--away. Perhaps in years to come Rosine would think how true, how faithful
his love had been, and would drop a tear--maybe in the cream she
would be skimming for Pink Dawson's breakfast. The wheels of politics revolved; and Johnny was appointed consul to
Coralio. Just before leaving he dropped in at Hemstetter's to say
good-bye. There was a queer, pinkish look about Rosine's eyes; and
had the two been alone, the United States might have had to cast
about for another consul. But Pink Dawson was there, of course,
talking about his 400-acre orchard, and the three-mile alfalfa tract,
and the 200-acre pasture. So Johnny shook hands with Rosine as coolly
as if he were only going to run up to Montgomery for a couple of
days. They had the royal manner when they chose, those Atwoods. "If you happen to strike anything in the way of a good investment
down there, Johnny," said Pink Dawson, "just let me know, will you? I
reckon I could lay my hands on a few extra thousands 'most any time
for a profitable deal." "Certainly, Pink," said Johnny, pleasantly. "If I strike anything of
the sort I'll let you in with pleasure." So Johnny went down to Mobile and took a fruit steamer for the coast
of Anchuria. When the new consul arrived in Coralio the strangeness of the scenes
diverted him much. He was only twenty-two; and the grief of youth is
not worn like a garment as it is by older men. It has its seasons
when it reigns; and then it is unseated for a time by the assertion
of the keen senses. Billy Keogh and Johnny seemed to conceive a mutual friendship at
once. Keogh took the new consul about town and presented him to the
handful of Americans and the smaller number of French and Germans
who made up the "foreign" contingent. And then, of course, he had to
be more formally introduced to the native officials, and have his
credentials transmitted through an interpreter. There was something about the young Southerner that the sophisticated
Keogh liked. His manner was simple almost to boyishness; but he
possessed the cool carelessness of a man of far greater age and
experience. Neither uniforms nor titles, red tape nor foreign
languages, mountains nor sea weighed upon his spirits. He was heir
to all the ages, an Atwood, of Dalesburg; and you might know every
thought conceived in his bosom. Geddie came down to the consulate to explain the duties and workings
of the office. He and Keogh tried to interest the new consul in their
description of the work that his government expected him to perform. "It's all right," said Johnny from the hammock that he had set up as
the official reclining place. "If anything turns up that has to be
done I'll let you fellows do it. You can't expect a Democrat to work
during his first term of holding office." "You might look over these headings," suggested Geddie, "of the
different lines of exports you will have to keep account of. The
fruit is classified; and there are the valuable woods, coffee,
rubber--"

"That last account sounds all right," interrupted Mr. Atwood. "Sounds
as if it could be stretched. I want to buy a new flag, a monkey, a
guitar and a barrel of pineapples. Will that rubber account stretch
over 'em?" "That's merely statistics," said Geddie, smiling. "The expense
account is what you want. It is supposed to have a slight elasticity. The 'stationery' items are sometimes carelessly audited by the State
Department." "We're wasting our time," said Keogh. "This man was born to hold
office. He penetrates to the root of the art at one step of his eagle
eye. The true genius of government shows its hand in every word of
his speech." "I didn't take this job with any intention of working," explained
Johnny, lazily. 