



Transcribed from the 1920 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





LIFE'S LITTLE IRONIES
A SET OF TALES
WITH SOME COLLOQUIAL SKETCHES
ENTITLED
A FEW CRUSTED CHARACTERS


BY
THOMAS HARDY

WITH A MAP OF WESSEX

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
1920

COPYRIGHT

_First Collected Edition_ 1894. _New Edition and reprints_ 1896-1900
_First published by Macmillan & Co._, _Crown_ 8_ov_, 1903. _Reprinted_
1910, 1915
_Pockets Edition_ 1907, 1910, 1913, 1916, 1919 (_twice_), 1920
_Wessex Edition_ 1912




CONTENTS


The Son's Veto
For Conscience' Sake
A Tragedy of Two Ambitions
On the Western Circuit
To Please his Wife
The Melancholy Hussar of the German Legion
A Tradition of Eighteen Hundred and Four
A Few Crusted Characters




THE SON'S VETO


CHAPTER I


To the eyes of a man viewing it from behind, the nut-brown hair was a
wonder and a mystery. Under the black beaver hat, surmounted by its tuft
of black feathers, the long locks, braided and twisted and coiled like
the rushes of a basket, composed a rare, if somewhat barbaric, example of
ingenious art. One could understand such weavings and coilings being
wrought to last intact for a year, or even a calendar month; but that
they should be all demolished regularly at bedtime, after a single day of
permanence, seemed a reckless waste of successful fabrication. And she had done it all herself, poor thing. She had no maid, and it was
almost the only accomplishment she could boast of. Hence the unstinted
pains. She was a young invalid lady--not so very much of an invalid--sitting in
a wheeled chair, which had been pulled up in the front part of a green
enclosure, close to a bandstand, where a concert was going on, during a
warm June afternoon. It had place in one of the minor parks or private
gardens that are to be found in the suburbs of London, and was the effort
of a local association to raise money for some charity. There are worlds
within worlds in the great city, and though nobody outside the immediate
district had ever heard of the charity, or the band, or the garden, the
enclosure was filled with an interested audience sufficiently informed on
all these. As the strains proceeded many of the listeners observed the chaired lady,
whose back hair, by reason of her prominent position, so challenged
inspection. Her face was not easily discernible, but the aforesaid
cunning tress-weavings, the white ear and poll, and the curve of a cheek
which was neither flaccid nor sallow, were signals that led to the
expectation of good beauty in front. Such expectations are not
infrequently disappointed as soon as the disclosure comes; and in the
present case, when the lady, by a turn of the head, at length revealed
herself, she was not so handsome as the people behind her had supposed,
and even hoped--they did not know why. For one thing (alas! the commonness of this complaint), she was less
young than they had fancied her to be. Yet attractive her face
unquestionably was, and not at all sickly. The revelation of its details
came each time she turned to talk to a boy of twelve or thirteen who
stood beside her, and the shape of whose hat and jacket implied that he
belonged to a well-known public school. The immediate bystanders could
hear that he called her 'Mother.' When the end of the recital was reached, and the audience withdrew, many
chose to find their way out by passing at her elbow. Almost all turned
their heads to take a full and near look at the interesting woman, who
remained stationary in the chair till the way should be clear enough for
her to be wheeled out without obstruction. As if she expected their
glances, and did not mind gratifying their curiosity, she met the eyes of
several of her observers by lifting her own, showing these to be soft,
brown, and affectionate orbs, a little plaintive in their regard. She was conducted out of the gardens, and passed along the pavement till
she disappeared from view, the schoolboy walking beside her. To
inquiries made by some persons who watched her away, the answer came that
she was the second wife of the incumbent of a neighbouring parish, and
that she was lame. She was generally believed to be a woman with a
story--an innocent one, but a story of some sort or other. In conversing with her on their way home the boy who walked at her elbow
said that he hoped his father had not missed them. 'He have been so comfortable these last few hours that I am sure he
cannot have missed us,' she replied. '_Has_, dear mother--not _have_!' exclaimed the public-school boy, with
an impatient fastidiousness that was almost harsh. 'Surely you know that
by this time!' His mother hastily adopted the correction, and did not resent his making
it, or retaliate, as she might well have done, by bidding him to wipe
that crumby mouth of his, whose condition had been caused by
surreptitious attempts to eat a piece of cake without taking it out of
the pocket wherein it lay concealed. After this the pretty woman and the
boy went onward in silence. That question of grammar bore upon her history, and she fell into
reverie, of a somewhat sad kind to all appearance. It might have been
assumed that she was wondering if she had done wisely in shaping her life
as she had shaped it, to bring out such a result as this. In a remote nook in North Wessex, forty miles from London, near the
thriving county-town of Aldbrickham, there stood a pretty village with
its church and parsonage, which she knew well enough, but her son had
never seen. It was her native village, Gaymead, and the first event
bearing upon her present situation had occurred at that place when she
was only a girl of nineteen. How well she remembered it, that first act in her little tragi-comedy,
the death of her reverend husband's first wife. It happened on a spring
evening, and she who now and for many years had filled that first wife's
place was then parlour-maid in the parson's house. When everything had been done that could be done, and the death was
announced, she had gone out in the dusk to visit her parents, who were
living in the same village, to tell them the sad news. As she opened the
white swing-gate and looked towards the trees which rose westward,
shutting out the pale light of the evening sky, she discerned, without
much surprise, the figure of a man standing in the hedge, though she
roguishly exclaimed as a matter of form, 'Oh, Sam, how you frightened
me!' He was a young gardener of her acquaintance. She told him the
particulars of the late event, and they stood silent, these two young
people, in that elevated, calmly philosophic mind which is engendered
when a tragedy has happened close at hand, and has not happened to the
philosophers themselves. But it had its bearing upon their relations. 'And will you stay on now at the Vicarage, just the same?' asked he. She had hardly thought of that. 'Oh, yes--I suppose!' she said. 'Everything will be just as usual, I imagine?' He walked beside her towards her mother's. Presently his arm stole round
her waist. She gently removed it; but he placed it there again, and she
yielded the point. 'You see, dear Sophy, you don't know that you'll stay
on; you may want a home; and I shall be ready to offer one some day,
though I may not be ready just yet. 'Why, Sam, how can you be so fast! I've never even said I liked 'ee; and
it is all your own doing, coming after me!' 'Still, it is nonsense to say I am not to have a try at you like the
rest.' He stooped to kiss her a farewell, for they had reached her
mother's door. 'No, Sam; you sha'n't!' she cried, putting her hand over his mouth. 'You
ought to be more serious on such a night as this.' And she bade him
adieu without allowing him to kiss her or to come indoors. The vicar just left a widower was at this time a man about forty years of
age, of good family, and childless. He had led a secluded existence in
this college living, partly because there were no resident landowners;
and his loss now intensified his habit of withdrawal from outward
observation. He was still less seen than heretofore, kept himself still
less in time with the rhythm and racket of the movements called progress
in the world without. For many months after his wife's decease the
economy of his household remained as before; the cook, the housemaid, the
parlour-maid, and the man out-of-doors performed their duties or left
them undone, just as Nature prompted them--the vicar knew not which. It
was then represented to him that his servants seemed to have nothing to
do in his small family of one. He was struck with the truth of this
representation, and decided to cut down his establishment. But he was
forestalled by Sophy, the parlour-maid, who said one evening that she
wished to leave him. 'And why?' said the parson. 'Sam Hobson has asked me to marry him, sir.' 'Well--do you want to marry?' 'Not much. But it would be a home for me. And we have heard that one of
us will have to leave.' A day or two after she said: 'I don't want to leave just yet, sir, if you
don't wish it. Sam and I have quarrelled.' He looked up at her. He had hardly ever observed her before, though he
had been frequently conscious of her soft presence in the room. What a
kitten-like, flexuous, tender creature she was! She was the only one of
the servants with whom he came into immediate and continuous relation. What should he do if Sophy were gone? Sophy did not go, but one of the others did, and things went on quietly
again. When Mr. Twycott, the vicar, was ill, Sophy brought up his meals to him,
and she had no sooner left the room one day than he heard a noise on the
stairs. She had slipped down with the tray, and so twisted her foot that
she could not stand. The village surgeon was called in; the vicar got
better, but Sophy was incapacitated for a long time; and she was informed
that she must never again walk much or engage in any occupation which
required her to stand long on her feet. As soon as she was comparatively
well she spoke to him alone. Since she was forbidden to walk and bustle
about, and, indeed, could not do so, it became her duty to leave. She
could very well work at something sitting down, and she had an aunt a
seamstress. The parson had been very greatly moved by what she had suffered on his
account, and he exclaimed, 'No, Sophy; lame or not lame, I cannot let you
go. You must never leave me again!' He came close to her, and, though she could never exactly tell how it
happened, she became conscious of his lips upon her cheek. He then asked
her to marry him. Sophy did not exactly love him, but she had a respect
for him which almost amounted to veneration. Even if she had wished to
get away from him she hardly dared refuse a personage so reverend and
august in her eyes, and she assented forthwith to be his wife. Thus it happened that one fine morning, when the doors of the church were
naturally open for ventilation, and the singing birds fluttered in and
alighted on the tie-beams of the roof, there was a marriage-service at
the communion-rails, which hardly a soul knew of. The parson and a
neighbouring curate had entered at one door, and Sophy at another,
followed by two necessary persons, whereupon in a short time there
emerged a newly-made husband and wife. Mr. Twycott knew perfectly well that he had committed social suicide by
this step, despite Sophy's spotless character, and he had taken his
measures accordingly. An exchange of livings had been arranged with an
acquaintance who was incumbent of a church in the south of London, and as
soon as possible the couple removed thither, abandoning their pretty
country home, with trees and shrubs and glebe, for a narrow, dusty house
in a long, straight street, and their fine peal of bells for the
wretchedest one-tongued clangour that ever tortured mortal ears. It was
all on her account. They were, however, away from every one who had
known her former position; and also under less observation from without
than they would have had to put up with in any country parish. Sophy the woman was as charming a partner as a man could possess, though
Sophy the lady had her deficiencies. She showed a natural aptitude for
little domestic refinements, so far as related to things and manners; but
in what is called culture she was less intuitive. She had now been
married more than fourteen years, and her husband had taken much trouble
with her education; but she still held confused ideas on the use of 'was'
and 'were,' which did not beget a respect for her among the few
acquaintances she made. Her great grief in this relation was that her
only child, on whose education no expense had been and would be spared,
was now old enough to perceive these deficiencies in his mother, and not
only to see them but to feel irritated at their existence. Thus she lived on in the city, and wasted hours in braiding her beautiful
hair, till her once apple cheeks waned to pink of the very faintest. Her
foot had never regained its natural strength after the accident, and she
was mostly obliged to avoid walking altogether. Her husband had grown to
like London for its freedom and its domestic privacy; but he was twenty
years his Sophy's senior, and had latterly been seized with a serious
illness. On this day, however, he had seemed to be well enough to
justify her accompanying her son Randolph to the concert. CHAPTER II


The next time we get a glimpse of her is when she appears in the mournful
attire of a widow. Mr. Twycott had never rallied, and now lay in a well-packed cemetery to
the south of the great city, where, if all the dead it contained had
stood erect and alive, not one would have known him or recognized his
name. The boy had dutifully followed him to the grave, and was now again
at school. Throughout these changes Sophy had been treated like the child she was in
nature though not in years. She was left with no control over anything
that had been her husband's beyond her modest personal income. In his
anxiety lest her inexperience should be overreached he had safeguarded
with trustees all he possibly could. The completion of the boy's course
at the public school, to be followed in due time by Oxford and
ordination, had been all previsioned and arranged, and she really had
nothing to occupy her in the world but to eat and drink, and make a
business of indolence, and go on weaving and coiling the nut-brown hair,
merely keeping a home open for the son whenever he came to her during
vacations. Foreseeing his probable decease long years before her, her husband in his
lifetime had purchased for her use a semi-detached villa in the same
long, straight road whereon the church and parsonage faced, which was to
be hers as long as she chose to live in it. Here she now resided,
looking out upon the fragment of lawn in front, and through the railings
at the ever-flowing traffic; or, bending forward over the window-sill on
the first floor, stretching her eyes far up and down the vista of sooty
trees, hazy air, and drab house-facades, along which echoed the noises
common to a suburban main thoroughfare. Somehow, her boy, with his aristocratic school-knowledge, his grammars,
and his aversions, was losing those wide infantine sympathies, extending
as far as to the sun and moon themselves, with which he, like other
children, had been born, and which his mother, a child of nature herself,
had loved in him; he was reducing their compass to a population of a few
thousand wealthy and titled people, the mere veneer of a thousand million
or so of others who did not interest him at all. He drifted further and
further away from her. Sophy's _milieu_ being a suburb of minor
tradesmen and under-clerks, and her almost only companions the two
servants of her own house, it was not surprising that after her husband's
death she soon lost the little artificial tastes she had acquired from
him, and became--in her son's eyes--a mother whose mistakes and origin it
was his painful lot as a gentleman to blush for. As yet he was far from
being man enough--if he ever would be--to rate these sins of hers at
their true infinitesimal value beside the yearning fondness that welled
up and remained penned in her heart till it should be more fully accepted
by him, or by some other person or thing. If he had lived at home with
her he would have had all of it; but he seemed to require so very little
in present circumstances, and it remained stored. Her life became insupportably dreary; she could not take walks, and had
no interest in going for drives, or, indeed, in travelling anywhere. Nearly two years passed without an event, and still she looked on that
suburban road, thinking of the village in which she had been born, and
whither she would have gone back--O how gladly!--even to work in the
fields. Taking no exercise, she often could not sleep, and would rise in the
night or early morning and look out upon the then vacant thoroughfare,
where the lamps stood like sentinels waiting for some procession to go
by. An approximation to such a procession was indeed made early every
morning about one o'clock, when the country vehicles passed up with loads
of vegetables for Covent Garden market. She often saw them creeping
along at this silent and dusky hour--waggon after waggon, bearing green
bastions of cabbages nodding to their fall, yet never falling, walls of
baskets enclosing masses of beans and peas, pyramids of snow-white
turnips, swaying howdahs of mixed produce--creeping along behind aged
night-horses, who seemed ever patiently wondering between their hollow
coughs why they had always to work at that still hour when all other
sentient creatures were privileged to rest. Wrapped in a cloak, it was
soothing to watch and sympathize with them when depression and
nervousness hindered sleep, and to see how the fresh green-stuff
brightened to life as it came opposite the lamp, and how the sweating
animals steamed and shone with their miles of travel. They had an interest, almost a charm, for Sophy, these semirural people
and vehicles moving in an urban atmosphere, leading a life quite distinct
from that of the daytime toilers on the same road. One morning a man who
accompanied a waggon-load of potatoes gazed rather hard at the
house-fronts as he passed, and with a curious emotion she thought his
form was familiar to her. She looked out for him again. His being an
old-fashioned conveyance, with a yellow front, it was easily
recognizable, and on the third night after she saw it a second time. The
man alongside was, as she had fancied, Sam Hobson, formerly gardener at
Gaymead, who would at one time have married her. She had occasionally thought of him, and wondered if life in a cottage
with him would not have been a happier lot than the life she had
accepted. She had not thought of him passionately, but her now dismal
situation lent an interest to his resurrection--a tender interest which
it is impossible to exaggerate. She went back to bed, and began
thinking. When did these market-gardeners, who travelled up to town so
regularly at one or two in the morning, come back? She dimly recollected
seeing their empty waggons, hardly noticeable amid the ordinary
day-traffic, passing down at some hour before noon. It was only April, but that morning, after breakfast, she had the window
opened, and sat looking out, the feeble sun shining full upon her. She
affected to sew, but her eyes never left the street. Between ten and
eleven the desired waggon, now unladen, reappeared on its return journey. But Sam was not looking round him then, and drove on in a reverie. 'Sam!' cried she. Turning with a start, his face lighted up. He called to him a little boy
to hold the horse, alighted, and came and stood under her window. 'I can't come down easily, Sam, or I would!' she said. 'Did you know I
lived here?' 'Well, Mrs. Twycott, I knew you lived along here somewhere. I have often
looked out for 'ee.' He briefly explained his own presence on the scene. He had long since
given up his gardening in the village near Aldbrickham, and was now
manager at a market-gardener's on the south side of London, it being part
of his duty to go up to Covent Garden with waggon-loads of produce two or
three times a week. In answer to her curious inquiry, he admitted that
he had come to this particular district because he had seen in the
Aldbrickham paper, a year or two before, the announcement of the death in
South London of the aforetime vicar of Gaymead, which had revived an
interest in her dwelling-place that he could not extinguish, leading him
to hover about the locality till his present post had been secured. They spoke of their native village in dear old North Wessex, the spots in
which they had played together as children. She tried to feel that she
was a dignified personage now, that she must not be too confidential with
Sam. But she could not keep it up, and the tears hanging in her eyes
were indicated in her voice. 'You are not happy, Mrs. Twycott, I'm afraid?' he said. 'O, of course not! I lost my husband only the year before last.' 'Ah! I meant in another way. You'd like to be home again?' 'This is my home--for life. The house belongs to me. But I
understand'--She let it out then. 'Yes, Sam. I long for home--_our_
home! I _should_ like to be there, and never leave it, and die there.' But she remembered herself. 'That's only a momentary feeling. I have a
son, you know, a dear boy. He's at school now.' 'Somewhere handy, I suppose? I see there's lots on 'em along this road.' 'O no! Not in one of these wretched holes! At a public school--one of
the most distinguished in England.' 'Chok' it all! of course! I forget, ma'am, that you've been a lady for
so many years.' 'No, I am not a lady,' she said sadly. 'I never shall be. But he's a
gentleman, and that--makes it--O how difficult for me!' CHAPTER III


The acquaintance thus oddly reopened proceeded apace. She often looked
out to get a few words with him, by night or by day. Her sorrow was that
she could not accompany her one old friend on foot a little way, and talk
more freely than she could do while he paused before the house. One
night, at the beginning of June, when she was again on the watch after an
absence of some days from the window, he entered the gate and said
softly, 'Now, wouldn't some air do you good? I've only half a load this
morning. Why not ride up to Covent Garden with me? There's a nice seat
on the cabbages, where I've spread a sack. You can be home again in a
cab before anybody is up.' She refused at first, and then, trembling with excitement, hastily
finished her dressing, and wrapped herself up in cloak and veil,
afterwards sidling downstairs by the aid of the handrail, in a way she
could adopt on an emergency. When she had opened the door she found Sam
on the step, and he lifted her bodily on his strong arm across the little
forecourt into his vehicle. Not a soul was visible or audible in the
infinite length of the straight, flat highway, with its ever-waiting
lamps converging to points in each direction. The air was fresh as
country air at this hour, and the stars shone, except to the
north-eastward, where there was a whitish light--the dawn. Sam carefully
placed her in the seat, and drove on. They talked as they had talked in old days, Sam pulling himself up now
and then, when he thought himself too familiar. More than once she said
with misgiving that she wondered if she ought to have indulged in the
freak. 'But I am so lonely in my house,' she added, 'and this makes me
so happy!' 'You must come again, dear Mrs. Twycott. There is no time o' day for
taking the air like this.' It grew lighter and lighter. The sparrows became busy in the streets,
and the city waxed denser around them. When they approached the river it
was day, and on the bridge they beheld the full blaze of morning sunlight
in the direction of St. Paul's, the river glistening towards it, and not
a craft stirring. Near Covent Garden he put her into a cab, and they parted, looking into
each other's faces like the very old friends they were. She reached home
without adventure, limped to the door, and let herself in with her latch-
key unseen. The air and Sam's presence had revived her: her cheeks were quite
pink--almost beautiful. She had something to live for in addition to her
son. A woman of pure instincts, she knew there had been nothing really
wrong in the journey, but supposed it conventionally to be very wrong
indeed. Soon, however, she gave way to the temptation of going with him again,
and on this occasion their conversation was distinctly tender, and Sam
said he never should forget her, notwithstanding that she had served him
rather badly at one time. After much hesitation he told her of a plan it
was in his power to carry out, and one he should like to take in hand,
since he did not care for London work: it was to set up as a master
greengrocer down at Aldbrickham, the county-town of their native place. He knew of an opening--a shop kept by aged people who wished to retire. 'And why don't you do it, then, Sam?' she asked with a slight
heartsinking. 'Because I'm not sure if--you'd join me. I know you wouldn't--couldn't! Such a lady as ye've been so long, you couldn't be a wife to a man like
me.' 'I hardly suppose I could!' she assented, also frightened at the idea. 'If you could,' he said eagerly, 'you'd on'y have to sit in the back
parlour and look through the glass partition when I was away
sometimes--just to keep an eye on things. The lameness wouldn't hinder
that . . . I'd keep you as genteel as ever I could, dear Sophy--if I
might think of it!' he pleaded. 'Sam, I'll be frank,' she said, putting her hand on his. 'If it were
only myself I would do it, and gladly, though everything I possess would
be lost to me by marrying again.' 'I don't mind that! It's more independent.' 'That's good of you, dear, dear Sam. But there's something else. I have
a son . . . I almost fancy when I am miserable sometimes that he is not
really mine, but one I hold in trust for my late husband. He seems to
belong so little to me personally, so entirely to his dead father. He is
so much educated and I so little that I do not feel dignified enough to
be his mother . . . Well, he would have to be told.' 'Yes. Unquestionably.' Sam saw her thought and her fear. 'Still, you
can do as you like, Sophy--Mrs. Twycott,' he added. 'It is not you who
are the child, but he.' 'Ah, you don't know! Sam, if I could, I would marry you, some day. But
you must wait a while, and let me think.' It was enough for him, and he was blithe at their parting. Not so she. To tell Randolph seemed impossible. She could wait till he had gone up
to Oxford, when what she did would affect his life but little. But would
he ever tolerate the idea? And if not, could she defy him? She had not told him a word when the yearly cricket-match came on at
Lord's between the public schools, though Sam had already gone back to
Aldbrickham. Mrs. Twycott felt stronger than usual: she went to the
match with Randolph, and was able to leave her chair and walk about
occasionally. The bright idea occurred to her that she could casually
broach the subject while moving round among the spectators, when the
boy's spirits were high with interest in the game, and he would weigh
domestic matters as feathers in the scale beside the day's victory. They
promenaded under the lurid July sun, this pair, so wide apart, yet so
near, and Sophy saw the large proportion of boys like her own, in their
broad white collars and dwarf hats, and all around the rows of great
coaches under which was jumbled the _debris_ of luxurious luncheons;
bones, pie-crusts, champagne-bottles, glasses, plates, napkins, and the
family silver; while on the coaches sat the proud fathers and mothers;
but never a poor mother like her. If Randolph had not appertained to
these, had not centred all his interests in them, had not cared
exclusively for the class they belonged to, how happy would things have
been! A great huzza at some small performance with the bat burst from
the multitude of relatives, and Randolph jumped wildly into the air to
see what had happened. Sophy fetched up the sentence that had been
already shaped; but she could not get it out. The occasion was, perhaps,
an inopportune one. The contrast between her story and the display of
fashion to which Randolph had grown to regard himself as akin would be
fatal. She awaited a better time. It was on an evening when they were alone in their plain suburban
residence, where life was not blue but brown, that she ultimately broke
silence, qualifying her announcement of a probable second marriage by
assuring him that it would not take place for a long time to come, when
he would be living quite independently of her. The boy thought the idea a very reasonable one, and asked if she had
chosen anybody? She hesitated; and he seemed to have a misgiving. He
hoped his stepfather would be a gentleman? he said. 'Not what you call a gentleman,' she answered timidly. 'He'll be much as
I was before I knew your father;' and by degrees she acquainted him with
the whole. The youth's face remained fixed for a moment; then he
flushed, leant on the table, and burst into passionate tears. His mother went up to him, kissed all of his face that she could get at,
and patted his back as if he were still the baby he once had been, crying
herself the while. When he had somewhat recovered from his paroxysm he
went hastily to his own room and fastened the door. Parleyings were attempted through the keyhole, outside which she waited
and listened. It was long before he would reply, and when he did it was
to say sternly at her from within: 'I am ashamed of you! It will ruin
me! A miserable boor! a churl! a clown! It will degrade me in the eyes
of all the gentlemen of England!' 'Say no more--perhaps I am wrong! I will struggle against it!' she cried
miserably. Before Randolph left her that summer a letter arrived from Sam to inform
her that he had been unexpectedly fortunate in obtaining the shop. He
was in possession; it was the largest in the town, combining fruit with
vegetables, and he thought it would form a home worthy even of her some
day. Might he not run up to town to see her? She met him by stealth, and said he must still wait for her final answer. The autumn dragged on, and when Randolph was home at Christmas for the
holidays she broached the matter again. But the young gentleman was
inexorable. It was dropped for months; renewed again; abandoned under his repugnance;
again attempted; and thus the gentle creature reasoned and pleaded till
four or five long years had passed. Then the faithful Sam revived his
suit with some peremptoriness. Sophy's son, now an undergraduate, was
down from Oxford one Easter, when she again opened the subject. As soon
as he was ordained, she argued, he would have a home of his own, wherein
she, with her bad grammar and her ignorance, would be an encumbrance to
him. Better obliterate her as much as possible. He showed a more manly anger now, but would not agree. She on her side
was more persistent, and he had doubts whether she could be trusted in
his absence. But by indignation and contempt for her taste he completely
maintained his ascendency; and finally taking her before a little cross
and altar that he had erected in his bedroom for his private devotions,
there bade her kneel, and swear that she would not wed Samuel Hobson
without his consent. 'I owe this to my father!' he said. The poor woman swore, thinking he would soften as soon as he was ordained
and in full swing of clerical work. But he did not. His education had
by this time sufficiently ousted his humanity to keep him quite firm;
though his mother might have led an idyllic life with her faithful
fruiterer and greengrocer, and nobody have been anything the worse in the
world. Her lameness became more confirmed as time went on, and she seldom or
never left the house in the long southern thoroughfare, where she seemed
to be pining her heart away. 'Why mayn't I say to Sam that I'll marry
him? Why mayn't I?' she would murmur plaintively to herself when nobody
was near. Some four years after this date a middle-aged man was standing at the
door of the largest fruiterer's shop in Aldbrickham. He was the
proprietor, but to-day, instead of his usual business attire, he wore a
neat suit of black; and his window was partly shuttered. From the
railway-station a funeral procession was seen approaching: it passed his
door and went out of the town towards the village of Gaymead. The man,
whose eyes were wet, held his hat in his hand as the vehicles moved by;
while from the mourning coach a young smooth-shaven priest in a high
waistcoat looked black as a cloud at the shop keeper standing there. _December_ 1891. FOR CONSCIENCE' SAKE


CHAPTER I


Whether the utilitarian or the intuitive theory of the moral sense be
upheld, it is beyond question that there are a few subtle-souled persons
with whom the absolute gratuitousness of an act of reparation is an
inducement to perform it; while exhortation as to its necessity would
breed excuses for leaving it undone. The case of Mr. Millborne and Mrs.
Frankland particularly illustrated this, and perhaps something more. There were few figures better known to the local crossing-sweeper than
Mr. Millborne's, in his daily comings and goings along a familiar and
quiet London street, where he lived inside the door marked eleven, though
not as householder. In age he was fifty at least, and his habits were as
regular as those of a person can be who has no occupation but the study
of how to keep himself employed. He turned almost always to the right on
getting to the end of his street, then he went onward down Bond Street to
his club, whence he returned by precisely the same course about six
o'clock, on foot; or, if he went to dine, later on in a cab. He was
known to be a man of some means, though apparently not wealthy. Being a
bachelor he seemed to prefer his present mode of living as a lodger in
Mrs. Towney's best rooms, with the use of furniture which he had bought
ten times over in rent during his tenancy, to having a house of his own. None among his acquaintance tried to know him well, for his manner and
moods did not excite curiosity or deep friendship. He was not a man who
seemed to have anything on his mind, anything to conceal, anything to
impart. From his casual remarks it was generally understood that he was
country-born, a native of some place in Wessex; that he had come to
London as a young man in a banking-house, and had risen to a post of
responsibility; when, by the death of his father, who had been fortunate
in his investments, the son succeeded to an income which led him to
retire from a business life somewhat early. One evening, when he had been unwell for several days, Doctor Bindon came
in, after dinner, from the adjoining medical quarter, and smoked with him
over the fire. The patient's ailment was not such as to require much
thought, and they talked together on indifferent subjects. 'I am a lonely man, Bindon--a lonely man,' Millborne took occasion to
say, shaking his head gloomily. 'You don't know such loneliness as mine
. . . And the older I get the more I am dissatisfied with myself. And to-
day I have been, through an accident, more than usually haunted by what,
above all other events of my life, causes that dissatisfaction--the
recollection of an unfulfilled promise made twenty years ago. In
ordinary affairs I have always been considered a man of my word and
perhaps it is on that account that a particular vow I once made, and did
not keep, comes back to me with a magnitude out of all proportion (I
daresay) to its real gravity, especially at this time of day. You know
the discomfort caused at night by the half-sleeping sense that a door or
window has been left unfastened, or in the day by the remembrance of
unanswered letters. So does that promise haunt me from time to time, and
has done to-day particularly.' There was a pause, and they smoked on. Millborne's eyes, though fixed on
the fire, were really regarding attentively a town in the West of
England. 'Yes,' he continued, 'I have never quite forgotten it, though during the
busy years of my life it was shelved and buried under the pressure of my
pursuits. And, as I say, to-day in particular, an incident in the law-
report of a somewhat similar kind has brought it back again vividly. However, what it was I can tell you in a few words, though no doubt you,
as a man of the world, will smile at the thinness of my skin when you
hear it . . . I came up to town at one-and-twenty, from Toneborough, in
Outer Wessex, where I was born, and where, before I left, I had won the
heart of a young woman of my own age. I promised her marriage, took
advantage of my promise, and--am a bachelor.' 'The old story.' The other nodded. 'I left the place, and thought at the time I had done a very clever thing
in getting so easily out of an entanglement. But I have lived long
enough for that promise to return to bother me--to be honest, not
altogether as a pricking of the conscience, but as a dissatisfaction with
myself as a specimen of the heap of flesh called humanity. If I were to
ask you to lend me fifty pounds, which I would repay you next midsummer,
and I did not repay you, I should consider myself a shabby sort of
fellow, especially if you wanted the money badly. Yet I promised that
girl just as distinctly; and then coolly broke my word, as if doing so
were rather smart conduct than a mean action, for which the poor victim
herself, encumbered with a child, and not I, had really to pay the
penalty, in spite of certain pecuniary aid that was given. There, that's
the retrospective trouble that I am always unearthing; and you may hardly
believe that though so many years have elapsed, and it is all gone by and
done with, and she must be getting on for an old woman now, as I am for
an old man, it really often destroys my sense of self-respect still.' 'O, I can understand it. All depends upon the temperament. Thousands of
men would have forgotten all about it; so would you, perhaps, if you had
married and had a family. Did she ever marry?' 'I don't think so. O no--she never did. She left Toneborough, and later
on appeared under another name at Exonbury, in the next county, where she
was not known. It is very seldom that I go down into that part of the
country, but in passing through Exonbury, on one occasion, I learnt that
she was quite a settled resident there, as a teacher of music, or
something of the kind. That much I casually heard when I was there two
or three years ago. But I have never set eyes on her since our original
acquaintance, and should not know her if I met her.' 'Did the child live?' asked the doctor. 'For several years, certainly,' replied his friend. 'I cannot say if she
is living now. It was a little girl. She might be married by this time
as far as years go.' 'And the mother--was she a decent, worthy young woman?' 'O yes; a sensible, quiet girl, neither attractive nor unattractive to
the ordinary observer; simply commonplace. Her position at the time of
our acquaintance was not so good as mine. My father was a solicitor, as
I think I have told you. She was a young girl in a music-shop; and it
was represented to me that it would be beneath my position to marry her. Hence the result.' 'Well, all I can say is that after twenty years it is probably too late
to think of mending such a matter. It has doubtless by this time mended
itself. You had better dismiss it from your mind as an evil past your
control. Of course, if mother and daughter are alive, or either, you
might settle something upon them, if you were inclined, and had it to
spare.' 'Well, I haven't much to spare; and I have relations in narrow
circumstances--perhaps narrower than theirs. But that is not the point. Were I ever so rich I feel I could not rectify the past by money. I did
not promise to enrich her. On the contrary, I told her it would probably
be dire poverty for both of us. But I did promise to make her my wife.' 'Then find her and do it,' said the doctor jocularly as he rose to leave. 'Ah, Bindon. That, of course, is the obvious jest. But I haven't the
slightest desire for marriage; I am quite content to live as I have
lived. I am a bachelor by nature, and instinct, and habit, and
everything. Besides, though I respect her still (for she was not an atom
to blame), I haven't any shadow of love for her. In my mind she exists
as one of those women you think well of, but find uninteresting. It
would be purely with the idea of putting wrong right that I should hunt
her up, and propose to do it off-hand.' 'You don't think of it seriously?' said his surprised friend. 'I sometimes think that I would, if it were practicable; simply, as I
say, to recover my sense of being a man of honour.' 'I wish you luck in the enterprise,' said Doctor Bindon. 'You'll soon be
out of that chair, and then you can put your impulse to the test. But--after twenty years of silence--I should say, don't!' CHAPTER II


The doctor's advice remained counterpoised, in Millborne's mind, by the
aforesaid mood of seriousness and sense of principle, approximating often
to religious sentiment, which had been evolving itself in his breast for
months, and even years. The feeling, however, had no immediate effect upon Mr. Millborne's
actions. He soon got over his trifling illness, and was vexed with
himself for having, in a moment of impulse, confided such a case of
conscience to anybody. But the force which had prompted it, though latent, remained with him and
ultimately grew stronger. The upshot was that about four months after
the date of his illness and disclosure, Millborne found himself on a mild
spring morning at Paddington Station, in a train that was starting for
the west. His many intermittent thoughts on his broken promise from time
to time, in those hours when loneliness brought him face to face with his
own personality, had at last resulted in this course. The decisive stimulus had been given when, a day or two earlier, on
looking into a Post-Office Directory, he learnt that the woman he had not
met for twenty years was still living on at Exonbury under the name she
had assumed when, a year or two after her disappearance from her native
town and his, she had returned from abroad as a young widow with a child,
and taken up her residence at the former city. Her condition was
apparently but little changed, and her daughter seemed to be with her,
their names standing in the Directory as 'Mrs. Leonora Frankland and Miss
Frankland, Teachers of Music and Dancing.' Mr. Millborne reached Exonbury in the afternoon, and his first business,
before even taking his luggage into the town, was to find the house
occupied by the teachers. Standing in a central and open place it was
not difficult to discover, a well-burnished brass doorplate bearing their
names prominently. He hesitated to enter without further knowledge, and
ultimately took lodgings over a toyshop opposite, securing a sitting-room
which faced a similar drawing or sitting-room at the Franklands', where
the dancing lessons were given. Installed here he was enabled to make
indirectly, and without suspicion, inquiries and observations on the
character of the ladies over the way, which he did with much
deliberateness. He learnt that the widow, Mrs. Frankland, with her one daughter, Frances,
was of cheerful and excellent repute, energetic and painstaking with her
pupils, of whom she had a good many, and in whose tuition her daughter
assisted her. She was quite a recognized townswoman, and though the
dancing branch of her profession was perhaps a trifle worldly, she was
really a serious-minded lady who, being obliged to live by what she knew
how to teach, balanced matters by lending a hand at charitable bazaars,
assisting at sacred concerts, and giving musical recitations in aid of
funds for bewildering happy savages, and other such enthusiasms of this
enlightened country. Her daughter was one of the foremost of the bevy of
young women who decorated the churches at Easter and Christmas, was
organist in one of those edifices, and had subscribed to the testimonial
of a silver broth-basin that was presented to the Reverend Mr. Walker as
a token of gratitude for his faithful and arduous intonations of six
months as sub-precentor in the Cathedral. Altogether mother and daughter
appeared to be a typical and innocent pair among the genteel citizens of
Exonbury. As a natural and simple way of advertising their profession they allowed
the windows of the music-room to be a little open, so that you had the
pleasure of hearing all along the street at any hour between sunrise and
sunset fragmentary gems of classical music as interpreted by the young
people of twelve or fourteen who took lessons there. But it was said
that Mrs. Frankland made most of her income by letting out pianos on
hire, and by selling them as agent for the makers. The report pleased Millborne; it was highly creditable, and far better
than he had hoped. He was curious to get a view of the two women who led
such blameless lives. He had not long to wait to gain a glimpse of Leonora. It was when she
was standing on her own doorstep, opening her parasol, on the morning
after his arrival. She was thin, though not gaunt; and a good,
well-wearing, thoughtful face had taken the place of the one which had
temporarily attracted him in the days of his nonage. She wore black, and
it became her in her character of widow. The daughter next appeared; she
was a smoothed and rounded copy of her mother, with the same decision in
her mien that Leonora had, and a bounding gait in which he traced a faint
resemblance to his own at her age. For the first time he absolutely made up his mind to call on them. But
his antecedent step was to send Leonora a note the next morning, stating
his proposal to visit her, and suggesting the evening as the time,
because she seemed to be so greatly occupied in her professional capacity
during the day. He purposely worded his note in such a form as not to
require an answer from her which would be possibly awkward to write. No answer came. Naturally he should not have been surprised at this; and
yet he felt a little checked, even though she had only refrained from
volunteering a reply that was not demanded. At eight, the hour fixed by himself, he crossed over and was passively
admitted by the servant. Mrs. Frankland, as she called herself, received
him in the large music-and-dancing room on the first-floor front, and not
in any private little parlour as he had expected. This cast a
distressingly business-like colour over their first meeting after so many
years of severance. The woman he had wronged stood before him,
well-dressed, even to his metropolitan eyes, and her manner as she came
up to him was dignified even to hardness. She certainly was not glad to
see him. But what could he expect after a neglect of twenty years! 'How do you do, Mr. Millborne?' she said cheerfully, as to any chance
caller. 'I am obliged to receive you here because my daughter has a
friend downstairs.' 'Your daughter--and mine.' 'Ah--yes, yes,' she replied hastily, as if the addition had escaped her
memory. 'But perhaps the less said about that the better, in fairness to
me. You will consider me a widow, please.' 'Certainly, Leonora . . . ' He could not get on, her manner was so cold
and indifferent. The expected scene of sad reproach, subdued to delicacy
by the run of years, was absent altogether. He was obliged to come to
the point without preamble. 'You are quite free, Leonora--I mean as to marriage? There is nobody who
has your promise, or--'

'O yes; quite free, Mr. Millborne,' she said, somewhat surprised. 'Then I will tell you why I have come. Twenty years ago I promised to
make you my wife; and I am here to fulfil that promise. Heaven forgive
my tardiness!' Her surprise was increased, but she was not agitated. She seemed to
become gloomy, disapproving. 'I could not entertain such an idea at this
time of life,' she said after a moment or two. 'It would complicate
matters too greatly. I have a very fair income, and require no help of
any sort. I have no wish to marry . . . What could have induced you to
come on such an errand now? It seems quite extraordinary, if I may say
so!' 'It must--I daresay it does,' Millborne replied vaguely; 'and I must tell
you that impulse--I mean in the sense of passion--has little to do with
it. I wish to marry you, Leonora; I much desire to marry you. But it is
an affair of conscience, a case of fulfilment. I promised you, and it
was dishonourable of me to go away. I want to remove that sense of
dishonour before I die. No doubt we might get to love each other as
warmly as we did in old times?' She dubiously shook her head. 'I appreciate your motives, Mr. Millborne;
but you must consider my position; and you will see that, short of the
personal wish to marry, which I don't feel, there is no reason why I
should change my state, even though by so doing I should ease your
conscience. My position in this town is a respected one; I have built it
up by my own hard labours, and, in short, I don't wish to alter it. My
daughter, too, is just on the verge of an engagement to be married, to a
young man who will make her an excellent husband. It will be in every
way a desirable match for her. He is downstairs now.' 'Does she know--anything about me?' 'O no, no; God forbid! Her father is dead and buried to her. So that,
you see, things are going on smoothly, and I don't want to disturb their
progress.' He nodded. 'Very well,' he said, and rose to go. At the door, however,
he came back again. 'Still, Leonora,' he urged, 'I have come on purpose; and I don't see what
disturbance would be caused. You would simply marry an old friend. Won't
you reconsider? It is no more than right that we should be united,
remembering the girl.' She shook her head, and patted with her foot nervously. 'Well, I won't detain you,' he added. 'I shall not be leaving Exonbury
yet. You will allow me to see you again?' 'Yes; I don't mind,' she said reluctantly. The obstacles he had encountered, though they did not reanimate his dead
passion for Leonora, did certainly make it appear indispensable to his
peace of mind to overcome her coldness. He called frequently. The first
meeting with the daughter was a trying ordeal, though he did not feel
drawn towards her as he had expected to be; she did not excite his
sympathies. Her mother confided to Frances the errand of 'her old
friend,' which was viewed by the daughter with strong disfavour. His
desire being thus uncongenial to both, for a long time Millborne made not
the least impression upon Mrs. Frankland. His attentions pestered her
rather than pleased her. He was surprised at her firmness, and it was
only when he hinted at moral reasons for their union that she was ever
shaken. 'Strictly speaking,' he would say, 'we ought, as honest persons,
to marry; and that's the truth of it, Leonora.' 'I have looked at it in that light,' she said quickly. 'It struck me at
the very first. But I don't see the force of the argument. I totally
deny that after this interval of time I am bound to marry you for
honour's sake. I would have married you, as you know well enough, at the
proper time. But what is the use of remedies now?' They were standing at the window. A scantly-whiskered young man, in
clerical attire, called at the door below. Leonora flushed with
interest. 'Who is he?' said Mr. Millborne. 'My Frances's lover. I am so sorry--she is not at home! Ah! they have
told him where she is, and he has gone to find her . . . I hope that suit
will prosper, at any rate!' 'Why shouldn't it?' 'Well, he cannot marry yet; and Frances sees but little of him now he has
left Exonbury. He was formerly doing duty here, but now he is curate of
St. John's, Ivell, fifty miles up the line. There is a tacit agreement
between them, but--there have been friends of his who object, because of
our vocation. However, he sees the absurdity of such an objection as
that, and is not influenced by it.' 'Your marriage with me would help the match, instead of hindering it, as
you have said.' 'Do you think it would?' 'It certainly would, by taking you out of this business altogether.' By chance he had found the way to move her somewhat, and he followed it
up. This view was imparted to Mrs. Frankland's daughter, and it led her
to soften her opposition. Millborne, who had given up his lodging in
Exonbury, journeyed to and fro regularly, till at last he overcame her
negations, and she expressed a reluctant assent. They were married at the nearest church; and the goodwill--whatever that
was--of the music-and-dancing connection was sold to a successor only too
ready to jump into the place, the Millbornes having decided to live in
London. CHAPTER III


Millborne was a householder in his old district, though not in his old
street, and Mrs. Millborne and their daughter had turned themselves into
Londoners. Frances was well reconciled to the removal by her lover's
satisfaction at the change. It suited him better to travel from Ivell a
hundred miles to see her in London, where he frequently had other
engagements, than fifty in the opposite direction where nothing but
herself required his presence. So here they were, furnished up to the
attics, in one of the small but popular streets of the West district, in
a house whose front, till lately of the complexion of a chimney-sweep,
had been scraped to show to the surprised wayfarer the bright yellow and
red brick that had lain lurking beneath the soot of fifty years. The social lift that the two women had derived from the alliance was
considerable; but when the exhilaration which accompanies a first
residence in London, the sensation of standing on a pivot of the world,
had passed, their lives promised to be somewhat duller than when, at
despised Exonbury, they had enjoyed a nodding acquaintance with three-
fourths of the town. Mr. Millborne did not criticise his wife; he could
not. Whatever defects of hardness and acidity his original treatment and
the lapse of years might have developed in her, his sense of a realized
idea, of a re-established self-satisfaction, was always thrown into the
scale on her side, and out-weighed all objections. It was about a month after their settlement in town that the household
decided to spend a week at a watering-place in the Isle of Wight, and
while there the Reverend Percival Cope (the young curate aforesaid) came
to see them, Frances in particular. No formal engagement of the young
pair had been announced as yet, but it was clear that their mutual
understanding could not end in anything but marriage without grievous
disappointment to one of the parties at least. Not that Frances was
sentimental. She was rather of the imperious sort, indeed; and, to say
all, the young girl had not fulfilled her father's expectations of her. But he hoped and worked for her welfare as sincerely as any father could
do. Mr. Cope was introduced to the new head of the family, and stayed with
them in the Island two or three days. On the last day of his visit they
decided to venture on a two hours' sail in one of the small yachts which
lay there for hire. The trip had not progressed far before all, except
the curate, found that sailing in a breeze did not quite agree with them;
but as he seemed to enjoy the experience, the other three bore their
condition as well as they could without grimace or complaint, till the
young man, observing their discomfort, gave immediate directions to tack
about. On the way back to port they sat silent, facing each other. Nausea in such circumstances, like midnight watching, fatigue, trouble,
fright, has this marked effect upon the countenance, that it often brings
out strongly the divergences of the individual from the norm of his race,
accentuating superficial peculiarities to radical distinctions. Unexpected physiognomies will uncover themselves at these times in well-
known faces; the aspect becomes invested with the spectral presence of
entombed and forgotten ancestors; and family lineaments of special or
exclusive cast, which in ordinary moments are masked by a stereotyped
expression and mien, start up with crude insistence to the view. Frances, sitting beside her mother's husband, with Mr. Cope opposite, was
naturally enough much regarded by the curate during the tedious sail
home; at first with sympathetic smiles. Then, as the middle-aged father
and his child grew each gray-faced, as the pretty blush of Frances
disintegrated into spotty stains, and the soft rotundities of her
features diverged from their familiar and reposeful beauty into elemental
lines, Cope was gradually struck with the resemblance between a pair in
their discomfort who in their ease presented nothing to the eye in
common. Mr. Millborne and Frances in their indisposition were strangely,
startlingly alike. The inexplicable fact absorbed Cope's attention quite. He forgot to
smile at Frances, to hold her hand; and when they touched the shore he
remained sitting for some moments like a man in a trance. As they went homeward, and recovered their complexions and contours, the
similarities one by one disappeared, and Frances and Mr. Millborne were
again masked by the commonplace differences of sex and age. It was as
if, during the voyage, a mysterious veil had been lifted, temporarily
revealing a strange pantomime of the past. During the evening he said to her casually: 'Is your step-father a cousin
of your mother, dear Frances?' 'Oh, no,' said she. 'There is no relationship. He was only an old
friend of hers. Why did you suppose such a thing?' He did not explain, and the next morning started to resume his duties at
Ivell. Cope was an honest young fellow, and shrewd withal. At home in his quiet
rooms in St. Peter's Street, Ivell, he pondered long and unpleasantly on
the revelations of the cruise. The tale it told was distinct enough, and
for the first time his position was an uncomfortable one. He had met the
Franklands at Exonbury as parishioners, had been attracted by Frances,
and had floated thus far into an engagement which was indefinite only
because of his inability to marry just yet. The Franklands' past had
apparently contained mysteries, and it did not coincide with his judgment
to marry into a family whose mystery was of the sort suggested. So he
sat and sighed, between his reluctance to lose Frances and his natural
dislike of forming a connection with people whose antecedents would not
bear the strictest investigation. A passionate lover of the old-fashioned sort might possibly never have
halted to weigh these doubts; but though he was in the church Cope's
affections were fastidious--distinctly tempered with the alloys of the
century's decadence. He delayed writing to Frances for some while,
simply because he could not tune himself up to enthusiasm when worried by
suspicions of such a kind. Meanwhile the Millbornes had returned to London, and Frances was growing
anxious. In talking to her mother of Cope she had innocently alluded to
his curious inquiry if her mother and her step-father were connected by
any tie of cousinship. Mrs. Millborne made her repeat the words. Frances
did so, and watched with inquisitive eyes their effect upon her elder. 'What is there so startling in his inquiry then?' she asked. 'Can it
have anything to do with his not writing to me?' Her mother flinched, but did not inform her, and Frances also was now
drawn within the atmosphere of suspicion. That night when standing by
chance outside the chamber of her parents she heard for the first time
their voices engaged in a sharp altercation. The apple of discord had, indeed, been dropped into the house of the
Millbornes. The scene within the chamber-door was Mrs. Millborne
standing before her dressing-table, looking across to her husband in the
dressing-room adjoining, where he was sitting down, his eyes fixed on the
floor. 'Why did you come and disturb my life a second time?' she harshly asked. 'Why did you pester me with your conscience, till I was driven to accept
you to get rid of your importunity? Frances and I were doing well: the
one desire of my life was that she should marry that good young man. And
now the match is broken off by your cruel interference! Why did you show
yourself in my world again, and raise this scandal upon my hard-won
respectability--won by such weary years of labour as none will ever
know!' She bent her face upon the table and wept passionately. There was no reply from Mr. Millborne. Frances lay awake nearly all that
night, and when at breakfast-time the next morning still no letter
appeared from Mr. Cope, she entreated her mother to go to Ivell and see
if the young man were ill.

Mrs. Millborne went, returning the same day. Frances, anxious and
haggard, met her at the station. Was all well? Her mother could not say it was; though he was not ill.

One thing she had found out, that it was a mistake to hunt up a man when
his inclinations were to hold aloof. Returning with her mother in the
cab Frances insisted upon knowing what the mystery was which plainly had
alienated her lover. The precise words which had been spoken at the
interview with him that day at Ivell Mrs. Millborne could not be induced
to repeat; but thus far she admitted, that the estrangement was
fundamentally owing to Mr. Millborne having sought her out and married
her. 'And why did he seek you out--and why were you obliged to marry him?' asked the distressed girl. Then the evidences pieced themselves together
in her acute mind, and, her colour gradually rising, she asked her mother
if what they pointed to was indeed the fact. Her mother admitted that it
was. A flush of mortification succeeded to the flush of shame upon the young
woman's face. How could a scrupulously correct clergyman and lover like
Mr. Cope ask her to be his wife after this discovery of her irregular
birth? She covered her eyes with her hands in a silent despair. In the presence of Mr. Millborne they at first suppressed their anguish. But by and by their feelings got the better of them, and when he was
asleep in his chair after dinner Mrs. Millborne's irritation broke out. The embittered Frances joined her in reproaching the man who had come as
the spectre to their intended feast of Hymen, and turned its promise to
ghastly failure. 'Why were you so weak, mother, as to admit such an enemy to your
house--one so obviously your evil genius--much less accept him as a
husband, after so long? If you had only told me all, I could have
advised you better! But I suppose I have no right to reproach him,
bitter as I feel, and even though he has blighted my life for ever!' 'Frances, I did hold out; I saw it was a mistake to have any more to say
to a man who had been such an unmitigated curse to me! But he would not
listen; he kept on about his conscience and mine, till I was bewildered,
and said Yes! . . . Bringing us away from a quiet town where we were
known and respected--what an ill-considered thing it was! O the content
of those days! We had society there, people in our own position, who did
not expect more of us than we expected of them. Here, where there is so
much, there is nothing! He said London society was so bright and
brilliant that it would be like a new world. It may be to those who are
in it; but what is that to us two lonely women; we only see it flashing
past! . . . O the fool, the fool that I was!' Now Millborne was not so soundly asleep as to prevent his hearing these
animadversions that were almost execrations, and many more of the same
sort. As there was no peace for him at home, he went again to his club,
where, since his reunion with Leonora, he had seldom if ever been seen. But the shadow of the troubles in his household interfered with his
comfort here also; he could not, as formerly, settle down into his
favourite chair with the evening paper, reposeful in the celibate's sense
that where he was his world's centre had its fixture. His world was now
an ellipse, with a dual centrality, of which his own was not the major. The young curate of Ivell still held aloof, tantalizing Frances by his
elusiveness. Plainly he was waiting upon events. Millborne bore the
reproaches of his wife and daughter almost in silence; but by degrees he
grew meditative, as if revolving a new idea. The bitter cry about
blighting their existence at length became so impassioned that one day
Millborne calmly proposed to return again to the country; not necessarily
to Exonbury, but, if they were willing, to a little old manor-house which
he had found was to be let, standing a mile from Mr. Cope's town of
Ivell. They were surprised, and, despite their view of him as the bringer of
ill, were disposed to accede. 'Though I suppose,' said Mrs. Millborne to
him, 'it will end in Mr. Cope's asking you flatly about the past, and
your being compelled to tell him; which may dash all my hopes for
Frances. She gets more and more like you every day, particularly when
she is in a bad temper. People will see you together, and notice it; and
I don't know what may come of it!' 'I don't think they will see us together,' he said; but he entered into
no argument when she insisted otherwise. The removal was eventually
resolved on; the town-house was disposed of; and again came the invasion
by furniture-men and vans, till all the movables and servants were
whisked away. He sent his wife and daughter to an hotel while this was
going on, taking two or three journeys himself to Ivell to superintend
the refixing, and the improvement of the grounds. When all was done he
returned to them in town. The house was ready for their reception, he told them, and there only
remained the journey. He accompanied them and their personal luggage to
the station only, having, he said, to remain in town a short time on
business with his lawyer. They went, dubious and discontented--for the
much-loved Cope had made no sign. 'If we were going down to live here alone,' said Mrs Millborne to her
daughter in the train; 'and there was no intrusive tell-tale presence! . . . But let it be!' The house was a lovely little place in a grove of elms, and they liked it
much. The first person to call upon them as new residents was Mr. Cope. He was delighted to find that they had come so near, and (though he did
not say this) meant to live in such excellent style. He had not,
however, resumed the manner of a lover. 'Your father spoils all!' murmured Mrs. Millborne. But three days later she received a letter from her husband, which caused
her no small degree of astonishment. It was written from Boulogne. It began with a long explanation of settlements of his property, in which
he had been engaged since their departure. The chief feature in the
business was that Mrs. Millborne found herself the absolute owner of a
comfortable sum in personal estate, and Frances of a life-interest in a
larger sum, the principal to be afterwards divided amongst her children
if she had any. The remainder of his letter ran as hereunder:--

   'I have learnt that there are some derelictions of duty which cannot
   be blotted out by tardy accomplishment. Our evil actions do not
   remain isolated in the past, waiting only to be reversed: like
   locomotive plants they spread and re-root, till to destroy the
   original stem has no material effect in killing them. I made a
   mistake in searching you out; I admit it; whatever the remedy may be
   in such cases it is not marriage, and the best thing for you and me is
   that you do not see me more. You had better not seek me, for you will
   not be likely to find me: you are well provided for, and we may do
   ourselves more harm than good by meeting again. 'F. M.'

Millborne, in short, disappeared from that day forward. But a searching
inquiry would have revealed that, soon after the Millbornes went to
Ivell, an Englishman, who did not give the name of Millborne, took up his
residence in Brussels; a man who might have been recognized by Mrs.
Millborne if she had met him. One afternoon in the ensuing summer, when
this gentleman was looking over the English papers, he saw the
announcement of Miss Frances Frankland's marriage. She had become the
Reverend Mrs. Cope. 'Thank God!' said the gentleman. But his momentary satisfaction was far from being happiness. As he
formerly had been weighted with a bad conscience, so now was he burdened
with the heavy thought which oppressed Antigone, that by honourable
observance of a rite he had obtained for himself the reward of
dishonourable laxity. Occasionally he had to be helped to his lodgings
by his servant from the _Cercle_ he frequented, through having imbibed a
little too much liquor to be able to take care of himself. But he was
harmless, and even when he had been drinking said little. _March_ 1891. A TRAGEDY OF TWO AMBITIONS


CHAPTER I


The shouts of the village-boys came in at the window, accompanied by
broken laughter from loungers at the inn-door; but the brothers
Halborough worked on. They were sitting in a bedroom of the master-millwright's house, engaged
in the untutored reading of Greek and Latin. It was no tale of Homeric
blows and knocks, Argonautic voyaging, or Theban family woe that inflamed
their imaginations and spurred them onward. They were plodding away at
the Greek Testament, immersed in a chapter of the idiomatic and difficult
Epistle to the Hebrews. The Dog-day sun in its decline reached the low ceiling with slanting
sides, and the shadows of the great goat's-willow swayed and interchanged
upon the walls like a spectral army manoeuvring. The open casement which
admitted the remoter sounds now brought the voice of some one close at
hand. It was their sister, a pretty girl of fourteen, who stood in the
court below. 'I can see the tops of your heads! What's the use of staying up there? I
like you not to go out with the street-boys; but do come and play with
me!' They treated her as an inadequate interlocutor, and put her off with some
slight word. She went away disappointed. Presently there was a dull
noise of heavy footsteps at the side of the house, and one of the
brothers sat up. 'I fancy I hear him coming,' he murmured, his eyes on
the window. A man in the light drab clothes of an old-fashioned country tradesman
approached from round the corner, reeling as he came. The elder son
flushed with anger, rose from his books, and descended the stairs. The
younger sat on, till, after the lapse of a few minutes, his brother re-
entered the room. 'Did Rosa see him?' 'No.' 'Nor anybody?' 'No.' 'What have you done with him?' 'He's in the straw-shed. I got him in with some trouble, and he has
fallen asleep. I thought this would be the explanation of his absence! No stones dressed for Miller Kench, the great wheel of the saw-mills
waiting for new float-boards, even the poor folk not able to get their
waggons wheeled.' 'What _is_ the use of poring over this!' said the younger, shutting up
Donnegan's _Lexicon_ with a slap. 'O if we had only been able to keep
mother's nine hundred pounds, what we could have done!' 'How well she had estimated the sum necessary! Four hundred and fifty
each, she thought. And I have no doubt that we could have done it on
that, with care.' This loss of the nine hundred pounds was the sharp thorn of their crown. It was a sum which their mother had amassed with great exertion and self-
denial, by adding to a chance legacy such other small amounts as she
could lay hands on from time to time; and she had intended with the hoard
to indulge the dear wish of her heart--that of sending her sons, Joshua
and Cornelius, to one of the Universities, having been informed that from
four hundred to four hundred and fifty each might carry them through
their terms with such great economy as she knew she could trust them to
practise. But she had died a year or two before this time, worn out by
too keen a strain towards these ends; and the money, coming unreservedly
into the hands of their father, had been nearly dissipated. With its
exhaustion went all opportunity and hope of a university degree for the
sons. 'It drives me mad when I think of it,' said Joshua, the elder. 'And here
we work and work in our own bungling way, and the utmost we can hope for
is a term of years as national schoolmasters, and possible admission to a
Theological college, and ordination as despised licentiates.' The anger of the elder was reflected as simple sadness in the face of the
other. 'We can preach the Gospel as well without a hood on our surplices
as with one,' he said with feeble consolation. 'Preach the Gospel--true,' said Joshua with a slight pursing of mouth. 'But we can't rise!' 'Let us make the best of it, and grind on.' The other was silent, and they drearily bent over their books again. The cause of all this gloom, the millwright Halborough, now snoring in
the shed, had been a thriving master-machinist, notwithstanding his free
and careless disposition, till a taste for a more than adequate quantity
of strong liquor took hold of him; since when his habits had interfered
with his business sadly. Already millers went elsewhere for their gear,
and only one set of hands was now kept going, though there were formerly
two. Already he found a difficulty in meeting his men at the week's end,
and though they had been reduced in number there was barely enough work
to do for those who remained. The sun dropped lower and vanished, the shouts of the village children
ceased to resound, darkness cloaked the students' bedroom, and all the
scene outwardly breathed peace. None knew of the fevered youthful
ambitions that throbbed in two breasts within the quiet creeper-covered
walls of the millwright's house. In a few months the brothers left the village of their birth to enter
themselves as students in a training college for schoolmasters; first
having placed their young sister Rosa under as efficient a tuition at a
fashionable watering-place as the means at their disposal could command. CHAPTER II


A man in semi-clerical dress was walking along the road which led from
the railway-station into a provincial town. As he walked he read
persistently, only looking up once now and then to see that he was
keeping on the foot track and to avoid other passengers. At those
moments, whoever had known the former students at the millwright's would
have perceived that one of them, Joshua Halborough, was the peripatetic
reader here. What had been simple force in the youth's face was energized judgment in
the man's. His character was gradually writing itself out in his
countenance. That he was watching his own career with deeper and deeper
interest, that he continually 'heard his days before him,' and cared to
hear little else, might have been hazarded from what was seen there. His
ambitions were, in truth, passionate, yet controlled; so that the germs
of many more plans than ever blossomed to maturity had place in him; and
forward visions were kept purposely in twilight, to avoid distraction. Events so far had been encouraging. Shortly after assuming the
mastership of his first school he had obtained an introduction to the
Bishop of a diocese far from his native county, who had looked upon him
as a promising young man and taken him in hand. He was now in the second
year of his residence at the theological college of the cathedral-town,
and would soon be presented for ordination. He entered the town, turned into a back street, and then into a yard,
keeping his book before him till he set foot under the arch of the latter
place. Round the arch was written 'National School,' and the stonework
of the jambs was worn away as nothing but boys and the waves of ocean
will wear it. He was soon amid the sing-song accents of the scholars. His brother Cornelius, who was the schoolmaster here, laid down the
pointer with which he was directing attention to the Capes of Europe, and
came forward. 'That's his brother Jos!' whispered one of the sixth standard boys. 'He's
going to be a pa'son, he's now at college.' 'Corney is going to be one too, when he's saved enough money,' said
another. After greeting his brother, whom he had not seen for several months, the
junior began to explain his system of teaching geography. But Halborough the elder took no interest in the subject. 'How about
your own studies?' he asked. 'Did you get the books I sent?' Cornelius had received them, and he related what he was doing. 'Mind you work in the morning. What time do you get up?' The younger replied: 'Half-past five.' 'Half-past four is not a minute too soon this time of the year. There is
no time like the morning for construing. I don't know why, but when I
feel even too dreary to read a novel I can translate--there is something
mechanical about it I suppose. Now, Cornelius, you are rather
behindhand, and have some heavy reading before you if you mean to get out
of this next Christmas.' 'I am afraid I have.' 'We must soon sound the Bishop. I am sure you will get a title without
difficulty when he has heard all. The sub-dean, the principal of my
college, says that the best plan will be for you to come there when his
lordship is present at an examination, and he'll get you a personal
interview with him. Mind you make a good impression upon him. I found
in my case that that was everything and doctrine almost nothing. You'll
do for a deacon, Corney, if not for a priest.' The younger remained thoughtful. 'Have you heard from Rosa lately?' he
asked; 'I had a letter this morning.' 'Yes. The little minx writes rather too often. She is homesick--though
Brussels must be an attractive place enough. But she must make the most
of her time over there. I thought a year would be enough for her, after
that high-class school at Sandbourne, but I have decided to give her two,
and make a good job of it, expensive as the establishment is.' Their two rather harsh faces had softened directly they began to speak of
their sister, whom they loved more ambitiously than they loved
themselves. 'But where is the money to come from, Joshua?' 'I have already got it.' He looked round, and finding that some boys
were near withdrew a few steps. 'I have borrowed it at five per cent. from the farmer who used to occupy the farm next our field. You remember
him.' 'But about paying him?' 'I shall pay him by degrees out of my stipend. No, Cornelius, it was no
use to do the thing by halves. She promises to be a most attractive, not
to say beautiful, girl. I have seen that for years; and if her face is
not her fortune, her face and her brains together will be, if I observe
and contrive aright. That she should be, every inch of her, an
accomplished and refined woman, was indispensable for the fulfilment of
her destiny, and for moving onwards and upwards with us; and she'll do
it, you will see. I'd half starve myself rather than take her away from
that school now.' They looked round the school they were in. To Cornelius it was natural
and familiar enough, but to Joshua, with his limited human sympathies,
who had just dropped in from a superior sort of place, the sight jarred
unpleasantly, as being that of something he had left behind. 'I shall be
glad when you are out of this,' he said, 'and in your pulpit, and well
through your first sermon.' 'You may as well say inducted into my fat living, while you are about
it.' 'Ah, well--don't think lightly of the Church. There's a fine work for
any man of energy in the Church, as you'll find,' he said fervidly. 'Torrents of infidelity to be stemmed, new views of old subjects to be
expounded, truths in spirit to be substituted for truths in the letter
. . . ' He lapsed into reverie with the vision of his career, persuading
himself that it was ardour for Christianity which spurred him on, and not
pride of place. He had shouldered a body of doctrine, and was prepared
to defend it tooth and nail, solely for the honour and glory that
warriors win. 'If the Church is elastic, and stretches to the shape of the time, she'll
last, I suppose,' said Cornelius. 'If not--. Only think, I bought a
copy of Paley's _Evidences_, best edition, broad margins, excellent
preservation, at a bookstall the other day for--ninepence; and I thought
that at this rate Christianity must be in rather a bad way.' 'No, no!' said the other almost, angrily. 'It only shows that such
defences are no longer necessary. Men's eyes can see the truth without
extraneous assistance. Besides, we are in for Christianity, and must
stick to her whether or no. I am just now going right through Pusey's
_Library of the Fathers_.' 'You'll be a bishop, Joshua, before you have done!' 'Ah!' said the other bitterly, shaking his head. 'Perhaps I might have
been--I might have been! But where is my D.D. or LL.D. ; and how be a
bishop without that kind of appendage? Archbishop Tillotson was the son
of a Sowerby clothier, but he was sent to Clare College. To hail Oxford
or Cambridge as _alma mater_ is not for me--for us! My God! when I think
of what we should have been--what fair promise has been blighted by that
cursed, worthless--'

'Hush, hush! . . . But I feel it, too, as much as you. I have seen it
more forcibly lately. You would have obtained your degree long before
this time--possibly fellowship--and I should have been on my way to
mine.' 'Don't talk of it,' said the other. 'We must do the best we can.' They looked out of the window sadly, through the dusty panes, so high up
that only the sky was visible. By degrees the haunting trouble loomed
again, and Cornelius broke the silence with a whisper: 'He has called on
me!' The living pulses died on Joshua's face, which grew arid as a clinker. 'When was that?' he asked quickly. 'Last week.' 'How did he get here--so many miles?' 'Came by railway. He came to ask for money.' 'Ah!' 'He says he will call on you.' Joshua replied resignedly. The theme of their conversation spoilt his
buoyancy for that afternoon. He returned in the evening, Cornelius
accompanying him to the station; but he did not read in the train which
took him back to the Fountall Theological College, as he had done on the
way out. That ineradicable trouble still remained as a squalid spot in
the expanse of his life. He sat with the other students in the cathedral
choir next day; and the recollection of the trouble obscured the purple
splendour thrown by the panes upon the floor. It was afternoon. All was as still in the Close as a cathedral-green can
be between the Sunday services, and the incessant cawing of the rooks was
the only sound. Joshua Halborough had finished his ascetic lunch, and
had gone into the library, where he stood for a few moments looking out
of the large window facing the green. He saw walking slowly across it a
man in a fustian coat and a battered white hat with a much-ruffled nap,
having upon his arm a tall gipsy-woman wearing long brass earrings. The
man was staring quizzically at the west front of the cathedral, and
Halborough recognized in him the form and features of his father. Who
the woman was he knew not. Almost as soon as Joshua became conscious of
these things, the sub-dean, who was also the principal of the college,
and of whom the young man stood in more awe than of the Bishop himself,
emerged from the gate and entered a path across the Close. The pair met
the dignitary, and to Joshua's horror his father turned and addressed the
sub-dean. What passed between them he could not tell. But as he stood in a cold
sweat he saw his father place his hand familiarly on the sub-dean's
shoulder; the shrinking response of the latter, and his quick withdrawal,
told his feeling. The woman seemed to say nothing, but when the sub-dean
had passed by they came on towards the college gate. Halborough flew along the corridor and out at a side door, so as to
intercept them before they could reach the front entrance, for which they
were making. He caught them behind a clump of laurel. 'By Jerry, here's the very chap! Well, you're a fine fellow, Jos, never
to send your father as much as a twist o' baccy on such an occasion, and
to leave him to travel all these miles to find ye out!' 'First, who is this?' said Joshua Halborough with pale dignity, waving
his hand towards the buxom woman with the great earrings. 'Dammy, the mis'ess! Your step-mother! Didn't you know I'd married? She
helped me home from market one night, and we came to terms, and struck
the bargain. Didn't we, Selinar?' 'Oi, by the great Lord an' we did!' simpered the lady. 'Well, what sort of a place is this you are living in?' asked the
millwright. 'A kind of house-of-correction, apparently?' Joshua listened abstractedly, his features set to resignation. Sick at
heart he was going to ask them if they were in want of any necessary, any
meal, when his father cut him short by saying, 'Why, we've called to ask
ye to come round and take pot-luck with us at the Cock-and-Bottle, where
we've put up for the day, on our way to see mis'ess's friends at Binegar
Fair, where they'll be lying under canvas for a night or two. As for the
victuals at the Cock I can't testify to 'em at all; but for the drink,
they've the rarest drop of Old Tom that I've tasted for many a year.' 'Thanks; but I am a teetotaller; and I have lunched,' said Joshua, who
could fully believe his father's testimony to the gin, from the odour of
his breath. 'You see we have to observe regular habits here; and I
couldn't be seen at the Cock-and-Bottle just now.' 'O dammy, then don't come, your reverence. Perhaps you won't mind
standing treat for those who can be seen there?' 'Not a penny,' said the younger firmly. 'You've had enough already.' 'Thank you for nothing. By the bye, who was that spindle-legged, shoe-
buckled parson feller we met by now? He seemed to think we should poison
him!' Joshua remarked coldly that it was the principal of his college,
guardedly inquiring, 'Did you tell him whom you were come to see?' His father did not reply. He and his strapping gipsy wife--if she were
his wife--stayed no longer, and disappeared in the direction of the High
Street. Joshua Halborough went back to the library. Determined as was
his nature, he wept hot tears upon the books, and was immeasurably more
wretched that afternoon than the unwelcome millwright. In the evening he
sat down and wrote a letter to his brother, in which, after stating what
had happened, and expatiating upon this new disgrace in the gipsy wife,
he propounded a plan for raising money sufficient to induce the couple to
emigrate to Canada. 'It is our only chance,' he said. 'The case as it
stands is maddening. For a successful painter, sculptor, musician,
author, who takes society by storm, it is no drawback, it is sometimes
even a romantic recommendation, to hail from outcasts and profligates. But for a clergyman of the Church of England! Cornelius, it is fatal! To
succeed in the Church, people must believe in you, first of all, as a
gentleman, secondly as a man of means, thirdly as a scholar, fourthly as
a preacher, fifthly, perhaps, as a Christian,--but always first as a
gentleman, with all their heart and soul and strength. I would have
faced the fact of being a small machinist's son, and have taken my
chance, if he'd been in any sense respectable and decent. The essence of
Christianity is humility, and by the help of God I would have brazened it
out. But this terrible vagabondage and disreputable connection! If he
does not accept my terms and leave the country, it will extinguish us and
kill me. For how can we live, and relinquish our high aim, and bring
down our dear sister Rosa to the level of a gipsy's step-daughter?' CHAPTER III


There was excitement in the parish of Narrobourne one day. The
congregation had just come out from morning service, and the whole
conversation was of the new curate, Mr. Halborough, who had officiated
for the first time, in the absence of the rector. Never before had the feeling of the villagers approached a level which
could be called excitement on such a matter as this. The droning which
had been the rule in that quiet old place for a century seemed ended at
last. They repeated the text to each other as a refrain: 'O Lord, be
thou my helper!' Not within living memory till to-day had the subject of
the sermon formed the topic of conversation from the church door to
church-yard gate, to the exclusion of personal remarks on those who had
been present, and on the week's news in general. The thrilling periods of the preacher hung about their minds all that
day. The parish being steeped in indifferentism, it happened that when
the youths and maidens, middle-aged and old people, who had attended
church that morning, recurred as by a fascination to what Halborough had
said, they did so more or less indirectly, and even with the subterfuge
of a light laugh that was not real, so great was their shyness under the
novelty of their sensations. What was more curious than that these unconventional villagers should
have been excited by a preacher of a new school after forty years of
familiarity with the old hand who had had charge of their souls, was the
effect of Halborough's address upon the occupants of the manor-house pew,
including the owner of the estate. These thought they knew how to
discount the mere sensational sermon, how to minimize flash oratory to
its bare proportions; but they had yielded like the rest of the assembly
to the charm of the newcomer. Mr. Fellmer, the landowner, was a young widower, whose mother, still in
the prime of life, had returned to her old position in the family mansion
since the death of her son's wife in the year after her marriage, at the
birth of a fragile little girl. From the date of his loss to the present
time, Fellmer had led an inactive existence in the seclusion of the
parish; a lack of motive seemed to leave him listless. He had gladly
reinstated his mother in the gloomy house, and his main occupation now
lay in stewarding his estate, which was not large. Mrs. Fellmer, who had
sat beside him under Halborough this morning, was a cheerful,
straightforward woman, who did her marketing and her alms-giving in
person, was fond of old-fashioned flowers, and walked about the village
on very wet days visiting the parishioners. These, the only two great
ones of Narrobourne, were impressed by Joshua's eloquence as much as the
cottagers. Halborough had been briefly introduced to them on his arrival some days
before, and, their interest being kindled, they waited a few moments till
he came out of the vestry, to walk down the churchyard-path with him. Mrs. Fellmer spoke warmly of the sermon, of the good fortune of the
parish in his advent, and hoped he had found comfortable quarters. Halborough, faintly flushing, said that he had obtained very fair
lodgings in the roomy house of a farmer, whom he named. She feared he would find it very lonely, especially in the evenings, and
hoped they would see a good deal of him. When would he dine with them? Could he not come that day--it must be so dull for him the first Sunday
evening in country lodgings? Halborough replied that it would give him much pleasure, but that he
feared he must decline. 'I am not altogether alone,' he said. 'My
sister, who has just returned from Brussels, and who felt, as you do,
that I should be rather dismal by myself, has accompanied me hither to
stay a few days till she has put my rooms in order and set me going. She
was too fatigued to come to church, and is waiting for me now at the
farm.' 'Oh, but bring your sister--that will be still better! I shall be
delighted to know her. How I wish I had been aware! Do tell her,
please, that we had no idea of her presence.' Halborough assured Mrs. Fellmer that he would certainly bear the message;
but as to her coming he was not so sure. The real truth was, however,
that the matter would be decided by him, Rosa having an almost filial
respect for his wishes. But he was uncertain as to the state of her
wardrobe, and had determined that she should not enter the manor-house at
a disadvantage that evening, when there would probably be plenty of
opportunities in the future of her doing so becomingly. He walked to the farm in long strides. This, then, was the outcome of
his first morning's work as curate here. Things had gone fairly well
with him. He had been ordained; he was in a comfortable parish, where he
would exercise almost sole supervision, the rector being infirm. He had
made a deep impression at starting, and the absence of a hood seemed to
have done him no harm. Moreover, by considerable persuasion and payment,
his father and the dark woman had been shipped off to Canada, where they
were not likely to interfere greatly with his interests. Rosa came out to meet him. 'Ah! you should have gone to church like a
good girl,' he said. 'Yes--I wished I had afterwards. But I do so hate church as a rule that
even your preaching was underestimated in my mind. It was too bad of
me!' The girl who spoke thus playfully was fair, tall, and sylph-like, in a
muslin dress, and with just the coquettish _desinvolture_ which an
English girl brings home from abroad, and loses again after a few months
of native life. Joshua was the reverse of playful; the world was too
important a concern for him to indulge in light moods. He told her in
decided, practical phraseology of the invitation. 'Now, Rosa, we must go--that's settled--if you've a dress that can be
made fit to wear all on the hop like this. You didn't, of course, think
of bringing an evening dress to such an out-of-the-way place?' But Rosa had come from the wrong city to be caught napping in those
matters. 'Yes, I did,' said she. 'One never knows what may turn up.' 'Well done! Then off we go at seven.' The evening drew on, and at dusk they started on foot, Rosa pulling up
the edge of her skirt under her cloak out of the way of the dews, so that
it formed a great wind-bag all round her, and carrying her satin shoes
under her arm. Joshua would not let her wait till she got indoors before
changing them, as she proposed, but insisted on her performing that
operation under a tree, so that they might enter as if they had not
walked. He was nervously formal about such trifles, while Rosa took the
whole proceeding--walk, dressing, dinner, and all--as a pastime. To
Joshua it was a serious step in life. A more unexpected kind of person for a curate's sister was never
presented at a dinner. The surprise of Mrs. Fellmer was unconcealed. She
had looked forward to a Dorcas, or Martha, or Rhoda at the outside, and a
shade of misgiving crossed her face. It was possible that, had the young
lady accompanied her brother to church, there would have been no dining
at Narrobourne House that day. Not so with the young widower, her son. He resembled a sleeper who had
awaked in a summer noon expecting to find it only dawn. He could
scarcely help stretching his arms and yawning in their faces, so strong
was his sense of being suddenly aroused to an unforeseen thing. When
they had sat down to table he at first talked to Rosa somewhat with the
air of a ruler in the land; but the woman lurking in the acquaintance
soon brought him to his level, and the girl from Brussels saw him looking
at her mouth, her hands, her contour, as if he could not quite comprehend
how they got created: then he dropped into the more satisfactory stage
which discerns no particulars. He talked but little; she said much. The homeliness of the Fellmers, to
her view, though they were regarded with such awe down here, quite
disembarrassed her. The squire had become so unpractised, had dropped so
far into the shade during the last year or so of his life, that he had
almost forgotten what the world contained till this evening reminded him. His mother, after her first moments of doubt, appeared to think that he
must be left to his own guidance, and gave her attention to Joshua. With all his foresight and doggedness of aim, the result of that dinner
exceeded Halborough's expectations. In weaving his ambitions he had
viewed his sister Rosa as a slight, bright thing to be helped into notice
by his abilities; but it now began to dawn upon him that the physical
gifts of nature to her might do more for them both than nature's
intellectual gifts to himself. While he was patiently boring the tunnel
Rosa seemed about to fly over the mountain. He wrote the next day to his brother, now occupying his own old rooms in
the theological college, telling him exultingly of the unanticipated
_debut_ of Rosa at the manor-house. The next post brought him a reply of
congratulation, dashed with the counteracting intelligence that his
father did not like Canada--that his wife had deserted him, which made
him feel so dreary that he thought of returning home. In his recent satisfaction at his own successes Joshua Halborough had
well-nigh forgotten his chronic trouble--latterly screened by distance. But it now returned upon him; he saw more in this brief announcement than
his brother seemed to see. It was the cloud no bigger than a man's hand. CHAPTER IV


The following December, a day or two before Christmas, Mrs. Fellmer and
her son were walking up and down the broad gravel path which bordered the
east front of the house. Till within the last half-hour the morning had
been a drizzling one, and they had just emerged for a short turn before
luncheon. 'You see, dear mother,' the son was saying, 'it is the peculiarity of my
position which makes her appear to me in such a desirable light. When
you consider how I have been crippled at starting, how my life has been
maimed; that I feel anything like publicity distasteful, that I have ye
no political ambition, and that my chief aim and hope lie in the
education of the little thing Annie has left me, you must see how
desirable a wife like Miss Halborough would be, to prevent my becoming a
mere vegetable.' 'If you adore her, I suppose you must have her!' replied his mother with
dry indirectness. 'But you'll find that she will not be content to live
on here as you do, giving her whole mind to a young child.' 'That's just where we differ. Her very disqualification, that of being a
nobody, as you call it, is her recommendation in my eyes. Her lack of
influential connections limits her ambition. From what I know of her, a
life in this place is all that she would wish for. She would never care
to go outside the park-gates if it were necessary to stay within.' 'Being in love with her, Albert, and meaning to marry her, you invent
your practical reasons to make the case respectable. Well, do as you
will; I have no authority over you, so why should you consult me? You
mean to propose on this very occasion, no doubt. Don't you, now?' 'By no means. I am merely revolving the idea in my mind. If on further
acquaintance she turns out to be as good as she has hitherto seemed--well,
I shall see. Admit, now, that you like her.' 'I readily admit it. 