



Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the Web Archive




Transcriber's Note:
  1. Page scan source:
  http://www.archive.org/details/talesofcaravanin00haufrich






                                 TALES

                                 OF THE

                       CARAVAN, INN, AND PALACE. TALES

                                 OF THE

                       CARAVAN, INN, AND PALACE. BY
                             WILLIAM HAUFF. WITH THE ORIGINAL ILLUSTRATIONS. TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
                                   BY
                           EDWARD L. STOWELL. CHICAGO:
                      JANSEN, McCLURG, & COMPANY. 1882. COPYRIGHT,
                       JANSEN, MCCLURG & COMPANY. 1881. PRINTED BY DONNELLEY, GASSETTE & LOYD. TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE. In introducing to American readers these charming and unique Tales, a
few details may properly be given of their author's life and literary
work. The record, though brief, is one of unusual interest. Wilhelm Hauff was born at Stuttgart, Germany, in 1802, and received his
education at Tuebingen. He graduated from the University, in 1824, with
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy; and for the following two years
filled the position of tutor in a nobleman's family. It was during the
leisure hours afforded by this occupation that he composed the greater
part of the works upon which his fame rests. In 1826 he published his
"_Maerchenalmanach auf das Jahr 1826, fuer Soehne und Toechter
gebildeter Staende_," a translation of which is herewith tendered the
American public, under the changed and abbreviated title of: "Tales of
the Caravan, Inn, and Palace." In the same year, and closely following
the "Fairy Tales," came "_Mittheilungen aus den Memoiren des Satan_,"
"_Der Mann im Monde_," a second volume of "Satan's Memoirs," and a
collection of short tales. These volumes appeared in such rapid
succession as to obscure for a time the brilliancy of the "Fairy
Tales;" but later editions of them acquired a widespread circulation,
while their popularity is so constantly on the increase as to suggest
the thought that in time they may prove a formidable rival of the
"Arabian Nights," in the regards of the young, the world over. The publication of "The Man in the Moon" gave Hauff a national
reputation; but when his "_Lichtenstein, eine romantische Sage_"
appeared, shortly afterward, the Wuertembergers hailed him as the
coming Walter Scott of Germany. Whether he would have merited this fond
and proud prediction of his countrymen, can not now be told. We only
know that he seemed to recognize in the historical novel his true field
of labor, and that he had already begun a second work of this nature,
when he sickened and died, in the Fall of 1827, before he had reached
his twenty-fifth birthday. Hauff stood on the threshold of his career as an author, in the dawning
glory of his brilliant talents, when he was stricken down; yet his
writings betray no sign of immaturity, and his collected works assure
him a niche, high in the temple of literature. The art of investing
localities with ideal characters who, in the reader's imagination,
haunt the spot forever after, was a gift Hauff shared alike with his
English brothers, Scott and Dickens. On crossing the Bridge of Arts,
in Paris, at night, one familiar with his works is apt to look about
for the tall and graceful form of the "Beggar Girl," with her lantern,
and the plate held out so reluctantly for coins. Or, if he wander
through the rugged Suabian Alps, Hauff's "_Lichtenstein_" will be the
guide-book he consults; and through the valleys and over the hills to
the _Nebelhoehle_ he will trace the flight of the stern Duke Ulerich,
pausing maybe at the little village of Hardt to pick out if possible
the piper's home, and to look sharply at every village maid, lest the
kind-hearted little "Baerbele" should pass him unawares. Some of Hauff's poems became quite popular in Germany, and several of
his songs may be heard to-day rising on the evening air from out the
beautiful valleys he loved so well. Because of his genius and his early death, Hauff becomes associated in
our mind with the English poets, Chatterton, Keats and Shelley; and in
thinking of him we recall his own sad words--

     "Oh, how soon
      Vanish grace and beauty's bloom;
      Dost thou boast of cheeks ne'er paling,
      Glowing red and white unfailing? See! the roses wither all!" Chicago, _October_, 1881. E. L. S.




                               CONTENTS. PART I. Tales of the Caravan. THE CARAVAN,                                                    11
  THE CALIPH STORK,                                               15
  THE AMPUTATED HAND,                                             30
  THE RESCUE OF FATIMA,                                           49
  LITTLE MUCK,                                                    70
  THE FALSE PRINCE,                                               91

                                PART II. Tales of the Inn. THE INN IN THE SPESSART,                                       119
  THE HIRSCH-GULDEN,                                             126
  THE MARBLE HEART (_First Part_),                               151
  SAID'S ADVENTURES,                                             182
  THE CAVE OF STEENFOLL,                                         229
  THE MARBLE HEART (_Second Part_),                              260

                               PART III. Tales of the Palace. THE SHEIK'S PALACE AND HIS SLAVES,                             295
  THE DWARF NOSEY,                                               304
  ABNER, THE JEW,                                                340
  THE YOUNG ENGLISHMAN,                                          353
  THE STORY OF ALMANSOR,                                         381






                                 PART I. TALES OF THE CARAVAN. THE CARAVAN,

[Illustration]

Once upon a time, a large caravan moved slowly over the desert. On the
vast plain, where nothing was to be seen but sand and sky, might have
been heard in the far distance the tinkling bells of the camels and the
ringing hoof beats of horses. A thick cloud of dust that moved before
it indicated the approach of the caravan; and when a breeze parted this
cloud, gleaming weapons and brilliantly colored garments dazzled the
eye. Thus was the caravan revealed to a man who galloped towards it from one
side. He rode a fine Arabian horse, covered with a tiger skin; from the
deep-red trappings depended little silver bells, while on the horse's
head waved a plume of heron feathers. The horseman was of stately
bearing, and his attire corresponded in richness with that of his
horse. A white turban, richly embroidered with gold, covered his head;
his coat and Turkish trousers were of scarlet; while a curved sword,
with a rich hilt, hung at his side. He had pulled the turban down well
over his face; and this, with the black eyes that flashed from beneath
the bushy brows, together with the long beard that hung straight down
from his Roman nose, gave him a fierce and uncouth appearance. When the rider had approached to within about fifty paces of the
vanguard of the caravan, he spurred his horse forward, and in a few
moments reached the head of the procession. It was such an unusual
occurrence to see a single horseman riding over the desert that the
escort of the train, fearing an attack, thrust out their spears. "What do you mean?" cried the horseman, as he saw this warlike
reception. "Do you, then, believe a single man would attack your
caravan?" Ashamed of their momentary alarm, the escort dropped their lances;
while their leader rode up to the stranger and asked what he wanted. "Who is the master of this caravan?" inquired the horseman. "It does not belong to one man," replied the guide; "but to several
merchants who are returning from Mecca to their homes, and whom we
escort across the desert, as it often happens that travelers are
annoyed by robbers." "Then lead me to these merchants," requested the stranger. "That may not be done now," replied the guide, "as we must proceed
farther on before coming to a halt, and the merchants are at least a
quarter of an hour behind us; but if you will ride on with me until we
encamp for our mid-day rest, I will then comply with your wish." The stranger made no reply, but produced a pipe that was fastened to
his saddle-bow, and began to smoke, meanwhile riding near the leader of
the vanguard. The guide knew not what to make of the stranger; he
hardly dared to question him directly as to his name, and no matter how
skillfully he sought to draw him into conversation, the stranger would
only reply to such attempts as: "You smoke a fine quality of tobacco,"
or, "Your horse has a splendid pace," with a short "Yes, certainly." Finally they reached the spot where they were to camp for the noon. The
guide posted the guards, but remained himself with the stranger until
the caravan should come up. Thirty camels, heavily laden, and attended
by armed guards, passed by. After these came the four merchants to whom
the caravan belonged, mounted on fine horses. They were mostly men of
advanced age, of sober and staid appearance. Only one seemed much
younger than the others, and of more cheerful countenance and vivacious
spirits. A large number of camels and pack-horses completed the
caravan. The tents were pitched, and the horses and camels ranged around them in
a circle. In the centre stood a tent of blue silk cloth. To this tent
the leader of the guard led the stranger. As they entered through the
curtain, they saw the four merchants sitting on gold embroidered
cushions, while black slaves handed them food and drink. "Who is it you bring to us?" cried the young merchant to the guide. Before the guide could reply, the stranger said--

"My name is Selim Baruch, of Bagdad. On my way to Mecca I was captured
by a robber band, and three days ago I succeeded in making my escape
from them. The great Prophet permitted me to hear the bells of your
camels in the distance, and thus directed me to you. Allow me to
journey in your company. Your protection would not be extended to one
unworthy of it; and when you reach Bagdad, I will richly reward your
kindness, as I am the nephew of the Grand Vizier." The oldest merchant made reply: "Selim Baruch, you are welcome to our
shelter. It gives us pleasure to assist you. But first of all, sit down
and eat and drink with us." Selim Baruch accepted this invitation. On the conclusion of the repast,
the slaves cleared away the dishes, and brought long pipes and Turkish
sherbet. The merchants sat silently watching the blue clouds of smoke
as they formed into rings and finally vanished in the air. The young merchant at length broke the silence by saying--

"For three days we have sat thus on horseback and at table without
making any attempt to while away the time. To me this is very
wearisome, as I have always been accustomed after dinner to see a
dancer or to hear music and singing. Can you think of nothing, my
friends, to pass away the time?" The three older merchants continued to smoke, seemingly lost in
meditation, but the stranger said--

"Permit me to make a proposition. It is that at every camping-place one
of us shall relate a story to the others. This might serve to make the
time pass pleasantly." "You are right, Selim Baruch," said one of the merchants, "let us act
on the proposal." "I am glad the suggestion meets with your approval," said Selim; "but
that you may see I ask nothing unfair, I will be the first to begin." The merchants drew nearer together in pleased anticipation, and had the
stranger sit in the centre. The slaves replenished the cups and filled
the pipes of their masters, and brought glowing coals to light them. Then Selim cleared his voice with a generous glass of sherbet, stroked
the long beard away from his mouth, and said--

"Listen, then, to the story of the Caliph Stork." THE CALIPH STORK. I. One fine afternoon, Chasid, Caliph of Bagdad, reclined on his divan. Owing to the heat of the day he had fallen asleep, and was now but
just awakened, feeling much refreshed by his nap. He puffed at a
long-stemmed rosewood pipe, pausing now and then to sip the coffee
handed him by an attentive slave, and testifying his approval of the
same by stroking his beard. In short, one could see at a glance that
the Caliph was in an excellent humor. Of all others, this was the hour when he might be most easily
approached, as he was now quite indulgent and companionable; and
therefore it was the custom of his Grand Vizier, Mansor, to visit him
every day at this time. As usual, he came to-day; but, as was unusual with him, his expression
was quite serious. The Caliph, removing the pipe from his mouth for a moment, said--

"Why do you wear so sober a face, Grand Vizier?" The Vizier crossed his arms on his breast, bowed low before his master,
and made answer--

"Sire, whether my face be sober or no, I know not. But beneath the
castle walls stands a trader, who has such beautiful wares that I
cannot help regretting that I have no spare money." The Caliph, who had long wished for an opportunity to do his Vizier a
favor, sent his black slave below to bring up the trader. The slave
soon returned with the man, who was short and stout, of dark brown
complexion, and clothed in rags. He carried a box containing all manner
of wares: strings of pearls, rings, and richly-chased pistols, cups and
combs. The Caliph and Grand Vizier looked them all over, and finally
the Caliph selected a fine pair of pistols for Mansor and himself, as
well as a comb for the Vizier's wife. Now just as the merchant was about to close his box, the Caliph espied
a small drawer therein, and desired to know if it contained still other
valuables. By way of reply, the trader opened the drawer, disclosing a
little box containing a blackish powder, and a paper covered with
singular writing, that neither the Caliph nor Mansor was able to read. "These two articles," explained the trader, "came into my possession
through a merchant who found them on the street in Mecca. I do not know
what they contain, but, for a small consideration, you are welcome to
them, as I can make nothing of them." The Caliph, who took pleasure in preserving old manuscripts in his
library, even though he might not be able to read them, bought both the
paper and the box, and dismissed the merchant. Then, curious to know
what the manuscript contained, he inquired of the Vizier if he knew of
any one who could decipher it. "Most gracious master and benefactor," replied the Vizier, "near the
great mosque lives a man called Selim the Learned, who understands all
languages. Let him be summoned; perhaps he might know these secret
characters." The learned Selim was soon brought. "Selim," began the Caliph, "it is said that you are very learned. Look
for a moment at this writing, and see if you can make it out. If you
can read it, you shall receive a new holiday cloak from me; if you
cannot, you will get instead twelve lashes on the back and twenty-five
on the soles of your feet, for being misnamed Selim the Learned." Selim made an obeisance, saying, "Thy will be done, O Sire!" He then examined the writing long and attentively, suddenly exclaiming,
"If this be not Latin, Sire, then give me to the hangman!" "Read what is written there, if it is Latin!" commanded the Caliph. Selim thereupon began to translate as follows:

"_Man, whoever thou art, that findeth this, praise Allah for His
goodness. He who takes a pinch of this powder, at the same time
saying,_ MUTABOR, _will be able to transform himself into any animal,
and will also understand the language of animals. Whenever he wishes to
re-assume the human form, he shall bow three times towards the East and
pronounce the same word. But take care that thou dost not laugh while
thou art transformed, or the magic word would vanish utterly from thy
memory, and thou wouldst remain an animal._"

When Selim the Learned had read this, the Caliph was pleased beyond
measure. He made the scholar swear never to mention the secret to any
one; presented him with a beautiful cloak, and then dismissed him. Then
turning to his Vizier, he said--

"I call that a good investment, Mansor. I am impatient to become an
animal. Come to me to-morrow morning early. We will then go together to
the fields, take a little pinch of this magical snuff, and then listen
to what is said in the air and the water, in the forest and field." II. No sooner had the Caliph Chasid dressed and breakfasted on the
following morning, than the Grand Vizier arrived, as he had been
commanded to do, to accompany him on his walk. The Caliph put the box
containing the magic powder in his sash, and after bidding his
attendants remain in the castle, started off, attended only by Mansor. They first took their way through the extensive gardens of the Caliph,
vainly searching for some living thing, in order to make their
experiment. The Vizier at last proposed that they go farther on, to a
pond, where he had frequently seen many creatures, more especially
storks. The Caliph consented to the proposal of Mansor, and went with him
towards the pond. Arriving there, they saw a stork walking up and down,
looking for frogs, and occasionally striking out before him with his
bill. At the same time far up in the sky they discerned another stork
hovering over this spot. "I will wager my beard, Most Worthy Master," said the Vizier, "that
these two storks will hold a charming conversation together. What say
you to our becoming storks?" "Well thought of!" answered the Caliph. "But first let us carefully
examine again the directions for resuming our human form. All right! By
bowing three times towards the East and saying '_Mutabor_,' I shall be
once more Caliph, and you Grand Vizier. But, for heavens sake! recollect! _No laughing, or we are lost!_"

While the Caliph spoke, he noticed that the stork above their heads was
gradually approaching the earth. Quickly drawing the box from his
girdle, he put a good pinch to his nose, held out the box to the
Vizier, who also took a pinch, and both then cried out: "_Mutabor!_"

Their legs at once shrank up and became thin and red; the beautiful
yellow slippers of the Caliph and his companion took on the shape of
stork's feet; their arms developed into wings; their necks were
stretched until they measured a yard in length; their beards vanished,
while white feathers covered their bodies. "You have a beautiful bill, Mr. Grand Vizier," cried the Caliph, after
a long pause of astonishment. "By the beard of the Prophet! I never saw
any thing like it in my life." [Illustration]

"Thank you most humbly," replied the Vizier, bowing low; "but, if I
dare venture the assertion, Your Highness presents a much handsomer
appearance as a stork than as Caliph. But come; if agreeable to you,
let us keep watch on our companions over there, and ascertain whether
we can really understand _Storkish_." In the meantime the other stork had alighted on the ground, cleaned its
feet with its bill, smoothed its feathers nicely, and approached the
first stork. The two newly-made storks now made haste to get near them,
and, to their surprise, overheard the following conversation:

"Good morning, Mrs. Longlegs! So early in the meadow?" "Thank you kindly, dear Clapperbill; I was just procuring a little
breakfast for myself. How would a portion of lizard suit you, or a leg
of a frog?" "Much obliged; but, I have not the least appetite to-day. I come to the
meadow for quite another purpose. I am to dance to-day before my
father's guests, and therefore wish to practice a little in private." So saying, the young stork stepped over the field in a series of
wonderful evolutions. The Caliph and Mansor looked on in wonder. But
when she struck an artistic attitude on one foot, and began to fan
herself gracefully with her wings, the two could no longer contain
themselves. An irrepressible fit of laughter burst forth from their
bills, from which it took them a long time to recover. The Caliph was
the first to compose himself. "That was sport!" exclaimed he, "that money could not buy. It's too bad
that the stupid creatures were frightened away by our laughter, or they
would certainly have tried to sing." Just here the Vizier remembered that laughing during the transformation
was forbidden them. He communicated his anxiety to the Caliph. "Zounds! By the Cities of the Prophet, that would be a bad joke if I
were compelled to remain a stork! Try and think of that stupid word,
Mansor! For the life of me, I can't recall it!" "We must bow three times towards the East, calling: _Mu_-- _Mu_--
_Mu_." They turned towards the East, and bowed away so zealously that their
bills nearly ploughed up the ground. But, O Horror! the magic word had
escaped them; and no matter how often the Caliph bowed, or how
earnestly his Vizier called out--_Mu_-- _Mu_, their memory failed them;
and the poor Chasid and his Vizier remained storks. III. Sadly the enchanted ones wandered through the fields, without the
slightest idea of what course they had better pursue in their present
plight. They could neither get rid of their feathers, nor could they
return to the town with any hope of recognition; for who would believe
a stork, were he to proclaim himself Caliph? or, even believing the
story, would the citizens of Bagdad be willing to have a stork for
their Caliph? So they stole about for several days, supporting
themselves very poorly on fruits, which, on account of their long
bills, they could eat only with great difficulty. For lizards and frogs
they had no appetite, fearing lest such tit-bits might disagree with
their stomachs. The only consolation left them in their wretchedness
was the power of flight; and they often flew to the roofs of Bagdad,
that they might see what occurred there. For the first day or two,
they noticed great excitement in the streets, followed by sadness. But about the fourth day after their enchantment, while they were
resting on the roof of the Caliph's palace, they observed down in the
street a brilliant procession. Trumpets and fifes sounded. A man in a
gold-embroidered scarlet coat sat upon a richly caparisoned steed,
surrounded by a gay retinue. Half Bagdad followed him, and all shouted:

[Illustration]

"Hail Mizra! Ruler of Bagdad!" The two storks perched on the palace roof, exchanged a glance, and
Caliph Chasid said--

"Do you perceive now the meaning of my enchantment, Grand Vizier? This
Mizra is the son of my deadly enemy, who, in an evil hour, swore to
revenge himself on me. But still I will not give up all hope. Come with
me, thou faithful companion of my misfortune, we will make a pilgrimage
to the grave of the Prophet. Perhaps in that sacred place the spell
will be removed." They rose from the palace roof and flew in the direction of Medina. But
so little practice had the two storks had in flying, that it fared hard
with them. "Oh, Sire!" groaned the Grand Vizier, after a few hours' flight, "with
your permission I shall have to stop. You fly much too fast! And it is
now evening, and we should do well to look out for a place on which to
alight for the night." Chasid harkened to the request of his follower, and, perceiving a ruin
that promised to afford a shelter, they flew down to it. The place they
had selected for the night bore the appearance of having once been a
castle. Beautiful columns rose out of the ruins, while several rooms
still in a fair state of preservation, testified to the former splendor
of the building. Chasid and his companion strolled through the
passages, seeking some dry sheltered spot, when suddenly the stork
Mansor stopped. "Sire," whispered he softly, "I wish it were not so unbecoming in a
Grand Vizier, and even more in a stork, to fear ghosts! My courage is
fast failing me, for near here there was a distinct sound of sighing
and groaning!" The Caliph also stopped, and very plainly heard a low sobbing that
seemed to proceed from a human being, rather than from an animal. Full
of curiosity, he was about to approach the place whence the sounds
came, when the Vizier caught him by the wing with his bill, and begged
him most earnestly not to plunge into new and unknown dangers. All in
vain! for the Caliph, who even under a stork's wing, carried a stout
heart, tore himself away with the loss of a few feathers, and hastened
into a dark passage. He shortly came to a door, through which he
plainly heard sighs intermingled with low groans. He pushed open the
door with his bill, but remained standing on the threshold in surprise. In the ruined room, lighted but dimly by a small lattice window, he saw
a large owl sitting on the floor. Large tears fell from its great round
eyes, while in passionate tones it poured forth its complaints from its
curved beak. But when the owl saw the Caliph and his Vizier, who by
this time had stolen up, it raised a loud cry of joy. Daintily brushing
the tears from its eyes with the brown spotted wings, it exclaimed in
pure human Arabic, to the wonder of the listeners:

"Welcome, storks! You are a good omen, as it was once prophecied that
storks would be the bearers of good fortune to me." As soon as the Caliph had sufficiently recovered from his astonishment,
he made a bow with his long neck, brought his slender feet into a
graceful position, and said--

"O owl of the night! from your words I believe I see in you a companion
in misfortune. But, alas! Your hope that we can give you relief is
doomed to disappointment. You will yourself appreciate our helplessness
when you have heard our story." The owl requested him to relate it; which the Caliph did, just as we
have heard it. IV. When the Caliph had concluded his story, the owl thanked him, and said:

"Listen also to my tale, and learn that I am not less unfortunate than
yourself. My father is king of India. I, his only and unhappy daughter,
am named Lusa. That same Sorcerer, Kaschnur, who transformed you,
plunged me also into misery. One day he came to my father and demanded
me in marriage for his son Mizra. But my father, who is a quick
tempered man, had him thrown down-stairs. The wretch found means, by
assuming other forms, of approaching me; and one day, as I was taking
the air in my garden, he appeared, dressed as a slave, and handed me a
drink that changed me into this horrible shape. He brought me here
senseless from fright, and shouted in my ears with a terrible voice:
'Here you shall remain, ugly, despised by every creature, until death;
or till some man voluntarily offers to marry you in your present form! Thus do I revenge myself on you and your proud father!' Since then many
months have passed. Lonely and sad, I live as a hermit within these
walls, abhorred by the world, despised even by animals, shut out from
all enjoyment of the beauties of nature, as I am blind by day, and only
at night, when the moon sheds its pale light over these walls, does the
veil fall from my eyes." The owl finished her story, and once more brushed away with her wing
the tears which the recital of her sufferings had caused. The Caliph was sunk in deep thought over the story of the Princess. "Unless I am greatly in error," said he, "there is a hidden connection
between our misfortunes; but where shall I find the key to this
riddle?" "O, Sire," the owl replied, "I suspect that too, for when I was a
little child it was foretold me by a soothsayer that a stork would
sometime bring me great good fortune. And I think I know a way by which
we can accomplish our own rescue." In great surprise the Caliph asked her in what way she meant. "The sorcerer who has done this wrong to us both," she answered, "comes
once a month to these ruins. Not far from here there is a room in which
he is accustomed to hold a banquet with many of his fellows. Many times
have I heard them there. On these occasions they relate to each other
their shameful deeds. Perhaps then he will divulge the magic word you
have forgotten." "O, dearest Princess," cried the Caliph, "tell us, when does he come,
and where is the banqueting hall?" The owl remained silent for a moment, and then said:

"Do not take it unkindly; but only on one condition can I inform you." "Speak out! speak out!" exclaimed Chasid. "Whatever your condition it
will be acceptable to me." "Well then, I am also desirous of being set free; but this can only
happen by one of you offering me his hand." The storks were somewhat disconcerted at this proposal; and the Caliph
beckoned his follower to leave the room with him. "Grand Vizier," said the Caliph, closing the door behind them, "this is
a pretty piece of business! But you, now, might take her." "Indeed?" answered he, "and thus give my wife cause to scratch my eyes
out, when I get home? Then, too, I am an old man; whereas you are young
and unmarried, and therefore in a better position to offer your hand to
a beautiful young princess." "That's the very point," sighed the Caliph, as he sadly allowed his
wings to droop to the ground. "It would be buying a cat in the bag; for
what assurance have you that she is young and beautiful?" They discussed the matter for a long time, until at last the Caliph,
convinced that the Vizier would rather remain a stork than marry the
Princess, concluded to fulfill the condition she had imposed on
himself. The owl was greatly rejoiced, and confessed that they could not have
come at a better time, as it was probable that the sorcerers would
assemble there that very night. The owl then left the room with the
storks to show them to the banquet-room. For a long time they walked
through a dark passage, when finally there streamed out bright rays of
light through a broken wall. As they came up to the wall the owl
cautioned the storks to remain perfectly quiet. The gap in which they
stood overlooked a large room, adorned on all sides with marble
columns, and tastefully decorated; countless colored lamps made the
place light as day. In the centre of the room stood a round table
covered with various dainty dishes, and upon the divan that encircled
it, sat eight men. In one of these men the storks recognized the trader
who had sold them the magic powder. The person who sat next to him
called on him to relate his latest deeds. The trader then told the
story of the Caliph and his Vizier. V.

"What kind of a word did you give them?" asked the other sorcerer. "A very hard Latin word--_Mutator_." When the storks from their place in the wall, heard this, they were
almost beside themselves with joy. They ran so fast toward the outlet
of the ruins that the owl could hardly keep up with their long legs. Once clear of the building, the Caliph said to the owl with much
feeling:

"Savior of my life and the life of my friend! As a lasting reward for
what you have done, take me for your husband." Then he turned to the East. Three times the storks bowed their long
necks to the sun just rising above the mountains, "_Mutabor!_" shouted
they, and in a trice they were men again. Then, in the joy of their
newly-returned life, master and follower were laughing and weeping by
turns in each other's arms. But who could describe their astonishment when they turned around and
saw a beautiful lady, richly dressed, standing before them? With a
smile she gave the Caliph her hand. "Do you no longer recognize the owl?" she asked. It really was the Princess. The Caliph was so enraptured by her beauty
and grace, that he declared his transformation into a stork had been
the best piece of fortune that had ever happened to him. The three now set out together on their journey to Bagdad. The Caliph
found in his clothes not only the box of magic powder, but his purse as
well. He therefore bought in the next village whatever was necessary
for their journey, and thus they soon reached the gates of Bagdad. There the arrival of the Caliph caused the greatest surprise. He had
long since been given up for dead, and the joy of the people at getting
back their beloved ruler knew no bounds. All the more was their wrath
inflamed against the traitor Mizra. They rushed to the palace, and took
the old sorcerer and his son prisoners. The Caliph sent the old man to the ruins, and had him hanged in the
very room that had been occupied by the Princess when an owl. But to
the son, who understood nothing of the art of his father, he gave the
choice of death or a pinch of the powder. As the prisoner chose the
latter, the Grand Vizier offered him the box. A generous pinch,
followed by the magic word of the Caliph, and he became a stork. The
Caliph secured him in an iron cage, which was placed in the garden. Long and happily Caliph Chasid lived with his wife, the Princess. His
pleasantest hours were always those of the afternoon, when the Grand
Vizier visited him. Then they often spoke of their adventures as
storks, and whenever the Caliph felt unusually merry, he began to
imitate the Grand Vizier as he appeared when a stork. He stalked up and
down the room, set up a great clapping, waved his arms as though they
were wings, and showed how the Vizier had turned to the East and
called, "_Mu_-- _Mu_-- _Mu_--." All this was great sport for the
Caliph's wife and children. But sometimes, when the Caliph clapped too
long and cried, "_Mu_-- _Mu_-- _Mu_--" too often, the Vizier was wont
to silence him with the threat that if he did not stop he would tell
the Princess what their conversation had been before the door of her
room in the ruin. As Selim Baruch finished his story, the merchants testified their
approval thereof most heartily. "Of a truth, the afternoon has passed without our knowing it," said one
of them, lifting the curtain of the tent. "The evening wind blows
fresh; we could put behind us a good stretch of road." As his companions were of the same opinion, the tents were folded, and
the caravan started on its way in the same order in which it had
entered camp. They journeyed nearly all night, as the days were hot and sultry, while
the night was cool and starlit. They came at last to a convenient
camping place, pitched their tents and lay down to rest. But the
merchants did not neglect to provide for the stranger as bountifully as
if he had been their most honored guest. One gave him a cushion,
another blankets, a third gave him slaves; in short, he was as well
provided for as though he had been at home. The heated hours of the day were already upon them when they arose from
their slumbers, and they therefore unanimously decided to remain where
they were until evening. When night approached, the movement of the caravan was resumed, and its
progress was continued until the following noon without impediment. After they had halted and refreshed themselves, Selim Baruch said to
Muley, the youngest of the merchants--

"Although you are the youngest of us all, you are always cheerful, and
could certainly give us a merry tale. Serve it up, so that we may
refresh ourselves after the heat of the day." "I should be glad to relate something that would amuse you," answered
Muley. "Still, modesty in all things is becoming to youth; therefore,
my older traveling companions should take precedence. Zaleukos is
always so serious and silent, ought he not to tell us what it is that
clouds his life? Perhaps we should be able to lighten his sorrow, if
such he experiences; for we would willingly treat him as a brother,
even though he is not of our religion." The person thus addressed was a Greek merchant--a man in middle age,
fine looking and of vigorous frame, but very grave. Although he was an
unbeliever (that is, not a Musselman), he was much beloved by his
fellow-travelers, as his whole conduct had won their esteem and
confidence. He had but one hand, and some of his companions supposed
that this loss was the cause of his grief. Zaleukos replied to the confidential inquiries of Muley: "I am much
honored by the interest you take in me, but have no grief--at least
none that you, with even the best intentions, could dispel. Still, as
Muley seems to lay so much stress on my sadness, I will tell you
something that will perhaps account for my appearing sadder than other
people. As you see, I have lost my left hand. It was not missing at my
birth, but I was deprived of it in the darkest hours of my life. Whether my punishment was just--whether, under the circumstances, my
features could be other than sad--you may judge for yourselves when you
have heard the story of the Amputated Hand." THE AMPUTATED HAND. I was born in Constantinople. My father was an interpreter at the
Sublime Porte, carrying on at the same time quite a lucrative trade in
ottar of roses and silk goods. He gave me a good education, devoting a
part of his own time to my instruction, and also employing one of our
priests to superintend my studies. At first he designed me to be
the successor of his business, but as I developed greater talents
than even he had expected, he changed his mind, and, by the advice
of his friends, concluded to make a physician of me; inasmuch as a
doctor, whose acquirements were greater than those of the quacks on the
market-place, was sure of making his way in Constantinople. Many Franks
came to our house, and one of them persuaded my father to allow me to
go to the city of Paris, in his country, where the best medical
education might be had gratuitously. He proposed to take me with him on
his return journey, and the trip should cost me nothing. My father, who
had traveled widely in his youth, assented to the arrangement, and the
Frenchman told me I should have three months in which to get ready. I was beside myself with joy at the prospect of seeing foreign
countries, and waited for the day of our departure with great
impatience. At last the Frenchman finished his business, and prepared
for the journey. On the evening before we started, my father led me
into his bedchamber. There I saw fine apparel and weapons lying on the
table. But that which attracted my attention most was a large pile of
gold, larger than I had ever before seen. My father embraced me,
saying--

"See, my son, I have provided these clothes for your journey. These
weapons are also yours; they are the same that your grandfather buckled
on me when I went out into the world. I know that you can wield them;
but never use them except in self-defense, and then strike hard. My
fortune is not large; look, I have divided it into three parts: one is
yours, another is for my own support, but the third is a sacred trust,
to be well guarded, and meant to serve you in the hour of need." Thus spake my good old father, while tears stood in his eyes, perhaps
from a presentiment that he would never see me again. Every thing went well on the journey. We soon arrived in the land of
the Franks, and six days afterwards we entered the great city of Paris. My friend rented a room for me there, and advised me as to the best
disposition to make of my money, which amounted in all to two thousand
thalers. I lived for three years in this city, and learned what a qualified
physician should know; but I should be guilty of untruth were I to say
that I lived there contentedly, for the customs of this people did not
please me. I had but few good friends there, but these few were noble
young men. In all this time I had heard nothing from my father. The
desire to see my home finally prevailed over all other considerations. I therefore seized a favorable opportunity to return. An embassy from
the Franks was bound to the Sublime Porte. I engaged as surgeon in the
retinue of the ambassadors, and arrived safely once more in Stamboul. I found my father's house closed. The neighbors were astonished to see
me, and told me that my father had been dead for two months. The priest
who had instructed me in my youth, brought me the key, and alone and
bereft I entered the desolate house. I found every thing as my father
had left it, with the single exception of the gold that he had promised
to leave me--that was missing. I asked the priest about it. He made a
low bow, and replied:

"Your father died as a holy man, leaving his gold to the church." This was incomprehensible to me, yet what should I do? I had no
witnesses against the priest, and must console myself with the
reflection that he had not also regarded the house and goods of my
father as a legacy to the church. This was the first misfortune that
happened to me, but from this time forth, stroke followed stroke. My
reputation as a physician did not spread, because I could not stoop to
advertise myself on the market-place; and, above all, I missed my
father, whose recommendation would have secured me admittance to the
wealthiest and most influential families, which now never gave a
thought to the poor Zaleukos. Then, too, my father's goods found no
sale, as the old customers disappeared after his death, and to gain new
ones would require time. Once, as I was hopelessly thinking over my situation, it occurred to me
that I had often seen countrymen of mine wandering through the land of
the Franks, and displaying their wares in the squares of the cities. I
remembered that their goods found a ready sale, because they came from
a strange country, and that the profits on such merchandise were very
large. My resolution was taken at once. I sold the homestead, gave a
part of the sale money to a trustworthy friend to keep for me, and with
the remainder bought such goods as were not common among the Franks;
shawls, silk stuff's, ointments, oils, etc. I then took passage on a
ship, and so began my second journey to the land of the Franks. It seemed as though fortune smiled on me again the moment we left the
Dardanelles behind. Our voyage was short and fortunate. I wandered
through the cities and towns of the Franks, and every-where found ready
purchasers for my wares. My friend in Stamboul kept forwarding me
consignments of fresh goods, and day by day my financial condition
improved. When I thought I had made money enough to venture on some
larger undertaking, I went to Italy with my goods. I have omitted
speaking on one thing that brought me in quite a little sum of money;
this was my knowledge of medicine. When I entered a town, I scattered
notices announcing the arrival of a Greek physician, whose skill had
restored many to health; and my balsams and medicines brought me in
many a sequin. At last I reached the city of Florence. It was my intention to remain
some time in this place, partly because the city pleased me, and partly
for the reason that I wished to recover from the fatigue of my
wanderings. I rented a shop in the Santa Croce quarter, and not far
from it, in an inn, I found a suite of beautiful rooms that overlooked
a terrace. I then distributed notices that advertised me as a merchant
and physician. I had no sooner opened my shop than a stream of
customers poured in, and although my prices were rather high, I sold
more than others, because I was polite and affable with my customers. I had passed four days pleasantly in Florence, when one evening, after
closing my shop, as I was counting over the profits of the day, I came
across a note, in a little box, that I could not remember having put
there. I opened the note, and found that it contained a request that I
would come to the Ponte Vecchio that night punctually at twelve
o'clock. I studied for a long time over the matter; but, as I did not
know a soul in Florence, I concluded that somebody wished to lead me
secretly to a sick person, as had happened more than once before. I
therefore resolved to go; but, by way of precaution, I took along the
sword that my father had given me. Shortly before midnight I started, and soon came to the Ponte Vecchio. I found the bridge deserted, and determined to wait until the person
who had invited me there should appear. The night was cold; the moon
shone bright, and I looked down at the waves of the Arno gleaming in
the moonlight. The church clocks struck twelve. I raised my head, and
before me stood a tall man, covered with a red mantle, a corner of
which he held before his face. I was somewhat startled at first by his
sudden appearance, but collecting myself immediately, said to him:

"If you are the person who ordered me here, tell me what it is you
desire?" The man in the red mantle turned about and said slowly: "Follow me!" I felt somewhat uneasy about accompanying this stranger, and replied:
"Not so, dear sir, until you first tell me where I am to follow you;
and you might also show me your face, so that I may assure myself that
you mean me no harm." The stranger, however, assumed to be indifferent, and said, "If you
won't go, Zaleukos, then don't!" This aroused my anger. "Do you think," exclaimed I, "that a man like me
will allow himself to be made sport of by every fool? and that I should
wait here in this cold night for nothing?" In three leaps I reached him, seized him by the cloak, and shouted
still louder, at the same time laying my other hand on my sword; but
the stranger had already disappeared around the next corner, leaving
the cloak in my hand. By and by my rage subsided; I still had the cloak, and this should
furnish the key to this singular adventure. I put it on and started to
go home. But before I had gone a hundred steps from the bridge,
somebody brushed by me, and whispered to me in French: "Take care,
Count; it can't be done to-night!" But before I could look around, this
person was far away, and I saw only a shadow flitting by the houses. I
saw at once that these whispered words were meant for the owner of the
cloak, and did not in any way concern me; but they shed no light on the
mystery. The next morning I considered what would better be done in the matter. My first thought was to have the mantle cried in the streets, as though
I had found it, but in that case the owner could have sent for it by
some third party, and I should be no wiser for my pains. While
I was thinking of this, I examined the mantle closely. It was of heavy
reddish-purple Genoese velvet, with a border of Astrachan fur, and
richly embroidered with gold. The splendid appearance of the cloak led
me to think of a plan that I resolved to put in execution. I took the
cloak to my store, and offered it for sale; but placed such a high
price on it that I was sure it would find no purchaser. My purpose in
this was to look everybody who asked about the furred cloak directly in
the eye. I thought that as I had had a momentary glimpse of the figure
of the unknown man after the loss of his cloak, I would know it among a
thousand. There were many admirers of the cloak, whose extraordinary
beauty attracted all eyes; but none of them resembled the stranger, and
not one of them would pay the exorbitant price of two hundred sequins. It struck me as strange that when I asked one and another whether such
cloaks were common in Florence, they all answered, "no," and assured me
that they had never before seen such a rich and elegant piece of work. As evening drew near, a young man, who had often been in my shop, and
who had already bid high for the cloak, came in, and threw down a purse
of sequins, exclaiming:

"Before God, Zaleukos, I must have your cloak, even if it beggars me." He at once began to count out his gold pieces. I was in quite a
dilemma. I had only hung up the mantle in order that it might perhaps
catch the eye of its owner; and along came a young fool to pay the
monstrous price, but what could I do? I finally consented to the
bargain, as from one point of view I should be well compensated for my
night's adventure. The youth put on the mantle and left, but turned on
the threshold and detached a paper that was fastened to the mantle,
which he threw to me, saying: "Here, Zaleukos, is something that
evidently does not go with the cloak." I took the paper unconcernedly, and found the following words were
written on it: "Bring the cloak to the Ponte Vecchio to-night, at the
appointed time, and you will receive four hundred sequins." I was thunderstruck. I had forfeited this chance, and, had not even
attained my purpose. But not stopping to consider the matter, I
gathered up the two hundred sequins, and rushed out after the man who
had bought the cloak. "Take back your money my good friend," said I,
"and leave me the mantle, as it is impossible for me to part with it." At first the young man looked on this as a joke; but when he saw that I
was really in earnest, he angrily refused to comply with my demand,
treated me as a fool, and thus we speedily came to blows. I was so
fortunate as to snatch the cloak away from him in the scuffle, and was
hastening away with it, when the young man summoned the police, and we
were taken to court. The judge was surprised at the accusation against
me, and awarded the cloak to my opponent. But I offered the young man
twenty, fifty, eighty, yes, one hundred sequins, over and above his two
hundred, if he would leave me in possession of the mantle. My gold
accomplished what my entreaties could not. He took my sequins, while I
carried away the mantle in triumph, contenting myself with the thought
that even if all Florence considered me insane, I knew, better than
they, that I should clear something by this transaction. Impatiently I awaited the night. At the same hour as on the previous
night, I went to the Ponte Vecchio with the mantle on my arm. At the
last stroke of the clock, a form approached out of the darkness. It was
undoubtedly the man I had met the night before. "Have you the mantle?" I was asked. "Yes," replied I; "but it cost me a hundred sequins cash." "I know it," was the reply, "look here, there are four hundred." He walked with me up to the broad balustrade of the bridge, and counted
out the gold pieces. They glistened brightly in the moonlight; their
gleam rejoiced my heart. Oh, I dreamed not that it was the last joy it
would ever experience. I put the money in my pocket, and attempted to
get a good look at the stranger; but he wore a mask, through which dark
eyes darted a formidable look on me. "I thank you, sir, for your kindness," said I. "What now do you require
from me? But I say to you beforehand that it must not be any thing
wrong." "Your anxiety is needless," replied he, as he placed the mantle on his
shoulders. "I need your services as a doctor; still, not for a living
patient, but for a dead one." "How can that be?" cried I, in astonishment. "I came with my sister from a distant country," began the stranger,
beckoning me at the same time to follow him. "I lived with her here at
the house of a friend. My sister had been ill, and yesterday she died
suddenly. Her relatives will bury her to-morrow. But in accordance with
an old custom in our family, all of its members must be buried in the
tomb of their ancestors. Many who died in foreign lands were embalmed
and brought home. I will permit our relatives here to keep my sister's
body, but I must at least take to my father the head of his daughter,
that he may see her once more." This custom of cutting off the heads of beloved relatives seemed
horrible to me; still I thought best not to offer any objections, lest
the stranger should feel insulted. I therefore told him that I was
acquainted with the method of embalming the dead, and requested him to
conduct me to the deceased. Still I could not refrain from inquiring
why all this was to be conducted so secretly and at night? He answered
that his relatives, holding his views on this subject to be wicked,
would prevent him from carrying them out by day; but when the head was
once removed, they could say little more on the subject. Of course he
might have brought me the head himself but a natural feeling held him
back from removing it. In the meantime we had reached a large and magnificent house, which my
companion pointed out to me as the end of our night's pilgrimage. We
passed by the principal gate, entering by a smaller one, which the
stranger closed carefully after him, and ascended a spiral staircase in
the darkness. It led into a dimly lighted corridor, from which he
gained a room which was lighted by a lamp suspended from the ceiling. In this room was a bed, on which the body lay. The stranger turned his
head away, apparently making an attempt to hide his tears. He pointed
to the bed; ordered me to do my work well and quickly, and walked out
of the door. I took out my instruments, which as a physician I always carried with
me, and approached the bed. Only the head of the dead girl was visible,
but this was so beautiful that I was seized with the deepest pity. The
dark hair hung down in long braids; the face was pale; the eyes were
closed. I first made a slight incision in the skin, as is the practice with
surgeons when they are about to remove a limb. Then I selected my
sharpest knife, and with one stroke cut through the windpipe. But what
a tragedy! The girl opened her eyes, closing them again instantly, and
with a deep sigh, now, for the first time, breathed out her life, while
at the same time a warm stream of blood gushed from the wound. I was
sure that I had taken the life of this poor creature; for that she was
now dead was beyond question, as there could be no recovery from this
wound. [Illustration]

I stood some moments almost stupefied at what had taken place. Had the
man in the red mantle betrayed me, or had his sister been lying in a
trance? The latter conjecture seemed the most plausible. But I dared
not say this to the brother of the girl; therefore I resolved to take
the head completely off. But one more groan came from the dying girl, a
spasm shook her form, and all was over. Overcome with horror, I rushed
out of the room. But the lamp in the corridor had gone out, and there
was no trace of my companion. In the darkness, I was compelled to feel
my way along the wall to reach the stairway. I finally found it, and
descended, slipping and stumbling. Nor was there any one below. I found
the door unlocked, and breathed freer when I once more stood upon the
street. Urged on by terror, I ran to my rooms, and buried myself in the
cushions of my couch. But sleep fled from me, and the approach of morning warned me to
compose myself. It seemed altogether likely to me that the man who had
betrayed me into doing this atrocious deed would not inform on me. I
resolved to go on as usual with my business, and if possible to assume
a cheerful manner. But a new circumstance, that I now noticed for the
first time, increased my terror. My cap and girdle, as well as my
instruments, were missing, and I was uncertain whether I had left them
in the chamber of the murdered girl, or had lost them in my flight. Unfortunately the first supposition seemed the more probable, and thus
the murder would be traced to me. I opened my shop at the usual time. My neighbor, who was a talkative
man, came in to see me as usual in the morning. "What do you say to the horrible tragedy that happened last night?" was
his greeting. I acted as if I knew nothing about it. "What, is it
possible that you don't know what the whole city is talking about? Not
know that the most beautiful flower of Florence, Bianca, the Governor's
daughter, was murdered during the night? I saw her yesterday, looking
so happy as she rode through the streets with her lover; and to-day was
to have been her wedding day." Every word was a stab in my heart. And how often did I suffer these
pangs, as one by one my customers repeated the story, each making it
more horrible than the other! And yet none of them could make it as
terrible as it had been when presented to my own eyes. About noon an officer from the court stepped into my shop, and
requested me to send the people away. "Signor Zaleukos," said he, producing the articles I had missed, "are
these things yours?" I hesitated for a moment whether I should deny all knowledge of them;
but as I saw through the half open door my landlord and several
acquaintances who could have borne witness against me, I determined not
to make the matter worse by a lie, and acknowledged the ownership of
the articles. The officer bade me follow him, and led me to a large
building, which I soon recognized as the prison. There he showed me to
a room, telling me that I should occupy it for the present. My situation seemed desperate when I came to think it over in the
solitude of the prison. The thought that I had committed murder, even
though it was done accidentally, kept returning to my mind. Neither
could I hide from myself the fact that the glitter of the gold had
captivated my senses, or I should never have rushed so blindly into
this affair. Two hours after my arrest I was led out of my chamber. Passing down
several steps, we entered a large hall. Twelve men, most of them of
advanced age, sat at a long table, covered with a black cloth. On the
side of the hall were ranged rows of benches, filled with the
aristocracy of Florence. High up, in the galleries the spectators were
crowded close together. When I was brought before the black-covered
table, a man of dark and sad aspect arose. It was the Governor. He told
those assembled that he, being the father of the murdered girl, could
not preside over this case, and that he would vacate his seat, for the
present, in favor of the oldest senator. The oldest senator was a man
of at least ninety years. He was bent with age, and his temples were
fringed with thin white hairs; but his eyes were still brilliant, and
his voice was clear and strong. He began by asking me if I confessed to the murder. I besought him to
give me his attention, and related fearlessly and in distinct tones
what I had done. I noticed that as I proceeded, the Governor first
turned pale and then red; and when I had finished, he sprang up in a
rage. "What, wretch!" he exclaimed to me, "it is your intention, then,
to impute this crime, that you committed in a spirit of avarice, to
another?" The presiding senator reproved him for this outburst, and reminded him
that he had of his own accord renounced his right to direct the trial;
nor did it appear, he said, that I contemplated robbery, as, by his own
admission, nothing was stolen from his daughter. The senator declared
to the Governor that he must give an account of his daughter's past
life, as this was the only means of judging whether I had spoken the
truth or not. At the same time he would close the court for that day,
in order, as he said, to get some further information from the papers
of the deceased, which the Governor should turn over to him. I was led
back to my prison, where I passed a miserable day, occupied with the
eager wish that some connection might be established between the man in
the red mantle and the deceased. Full of expectation, I entered the hall of justice on the following
day. There were several letters on the table. The aged senator asked me
whether they were in my hand-writing. I looked at them, and found that
they must have been written by the same hand that wrote me the two
notes I had received. I expressed this belief to the senators, but they
paid no attention to my opinion, and answered that I both could and did
write those notes myself, as the signature at the end of the letters
was certainly a Z, the initial letter of my name. And then the letters
contained threats against the deceased, and warnings against the
wedding which was about to take place. The Governor seemed to have made some strange disclosures about me, as
I was on this day treated more sternly and suspiciously. To justify
myself, I called for all the papers that were to be found in my room. But I was told that search had already been made there, and nothing
found. When the court broke up, my hope had entirely vanished; and when
I was led back to the hall on the third day, the verdict was
communicated to me. I had been convicted of willful murder, and
sentenced to death. To this, then, I had come at last! Deprived of
every thing that was still dear to me on earth, far from my home, I
should die innocent of crime, and, in the bloom of my youth, under an
ax! I was sitting in my lonely prison on the evening of the day that had
decided my fate, with my hopes all dissipated, and my thoughts
earnestly turned on death, when my prison door opened, and a man
entered, who regarded me long and silently. "And thus I find you once
more, Zaleukos?" said he. I had not recognized him by the dull gleam of
my lamp, but the tone of his voice awoke old memories in me. It was
Valetty, one of the few friends I had made during my studies in Paris. He said that happening to come to Florence, where his father, who was a
man of prominence, lived, he heard of my story; he had come to see me,
to learn from my own lips how I had come to commit so terrible a crime. I told him the whole story. He seemed very much astonished, and
implored me to tell him, my only friend, the whole truth, and not die
with a lie on my lips, I swore to him by every thing that was sacred
that I had spoken the truth, and that the only burden on my conscience
was that, dazed by the glitter of the gold, I had not perceived the
improbabilities in the stranger's story. "Then you did not know
Bianca?" asked he. I assured him that I had never seen her before. Valetty then told me that a deep secret hung over the deed, that the
Governor had passed sentence on me very hastily, and there was a rumor
among the people that I had known Bianca for a long time, and had
murdered her out of revenge for her approaching marriage with another. I remarked to him that all this might apply to the man in the red
mantle, but that I was unable to prove his participation in the deed. Valetty embraced me, weeping, and promised to make every effort to save
my life. I had but little hope, yet I knew that Valetty was a wise man
and experienced in the laws, and that he would do his best to save me. For two long days I remained in uncertainty. At last Valetty appeared. "I bring you consolation, even though it be painful," said he. "You
will live and be set at liberty; but with the loss of a hand." Joyfully I thanked my friend for my life. He told me that the Governor
was inexorably opposed to opening the case again, but that finally, in
order not to appear unjust, he agreed that if a similar case could be
found in any books of Florentine history, then my punishment should be
regulated by the punishment there recorded. Valetty and his father had
thereupon looked through the old books by day and night, and finally
found a case the exact counterpart of mine. The punishment there
awarded was stated thus: "His left hand shall be amputated, his goods
confiscated, and he himself banished forever." This was now to be my
punishment; and I had to prepare myself for the painful ordeal that
awaited me. But I will not dwell on that terrible hour when I stood on
the public square, laid my hand on the block, and felt my own blood
stream over me. Valetty took me to his own house until I had recovered; then he
generously provided me with money for my journey; as all that I had
acquired in my years of labor was forfeited to the State. I traveled
from Florence to Sicily, and there embarked on the first ship for
Constantinople. My hopes were turned upon the money I had given into
the keeping of my friend; I also asked permission to live with him, but
he astounded me with the question, why I did not occupy my own house? He informed me that a strange man had bought a house in my name in the
Greek quarter, and had told the neighbors that I would soon be there to
take possession of it. I immediately went there with my friend, and was
warmly welcomed by all my old acquaintances. An old merchant gave me a
letter, left by the man who had bought the house for me. The letter was as follows: "Zaleukos, two hands will be always ready to
provide so tirelessly for you that you will not feel the loss of one. The house that you see, and all it contains, is yours; and every year
you will be given enough to place you in the ranks of your
wealthiest countrymen. May you forgive him who is more unfortunate than
yourself." I suspected who had written this; and the merchant replied to my
question that he had taken the man to be a Frank, and that he wore a
red mantle. I knew enough to own to myself that the stranger was not
entirely destitute of noble sentiments. I found my new house fitted up
in the very best manner, and there was also a shop stocked with wares
finer than I had ever owned before. Ten years have passed since then; yet, more from habit than necessity,
I continue to make these commercial journeys. I have never since
visited that country where I met with my misfortune. Every year I
receive a thousand gold pieces. But though it rejoices me to know that
the unfortunate stranger has some noble traits of character, it is
impossible for him to cure the sorrow of my soul, which is perpetually
haunted by the terrible vision of the murdered Bianca. While the Greek merchant had told his story, the others had listened to
him with the deepest interest. Selim Baruch, particularly, had shown
much emotion, having sighed deeply several times, while Muley was sure
that at one time he had seen tears in his eyes. The merchants commented
for some time on the story. "And do you not hate the stranger who so basely endangered your life
and caused the loss of so important a member of your body?" asked Selim
Baruch. "There was a time at first," answered the Greek, "when my heart accused
him before God that he had brought this sorrow on me and poisoned my
life. But I found consolation in the religion of my fathers, which
commands me to love my enemies. And then he must be more unhappy than
I." "You are a noble man!" exclaimed Selim Baruch, as he pressed the Greek's
hand warmly. The leader of the guard here interrupted the conversation. He entered
the tent with an anxious air, and reported that it would not do for
them to retire to their couches, as this was the place where the
caravans were usually attacked; and, besides, his sentinels believed
they saw several horsemen in the distance. The merchants were greatly disturbed at this news; but Selim Baruch,
the stranger, expressed surprise at their consternation, and thought
that they were so strongly guarded that they need not fear a troop of
Arab robbers. "True, Master!" answered the leader of the escort; "if it were only
such fellows, one could lie down to sleep without anxiety. But for
sometime past the terrible Orbasan has appeared occasionally; and
therefore it behooves one to be on his guard." Selim desired to know who this Orbasan might be, and one of the
merchants answered him: "There are all sorts of reports current among
the people about this wonderful man. Some believe him to be a
supernatural being, because he has often overcome five or six men in a
fight. Others hold that he is a brave Frank, whom misfortune has driven
into these parts. But from all accounts this much is certain: that he
is an infamous robber and thief!" "But still you will hardly be able to maintain that," retorted Lezah,
another of the merchants. "Even though a robber, he is a magnanimous
man, and has shown himself such to my brother, as I could relate to
you. He has made orderly men of his whole band, and while he roams over
the desert, no other band dare show itself. Neither is he a common
robber, but simply levies a tax on the caravans, and whoever pays this
willingly may travel on without further molestation, for Orbasan is the
Ruler of the Desert." Thus the merchants discoursed in the tent; but the guard, who was
stationed around the camp, began to be uneasy. A considerable troop of
armed horsemen was seen at a distance of half an hour's ride, and
seemed to be making directly for the camp. One of the guard therefore
went into the tent to announce that they would probably be attacked. The merchants conferred with one another as to what was to be done:
whether they had better ride out and meet the attack, or await it in
camp. The two eldest merchants were in favor of the latter course; but
the fiery Muley and Zaleukos chose the first, and called on Selim to
follow their example. But Selim quietly drew a small blue cloth,
covered with red stars, from his girdle, tied it to a spear, and
ordered one of the slaves to fasten it to the top of the tent, saying
he would pledge his life that when the horsemen saw this signal they
would draw off quietly. Muley placed no faith in the result, but the
slave fixed the lance on top of the tent. In the meantime all those in
camp had seized their weapons, and looked for the horsemen in intense
expectancy. But they had apparently caught sight of the signal on the
tent, as they suddenly changed their course, and moved off from the
camp in an opposite direction. The merchants gazed in wonder, now at the vanishing horsemen, and then
on Selim. But he stood before the tent, looking out unconcernedly over
the plain, as if nothing unusual had happened. At length Muley broke
the silence. "Who are you, O mighty stranger?" cried he. "You that tame the wild
hordes of the desert by a signal." "You rate my power much higher than it is," answered Selim Baruch. "I
provided myself with this token when I fled from captivity. What it
signifies, I do not know myself; only this much I do know: that whoever
travels with this sign stands under powerful protection." The merchants thanked Selim and called him their deliverer; and really
the number of the horsemen was so great that the caravan could not have
resisted them very long. With lighter hearts the merchants laid down to rest; and when the sun
began to set, and the evening breeze blew over the plains of sand, they
broke camp, and resumed their journey. The next day they camped within a day's march of the end of the desert. When the travelers had gathered once more in the large tent, Lezah the
merchant began to speak:

"I told you yesterday that the dreaded Orbasan was a magnanimous man;
permit me to prove it to you to-day, by the recital of my brother's
fate. My father was Cadi at Acara. He had three children, of whom I was
the eldest. My brother and sister were considerably younger. When I was
twenty years old, my father's brother sent for me. He made me heir to
his property, with the condition that I should remain with him while he
lived. But he reached a good old age, so that I could not return home
until two years ago, having learned nothing in the meantime of the dark
cloud that had overshadowed our family, and how graciously Allah had
dispersed it." THE RESCUE OF FATIMA. My brother Mustapha and my sister Fatima were of nearly the same age. He was at the most, but two years older. They were devotedly attached
to one another, and together strove, by every means in their power, to
lighten the burden of our sick father's years. On Fatima's sixteenth birthday, my brother arranged a celebration in
her honor. He invited all her companions; served them with choice
viands in the garden; and towards evening invited them to a ride on the
sea, in a barge which he had hired, and decorated especially for the
occasion. Fatima and her companions joyfully accepted the invitation,
as the evening was fine, and the city viewed from the sea, especially
by night, presented a magnificent appearance. So highly did the young girls enjoy their ride, that they kept urging
my brother to take them still further out to sea. Mustapha consented
very unwillingly, as some days before a corsair had been seen standing
off the coast. Not far from the city a point of land extended out into
the sea. The young girls now expressed a desire to go there, that they
might see the sun set in the sea. As they rounded the cape, they saw,
at a little distance, a barge filled with armed men. With many
misgivings, my brother ordered the oarsmen to turn the boat around and
pull for shore. And in truth his fears did not seem to be groundless,
for the other barge gave chase to them, and, having more rowers, soon
overtook them--keeping in a line between my brother's barge and the
shore. When the young girls perceived their danger, they jumped up with
cries and lamentations. It was in vain that Mustapha tried to quiet
them; in vain did he urge them to be quiet, as, by their running about,
the boat was in danger of upsetting. His entreaties were not listened
to; and when finally the other boat came near, they all rushed to the
further side of Mustapha's boat and capsized it. But in the meantime the movements of the strange boat had been watched
from land, and as for some time past fears had been entertained of
corsairs, several barges pushed out from shore to render assistance to
my brother. They arrived just in time to pick up the drowning ones. In
the excitement, the hostile boat escaped; and in the two barges on
which the rescued had been placed, there was some uncertainty as to
whether all had been saved. These two boats were brought side by side,
and alas! it was found that my sister and one of her companions were
missing. At the same moment a man whom no one knew was discovered on
one of the barges. Mustapha's threats extorted from him the admission
that he belonged to the hostile ship that lay at anchor two miles to
the eastward, and that his companions, in their hasty flight, had left
him while he was in the very act of assisting the young girls out of
the water. He further said that he had seen two of them drawn into the
boat to which he belonged. The anguish of my aged father was intense. Mustapha, too, was nearly
wild with grief--not alone because his beloved sister was lost, and he
must blame himself as the author of her misfortune, but the companion
of Fatima's sad fate was his betrothed, though he had never dared to
mention that circumstance to our father, as the young lady's parents
were poor and low-born. But my father was a stern man. As soon as he was able to control his
grief, he sent for Mustapha, and said to him: "Your folly has robbed me
of the comfort of my old age, and the light of my eyes. Go! I banish
you forever from my sight; I curse you and all your descendants; and
only when you bring Fatima back to me, shall your father's curse be
lifted." My brother had not expected this. He had already formed the resolution
of going in search of his sister and her friend, and had come to his
father intending to ask his blessing on the undertaking; and now he was
sent out into the world with the weight of his father's curse on his
head. But if before sorrow had bent him to the ground, this blow, so
undeservedly given, steeled his soul. He went to the imprisoned pirate, to ask him where his ship was bound,
and learned that she was employed in the slave trade, and usually made
Balsora her market. When he returned home to prepare for his journey, his father's wrath
seemed to have cooled somewhat, as he sent him a purse of gold for his
support on the journey. Mustapha then took leave of the parents of
Zoraide--his secretly betrothed bride, and started on his way to
Balsora. As there was no ship from our small town bound directly for Balsora, my
brother made the journey by land; and in order that he might not arrive
too long after the pirates had reached there, he was forced to make
very long day's journeys. Still, as he had a fine horse, and no
luggage, he counted on reaching Balsora at the close of the sixth day. But on the evening of the fourth day, as he was riding along quite
alone, he was suddenly attacked by three robbers. Observing that they
were powerful men and well armed, and believing that their purpose was
to take his money and horse, rather than his life, he called out that
he would surrender. Thereupon they dismounted from their horses, and
bound his feet together under his horse's belly. One of the men then
seized the bridle of Mustapha's steed, and, with my brother in their
midst, they galloped off in great haste without having once spoken a
word. Mustapha resigned himself to a gloomy despondency. His father's
curse seemed in process of fulfillment; and how could he hope to rescue
his sister and Zoraide, when, stripped of all he possessed, he could
employ only a miserable life towards securing their freedom? Mustapha and his silent escort had ridden on for about an hour, when
they turned into a side valley, which was shut in by high trees. A
soft, dark-green sod, and a brook rushing swiftly through the middle of
the valley, invited them to rest. Scattered over the green were from
fifteen to twenty tents. Camels and fine horses were tied to the tent
stakes, while from one of the tents sounded the pleasing melody of a
guitar, accompanied by two fine male voices. To my brother it seemed that people who had displayed such good taste
in the selection of their camping ground could entertain no sinister
designs on him, and he, therefore, cheerfully obeyed the command of
his guides to dismount as soon as they had unloosed his bonds. He was
led into a tent much larger than the others, the interior of which was
fitted up neatly, even elegantly. Gold embroidered cushions, woven
carpets and gold plated censors would have indicated elsewhere the wealth
and respectability of their owner; but here they were plainly the fruits
of robbery. On one of the cushions sat a little old man of repulsive
appearance. His skin was tanned and shiny, and a disagreeable
expression of Turkish slyness lurked about his eyes and mouth. Although
this man attempted to appear dignified, it did not take Mustapha long
to decide that this tent had not been furnished so richly for him,
while the conversation of his guards seemed to confirm his observation. "Where is the Strong One?" they inquired of the little old man. "On the chase," answered he. "But he bade me fill his place while he
was gone." "He didn't display much sense, then," replied one of the robbers, "as
it ought to be decided at once whether this dog shall die or be held
for ransom, and the Strong One could decide that much better than you." The old man arose with an assumption of dignity, and reached out as if
to grasp his opponent's ear, or to revenge himself by a blow; but when
he saw that his effort was fruitless, he began to curse and swear. Nor
did the others remain long in his debt, but replied in kind, until the
tent resounded with their quarrel. All at once the door of the tent was opened, and a tall, stately man,
young and handsome as a Persian prince, entered. His clothes and
weapons were plain and simple, with the exception of a richly jeweled
dagger and a gleaming sword; but his steady eye and whole appearance
commanded attention, without inspiring distrust. "Who is it that dares to make such a disturbance in my tent?" demanded
he of the frightened participants. For a little time there was deep silence; until finally,
one of the men who had brought Mustapha in told him how the quarrel had
originated. The face of the Strong One, as they called him, flushed
with anger at this recital. "When did I ever put you in my place, Hassan?" cried he, in a fearful
voice, to the little old man, who, shrinking with fear, stole towards
the door, looking smaller than ever. The Strong One lifted his foot,
and Hassan went flying through the doorway with some remarkable leaps. When Hassan had disappeared, the three men led Mustapha up to the
master of the tent, who was now reclining on the cushions, saying: "We
have brought you the man whom you ordered us to capture." The Strong
One looked for some time at the prisoner, and then said: "Pasha of
Sulieika, your own conscience will tell you why your are the prisoner
of Orbasan." When my brother heard this, he threw himself down before Orbasan, and
answered "Oh, Master, you have made a mistake. I am only a poor
unfortunate man, and not the Pasha whom you seek." All in the tent were surprised at these words. But the master of the
tent replied--

"It will not help you much to deny your identity, as I will produce
people who know you well." He then commanded Zuleima to be brought. An
old woman was led in, who, in response to the question whether she did
not recognize in my brother the Pasha of Sulieika, said--

"Certainly! I swear by the graves of the prophets that he is the Pasha
and no other." "Do you see, poor fool, how your stratagem is frustrated?" sneered
Orbasan. "You are so miserable a creature that I will not soil my
dagger with your blood; but when to-morrow's sun rises, I will tie you
to my horse's tail and chase through the forests with you until the sun
sets behind the hills of Sulieika." At this announcement my brother's courage entirely deserted him. "This
is the result of my cruel father's curse that is driving me to an
ignominious death!" exclaimed he, in tears. "And thou, too, sweet
sister, and thou, Zoraide, art lost!" "Your dissimulation will avail you nothing," said one of the robbers,
who was engaged in tying Mustapha's hands behind his back. "Get out of
the tent quickly, for the Strong One is biting his lips and glancing at
his dagger. If you would live another night, come quickly!" As the robbers were leading my brother out of the tent, they
encountered three others, who were pushing in a prisoner before them. "We have brought you the Pasha as you commanded us," said they, and led
the prisoner up to the cushions where Orbasan reclined. While the
prisoner was being led forward, my brother had an opportunity to
observe him closely, and he was forced to acknowledge the striking
resemblance which this man bore to him, only the stranger's complexion
was darker and he wore a black beard. Orbasan seemed much astonished over the appearance of the second
prisoner. "Which of you, then, is the right one?" asked he, looking
from one to the other. "If you mean the Pasha of Sulieika," answered the prisoner, in a proud
tone, "I am he." Orbasan gazed at him some time with a stern, hard expression, and then
silently beckoned the men to lead him away. When they had done so,
Orbasan went up to my brother, cut his bonds with his dagger, and
motioned to him to sit down with him on the cushions. "I am sorry,
young stranger," said he, "that I mistook you for that monster. It was,
indeed, a singular dispensation of fate which led you into the hands of
my comrades at the same hour that was destined to see the fall of that
traitor." My brother begged of him but one favor: that he might be
allowed to continue on his journey at once, as the least delay would
prove fatal to his purpose. Orbasan inquired what the nature of the
affair was that required such haste, and when Mustapha had told him
every thing, Orbasan persuaded him to remain in his tent over night, as
he and his horse were in need of rest, and promised that in the morning
he would show him a way by which he could reach Balsora in a day and a
half. My brother remained, was hospitably entertained, and slept soundly
until morning in the tent of the robber chief. When he awakened he
found himself all alone, but before the curtain of the tent he heard
several voices, one of which belonged to Orbasan and another to Hassan. He listened, and heard, to his horror, that the little old man was
urging upon Orbasan the necessity of killing him, lest he should betray
them when he had regained his liberty. Mustapha felt sure that Hassan
hated him, because he had been the cause of the little fellow's being
handled so roughly the night before. Orbasan remained silent for some
moments, and then replied: "No, he is my guest, and the laws of
hospitality are sacred with me; neither does he look like an informer." Thus saying, Orbasan flung aside the curtain and entered. "Peace be
with you, Mustapha," said he. "Let us take our morning draught, and
then prepare yourself to start." He handed my brother a glass of
sherbet, and when they had drunk, they saddled their horses, and with a
lighter heart than he had entered the camp, Mustapha swung himself into
his seat. They had soon left the tents far behind, and followed a broad path that
led into the forest. Orbasan told my brother that the Pasha who had
been captured had promised that he would permit them to remain
undisturbed in his territory; yet but a few weeks after he took one of
their bravest men prisoner, and hanged him with the most horrible
torture. Orbasan had had spies on his track for a long time, and now he
must die. Mustapha did not venture to oppose his purpose, as he was
thankful to get away with a whole skin himself. At the end of the forest Orbasan stopped his horse, described the way
to my brother, offered him his hand at parting, and said: "Mustapha,
you became the guest of the robber Orbasan under singular
circumstances. I will not require you to promise that you will not
betray what you have seen and heard. You were unjustly forced to suffer
the fear of death, and I am, therefore, in your debt. Take this dagger
as a keepsake, and if you are ever in need of help, send it to me, and
I will hasten to your assistance. This purse you may be able to use on
your journey." My brother thanked him for his generosity, and took the dagger, but
refused the purse. Orbasan pressed his hand once more, letting the
purse fall to the ground, and sprang with the speed of the wind into
the forest. When Mustapha saw that Orbasan did not intend to return for
the purse, he dismounted and picked it up, starting at the generosity
of his host, as he found it contained a large sum of gold. He thanked
Allah for his rescue, recommended the generous robber to His mercy, and
continued on his way to Balsora with a lighter heart. Lezah, the story-teller, paused, and looked inquiringly at the merchant
who had spoken so bitterly of Orbasan. The latter said--

"Well, if all that be so, I will cheerfully reverse my judgment of
Orbasan, for he really treated your brother handsomely." "He behaved like a true Musselman," exclaimed Muley. "But I hope your
story was not ended there, for we are all curious to hear more; how
things went with your brother, and whether he rescued your sister
Fatima and the beautiful Zoraide." "If I do not weary you, I will willingly continue," replied Lezah; "for
this story of my brother is certainly adventurous and wonderful." With this, he continued his story. At noon on the seventh day of his departure from home, Mustapha entered
the gate of Balsora. As soon as he had reached a caravansary, he made
inquiries as to when the slave auction, held there every year, opened. He received in reply the dreadful news that he had arrived two days too
late. They deplored his delay, and told him that he had missed a fine
sight, for on the last day of the auction two female slaves had been
put up, of such extraordinary beauty as to attract the attention of all
bidders. There was sharp competition for their possession, and the
bidding ran up so high as to frighten off everybody but their present
owner. Mustapha made more particular inquiries, until he had satisfied
himself beyond a doubt that these slaves were the unfortunate objects
of his search. He learned further that the name of the man who had
bought them was Thiuli-Kos; that he lived a good forty-hours' journey
from Balsora, and was a rich and elderly man of rank, who had formerly
been senior Pasha of the Shah, but had now retired from official life
to live upon his means. At first thought, Mustapha was about to mount his horse and hasten
after Thiuli-Kos, who had only a day the start of him; but, after
reflecting that, alone and unattended, he could hardly approach so
powerful and rich a man, and still less hope to rob him of his
possessions, he tried to devise some other plan, and soon hit upon one
that appeared feasible. The singular mistake of confounding him with
the Pasha of Sulieika, which had been so nearly fatal to him, suggested
the idea of visiting the house of Thiuli-Kos, under this name, and then
attempting the rescue of the unfortunate maidens. Accordingly he hired
horses and servants--for which purpose Orbasan's money proved very
useful--provided fine clothes for himself and servants, and set out for
Thiuli's castle. In five days he reached the vicinity of the castle, which was situated
in a beautiful plain, enclosed within high walls, above which but
little could be seen of the buildings. Arriving there, Mustapha dyed
his hair and beard black, and painted his face with the juice of a
plant, that gave him quite as brown a complexion as the real Pasha had
possessed. Thereupon he sent one of his servants to the castle to
request a night's lodging, in the name of the Pasha of Sulieika. The
servant soon returned, and with him came four finely costumed slaves,
who took hold of the bridle of Mustapha's horse, and led him into the
court of the castle. There they assisted him to dismount, when four
others conducted him up the broad marble steps to the presence of
Thiuli. The latter proved to be a jovial old fellow, and he received my
brother with due honor, and set before him the best that his cook could
prepare. After the table was cleared, Mustapha turned the conversation to the
new slaves, and Thiuli boasted of their beauty, while complaining of
their sadness; this, however, he believed would soon disappear. My
brother was well pleased with his reception, and betook himself to
rest, feeling very hopeful. He had slept perhaps an hour, when he was
awakened by the gleam of a lamp that dazzled his eyes. As he raised
himself in bed, he believed that he must still be dreaming, for before
him stood that little dark-skinned man whom he had seen in Orbasan's
tent. He held a lamp in his hand, and his broad mouth was distorted by
a horrible grimace. Mustapha pinched his own arm and pulled his nose,
in order to convince himself that he was awake; but the apparition
remained as before. "What will you at my bed-side?" cried Mustapha, as soon as he had
recovered from his astonishment. "Don't trouble yourself, Master," replied Hassan, "I have found out
your purpose in coming here; nor was your worthy face forgotten by me. But really, if I had not helped to hang the Pasha with my own hands, I
might perhaps have been deceived. Now I have come to put a question." "First of all, tell me how you came here," returned Mustapha, furious
at being betrayed. "I will tell you," replied Hassan, "I could not get along with Orbasan
any longer; therefore I ran away. But you, Mustapha, was the cause of
our quarrel, and therefore you must give me your sister to wed, and I
will assist you in your flight. If you do not agree to this, I will go
to my new master and tell him something about the new Pasha." Mustapha was beside himself with rage and terror. Now, just as he
believed himself about to attain his object, why must this wretch come
and thwart his designs? There was only one way left in which he could
carry out his plan: he must kill the ugly monster. With one spring he
leaped from the bed and tried to seize the ugly wretch; but he,
doubtless having expected such an attack, let the lamp fall and escaped
in the darkness, shrieking murderously for help. He was now compelled to give up the young girls, and turn his attention
to his own safety. He went to the window to see whether he could jump
out, and found it was quite a distance to the ground, while opposite
stood a high wall. Suddenly he heard voices approaching his room. As
they reached his door, he grasped his clothes and dagger in
desperation, and swung himself out of the window. The fall was a hard
one, but he felt that no bones were broken, and sprang up to run to the
wall, which he climbed, to the astonishment of the pursuers, and was
soon at liberty. He ran until he reached a small wood, where he flung
himself down exhausted. Here he considered what was to be done. His servants and horses he had been forced to leave, but the money
which he carried in his girdle was safe, and his ingenuity shortly
discovered another mode of rescue. He went on through the forest until
he came to a village, where for a little money he bought a horse that
quickly carried him to a city. Once there he inquired for a physician,
and an old and experienced man was recommended to him. By the aid of
some gold pieces, he induced this physician to furnish him with a
medicine that would produce a death-like sleep, that might, however, be
instantly dispelled by some other remedy. When he had procured these
medicines, he bought a false beard, a black gown, and all manner of
little boxes and alembics, so that he properly represented a traveling
physician--loaded his traps on an ass and journeyed back to the castle
of Thiuli-Kos. He was certain this time of not being known, as the
beard made such a complete change in his appearance that he felt
doubtful of his own identity. On arriving at Thiuli's, he announced himself as the physician
Chakamankabudibaba. The result was as he had foreseen: the
high-sounding name recommended him so highly to the weak old Pasha that
he was at once invited to dinner. After an hour's conversation, the old
man resolved to submit all his female slaves to the treatment of the
wise physician. Mustapha could now hardly conceal his joy at the
prospect of seeing his beloved sister again, and followed Thiuli with a
beating heart, as he led the way to the seraglio. They came to a room
beautifully decorated but unoccupied. "Chambaba, or whatever you call yourself, dear doctor," said
Thiuli-Kos, "look for a moment at yonder hole in the wall; each one of
my slaves will put her arm through it in succession, and you can
ascertain by the pulse who the sick are and who the well." [Illustration]

Mustapha's objections to this arrangement were of no avail; he was not
permitted to see the slaves; still Thiuli consented to inform him of
each one's general state of health. Thiuli then drew out a long sheet
of paper from his sash, and began to call the roll of his female slaves
in a loud voice; and at each name a hand was thrust through the wall,
and the physician felt the pulse. Six were called off, and pronounced
in good health, when Thiuli called out the name "Fatima," as the
seventh, and a small white hand slipped through the wall. Trembling
with joy, Mustapha seized this hand and declared with an important air,
that Fatima was seriously sick. Thiuli became very anxious, and ordered
his wise Chakamankabudibaba to prepare at once some medicine for her. The physician went out of the room, and wrote on a small piece of
paper:

"Fatima! I will save you, if you have the strength of will to take a
medicine that will deprive you of life for two days; still I possess a
remedy that will restore you to life again. If you are willing to do
this, speak these words: 'The medicine did not help me any,' and I
shall take it as a sign of your assent." Mustapha returned to the room where Thiuli was awaiting him. He brought
with him a harmless drink, felt of Fatima's pulse once more, at the
same time tucking the note under her bracelet, and passed the drink
through the opening in the wall. Thiuli seemed to be very anxious about
Fatima, and put off the examination of the rest until a more favorable
opportunity. As he left the room with Mustapha, he said, in a sad tone:
"Chidababa, tell me the exact truth; what is your opinion of Fatima's
sickness?" Chakamankabudibaba replied with a deep sigh: "Oh Master! may
the good Prophet send you consolation; she has a stealthy fever that
may end her life." At this reply Thiuli's anger flamed up. "What's that
you say, you cursed dog of a doctor! Do you mean to say that she, for
whom I paid two thousand pieces of gold, will die on my hands like a
cow? Know, then, that if you do not save her, I will take your head
off!" My brother at once saw that he had made a stupid mistake, so he
hastened to assure Thiuli there was still hope for Fatima. While they
were speaking together, a black slave came from the seraglio to say to
the physician that _the drink did not help her any_. "Put forth all
your art, Chakamdababelda, or whatever you call yourself, and I will
pay you whatever you ask," exclaimed Thiuli-Kos, wild with anxiety at
the prospect of losing so much money. "I will give her a little
decoction that will save her from danger," answered the physician. "Yes! by all means, give her the medicine," cried old Thiuli. Mustapha, in high spirits, went to fetch the sleeping potion, and after
handing it to the slave, with instructions as to the quantity to be
taken, he returned to Thiuli, and told him that now he must go down to
the sea and gather some healing herbs. He then hurried away to the sea,
that was not far off, where he took off his various disguises and flung
them into the water, where the waves tossed them about. He then
concealed himself in the bushes until evening, when he stole quietly up
to the burial vault of Thiuli's castle. Hardly an hour after Mustapha had departed from the castle, word was
brought Thiuli that his slave Fatima was dying. He at once sent down to
the shore to have the physician brought back, but his messengers soon
returned with the information that the poor doctor had fallen into the
water and been drowned; his black cloak was floating on the waves, and
occasionally his magnificent black beard might be seen bobbing up and
down in the water. When Thiuli saw there was no hope of her recovery, he cursed himself
and the whole world, tore out his beard, and butted his head against
the wall. But all this availed nothing, for Fatima, under the care of
the other women, soon ceased to breathe. When Thiuli heard of her
death, he ordered a coffin to be hastily made, as he could not suffer a
dead person to remain in the house, and had the body carried to the
tomb. The bearers carried the coffin there, dropped it hastily, and
fled, as they heard groans and sighs proceeding from the other coffins. Mustapha, who had hidden behind the coffins and frightened away the
bearers of Fatima's coffin, now came out from his hiding place, and
lighted a lamp that he had provided for this purpose. Next he produced
a phial containing the restorative, and raised the lid of Fatima's
coffin. But what was his amazement when the rays of the lamp disclosed
features entirely strange to him! It was neither my sister nor Zoraide,
but quite another person, that lay in the coffin. It took him a long
time to recover from this latest blow of fate, but finally pity
overcame his vexation. He opened the phial, and poured some of the
contents into the mouth of the sleeper. She breathed, opened her eyes,
and seemed for a long time to be trying to make out her situation. At
last she recalled all that had happened, and, stepping out of the
coffin, flung herself at Mustapha's feet. "How can I thank you,
gracious being?" cried she, "for freeing me from my terrible prison!" Mustapha interrupted her expressions of gratitude with the question how
it happened that she and not his sister Fatima had been rescued. She
looked at him in an astonished way before replying: "Now for the first
time I understand what before was incomprehensible to me. You must know
that I was called Fatima in the castle, and it was to me you gave the
note and medicine." My brother requested her to give him news of his
sister and Zoraide, and learned that they were both in the castle, but,
in accordance with a custom of Thiuli's, had received other names, and
were now called Mirza and Nurmahal. When the freed slave, Fatima, saw that my brother was so cast down by
this mistake, she consoled him with the assurance that she could point
out another way by which both of the young girls might be rescued. Aroused by what she said, he begged her to tell him her plan, to which
she replied--

"For some five months I have been Thiuli's slave; yet from the first I
have planned to escape, but it was too much of a task for me to attempt
alone. In the inner court of the castle you must have noticed a
fountain that throws the water in a cascade from ten pipes. This
fountain impressed me strongly, because I remembered a similar one in
my father's house, the water of which was brought through a large
aqueduct. In order to learn whether this fountain was built in the same
way, I one day praised its beauty to Thiuli, and asked who had
constructed it. 'I built it myself,' answered he; 'and what you see
here is the least part of the work, as the water is brought from a
brook, a thousand paces away, through an arched viaduct at least high
enough for a man to walk in. And the construction of all this I
directed myself.' "Since hearing this, I have often wished for the strength of a man to
pull out a stone in the side of the fountain, and thereby escape. I
will now show you the aqueduct, through which you can obtain entrance
to the castle at night, and set your sister free. But you ought to have
at least two men with you, in order to overpower the slaves who watch
the seraglio at night." My brother Mustapha, although he had seen his plans twice frustrated,
plucked up courage once more at these words, and hoped, with Allah's
assistance, to carry out the scheme of the slave. He promised to see
that she arrived safely at her home if she would assist him to enter
the castle. But one point caused him some little perplexity: where
should he obtain two or three men upon whom he could depend? Just then
Orbasan's dagger occurred to him, and the promise he had received from
the bandit that, in case of need, he would hasten to his assistance;
and he therefore left the vault, in company with Fatima, to hunt up the
robber. In the same village which had witnessed his transformation into a
physician, he bought a horse with what money remained to him, and
procured a lodging for Fatima with a poor woman who lived in the
suburb. He then hastened toward the hills where he had first met
Orbasan, and arrived there in three days. He soon found their tents, and
appeared unexpectedly to Orbasan, who greeted him with friendliness. He
gave an account of his failures, at which the grave Orbasan could not
refrain from laughing now and then, especially when he thought of the
physician Chakamankabudibaba. But he was terribly enraged over the
treachery of the ugly little monster, Hassan, and swore he would hang
him up wherever he found him. He also promised that when my brother had
refreshed himself after the fatigue of his journey, he would be ready to
assist him. Mustapha therefore spent the night in Orbasan's tent. With the early
dawn they rode off, accompanied by three of Orbasan's bravest men well
mounted and armed. They rode very fast and in two days' time reached
the place where Mustapha had left Fatima. They took her with them, and
journeyed on until they came to the small wood from whence Thiuli's
castle could be seen, where they went into camp until night should
come. As soon as it was dark, guided by Fatima, they stole up to the brook
where the aqueduct began, and soon discovered the entrance. There they
left Fatima and a servant with the horses, and prepared to descend into
the conduit; but before they went in, Fatima repeated once more her
instructions to them--they would emerge from the fountain into the
inner court, in the right and left corners of which were towers, and in
the sixth door counting from the right tower, they would find Fatima
and Zoraide, guarded by two black slaves. Well provided with weapons and
crowbars, Mustapha, Orbasan, and two other men, descended into the
aqueduct. They sank to their hips in the water, but none the less did
they advance valiantly forward. In half an hour they came to the
fountain, and at once began to use their crowbars. The wall was thick
and solid but could not long withstand the united strength of the four
men, and they had soon made an opening large enough to crawl through. Orbasan passed through first, and helped the others after him. When they all stood in the court, they looked closely at the side of
the castle facing them, to pick out the door that had been described. But they did not all agree on this point, for on counting from the
right tower toward the left, they found one door that had been walled
up, and they could not decide whether Fatima had passed this door by,
or had counted it in with the others. But Orbasan did not hesitate
long. "My good sword will open every door to me," exclaimed he, and
went to one of the doors followed by his companions. They opened the
door and discovered six black slaves lying on the floor asleep. They
were about to withdraw quietly, as they saw they had missed the right
door, when a man's form arose in the corner, and in a well-known voice,
called for help. It was Hassan, the deserter from Orbasan's camp. But
before the black guards could find out what had happened, Orbasan
rushed at the little wretch, tore his girdle into two pieces, with one
of which he bound his mouth, and with the other tied his hands behind
his back; then he turned on the slaves, some of whom were already
partially secured by Mustapha and his companions, and assisted to
completely overpower them. At the point of the dagger, the slaves
confessed that Nurmahal and Mirza were in the adjoining room. Mustapha
rushed in, and found Fatima and Zoraide, who were already aroused by
the noise. They quickly collected their clothing and ornaments, and
followed Mustapha. The two robbers now begged permission of Orbasan to
plunder whatever they found; but he forbade them, saying: "It shall
never be said of Orbasan that he broke into a house at night to steal
gold." Mustapha and the young girls slid quickly into the aqueduct, Orbasan
promising to follow immediately; but as soon as the others were out of
sight, Orbasan and one of the robbers took Hassan out into the court,
and tying a silk cord around his neck, hung him to the highest point of
the fountain. After having inflicted this penalty on the wretch, they
descended into the aqueduct and followed Mustapha. [Illustration]

With tears the two young girls thanked their noble rescuer Orbasan, but
he hurried them on in their flight, as it was quite probable that
Thiuli-Kos would pursue them in all directions. With deep emotion,
Mustapha and the rescued ones parted from Orbasan on the following day. Of a truth, they will never forget him. Fatima, the freed slave,
disguised herself and went to Balsora to take passage for her home, and
all reached there safely after a short and agreeable journey. The joy of seeing them again almost killed my father; but the day after
their arrival, he ordered an immense banquet, to which the whole town
came. My brother had then to repeat his story before a large number of
relatives and friends, and with one voice they praised him and the
noble Orbasan. When my brother had finished, my father rose and led Zoraide up to him. "Thus," said he in joyful tones, "do I lift the curse from thy head;
take her as the reward, which thou hast won through thy tireless zeal;
take my fatherly blessing; and may our city never be wanting in men
who, in brotherly love, in wisdom and zeal, resemble thee." The caravan had reached the end of the desert, and the travelers
joyfully greeted the green meadows and the thick foliage of the trees;
a delightful view, of which they had been deprived for many days. In a
beautiful valley was situated a caravansary, which they chose for a
night's lodging; and although it offered poor accommodation and
refreshment, yet the whole company were in better spirits and more
confidential than ever, as the feeling that they had escaped all the
dangers and discomforts which a journey through the desert brings,
opened all hearts and disposed all minds to jests and sports. Muley,
the active young merchant, danced a comic dance, accompanying himself
with songs, until even the sad features of Zaleukos, the Greek, relaxed
into a smile. But not satisfied with having entertained his fellow
travelers with dances and games, he related, as soon as he had somewhat
recovered from his violent exercise, the story which he had promised
them. LITTLE MUCK. IN Nicaeea, my dearly-loved native city, lived a man who was called
Little Muck, I can recall him distinctly, although I was quite young at
the time, chiefly because of a severe chastisement I received from my
father on his account. This Little Muck was already an old man when I
knew him, and yet he was not more than four feet in height. His figure
presented a singular appearance, as his body, small and childlike,
seemed but a slender support for a head much larger than the heads of
ordinary people. He lived all alone in a large house, and cooked his
own meals, and had it not been for the smoke that rose from his kitchen
chimney at midday, the townspeople would have remained in doubt as to
whether he still lived; for he went out but once a month. He was,
however, occasionally seen walking on the house-top, and to one looking
up from the street there was presented the singular sight of a head
moving to and fro. My companions and myself were rather bad boys, who
took delight in teasing and making sport of everybody; so it was always
a great holiday for us whenever Little Muck went out. We gathered
before his house on the appointed day, and waited; and when now the
door opened, and the large head, wrapped in a still larger turban,
peeped out, followed by the rest of his little body, done up in a
threadbare cloak, baggy breeches, and a wide sash, from which hung a
dagger so long that it could not be told whether Muck stuck on the
dagger or the dagger on Muck--when he thus made his appearance, the air
echoed with our shouts; we threw up our caps, and danced around him
like mad. Little Muck, however, returned our salute with a grave nod of
the head, and shuffled slowly down the street in such great, wide
slippers as I had never seen before. We boys ran behind him, shouting:
"Little Muck! Little Muck!" We also had a jolly little verse that we
now and then sang in his honor, which ran as follows:

[Illustration]

            Little Muck, little Muck,
            Living in a house so fair,
            Once a month you take the air,
            You, brave little dwarf, 'tis said,
            Have a mountain for a head;
            Turn around just once and look;
            Run and catch us, little Muck! Thus had we often entertained ourselves, and, to my shame be it
confessed, I behaved the worst--often catching him by the cloak, and
once I trod on the heel of his slipper so that he fell down. This
struck me as a very funny thing, but the laugh stuck in my throat as I
saw him go to my father's house. He went right in and remained there
for some time. I hid myself near the front door, and saw Little Muck
come out again, accompanied by my father, who held his hand and parted
from him on the door-step with many bows. Not feeling very easy in my
mind, I remained for a long time in my hiding place; but I was at last
driven out by hunger, which I feared worse than a whipping, and,
spiritless and with bowed head, I went home to my father. "I hear that
you have been insulting the good Little Muck," said he, in a grave
tone. "I will tell you the story of Little Muck, and you will certainly
not want to laugh at him again; but before I begin, and after I am
through, you will receive '_the customary_.'" Now "the customary"
consisted of twenty-five blows, which he was accustomed to lay on
without making any mistake in the count. He took for this purpose the
long stem of a cherry pipe, unscrewing the amber mouth-piece, and
belaboring me harder than ever before. When the five-and-twenty strokes
were completed, he commanded me to pay attention, and told me the story
of Little Muck. The father of Little Muck--whose proper name was Mukrah--was a poor but
respectable man, living here in Nicaea. He lived nearly as solitary a
life as his son now does. This son he could not endure, as he was
ashamed of his dwarfish shape, and he therefore allowed him to grow up
in ignorance. Little Muck, though in his sixteenth year, was only a
child; and his father continually scolded him, because he who should
have long since "put away childish things," still remained so stupid
and silly. However, the old gentleman got a bad fall one day, from the effects of
which he shortly died, and left Little Muck poor and ignorant. The
unfeeling relatives, to whom the deceased had owed more than he could
pay, drove the poor little fellow out of the house, and advised him to
go out into the world and seek his fortune. Little Muck replied that he
was ready for the journey, but begged that he might be allowed to have his
father's clothes; and these were given him. His father had been a tall,
stout man, so that the clothes did not fit the little son very well; but
Muck knew just what to do in this emergency: he cut off every thing that
was too long, and then put the clothes on. He seemed, however, to have
forgotten that he should have cut away from the width as well; hence his
singular appearance just as he may be seen to-day--dressed in the large
turban, the broad sash, the baggy trousers, the blue cloak, all heirlooms
from his father, which he has ever since worn. The long Damascus poniard,
that had also belonged to his father, he stuck proudly in his sash, and,
supported by a little cane, wandered out of the city gate. He tramped along merrily the whole day; for had he not been sent out to
seek his fortune? If he came across a broken bit of pottery glistening
in the sun, he straightway put it into his pocket, in the full belief
that it would prove to be the most brilliant diamond. When he saw in
the distance the dome of a mosque all ablaze with the sun's rays, or a
lake gleaming like a mirror, he made all haste to reach it, believing
he had arrived in an enchanted land. But alas, the illusions vanished
as he neared them, while weariness and an empty stomach forcibly
reminded him that he was still in the land of mortals. Thus hungry and
sorrowful, and despairing of ever finding his fortune, he wandered on
for two long days, with the fruits of the field for his only
nourishment, and the hard earth for his couch. On the morning of the third day he discovered, from a hill, a large
city. The crescent shone brightly on its battlements, while gay banners
waving from the roofs seemed to beckon him on. In great surprise, he
stopped to look at the city and its surroundings. "Yes, there shall Little
Muck find his fortune," said he to himself; and summoning all his strength,
he started on towards the city. But, although the town seemed near by, it
was nearly noon when he reached it, as his little legs almost refused to
carry out his will, and he was forced to sit down in the shade of a palm
tree to rest. At last he reached the gate. There he arranged his cloak with
great care, gave a new fold to his turban, stretched out his sash to twice
its usual width, stuck the long poniard in a little straighter, and wiping
the dust from his shoes, grasped his stick more firmly and marched bravely
in. He had wandered through several streets, but not a door opened to him;
nor did any one call out--as he had fancied would be done--:

            Little Muck! Come in and eat,
            And rest your weary little feet. Once more he looked up very longingly at a large, fine house before
him, when suddenly a window was opened, and an old woman looked down,
calling out in a sing-song tone:

            O come, O come! The porridge is done,
            The table is spread,
            May you all be well-fed;
            O good neighbors, come,
            The porridge is done! The door of the house opened, and Muck saw many dogs and cats enter. He
remained for some time in doubt whether he should accept the
invitation, but at last he mustered up courage and walked in. Before
him went two little kittens, and he concluded to follow them, as they
might know the way to the kitchen better than he did. As Muck ascended the stairs, he met the same old woman who had looked
out from the window. She looked at him crossly, and asked him what he
wanted. "Why, you invited everybody in to partake of your porridge,"
answered Little Muck; "and as I was very hungry, I came in too." The
old woman laughed and said: "Where in the world do you come from, you
odd little fellow? The whole city knows that I cook for nobody but my
dear cats, and now and then I invite company for them out of the
neighborhood, as you see." Little Muck told the old woman how hardly it
had fared with him since his father's death, and begged that she would
permit him to eat with her cats to-day. The woman, who was pleased with
the simple-hearted manner in which the dwarf told his story, allowed
him to be her guest, and provided food and drink for him bountifully. When he had eaten his fill, and felt much stronger, the old woman
looked at him for some time before saying: "Little Muck, remain in my
service; you will have little to do, and will be well provided for." 