



Produced by Charles Keller. HTML version by Al Haines. EMMA McCHESNEY & CO.


by

Edna Ferber




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

   I.  BROADWAY TO BUENOS AIRES
  II. THANKS TO MISS MORRISSEY
 III. A CLOSER CORPORATION
  IV. BLUE SERGE
   V.  "HOOPS, MY DEAR!" VI. SISTERS UNDER THEIR SKIN
 VII. AN ETUDE FOR EMMA





EMMA McCHESNEY & CO. I

BROADWAY TO BUENOS AIRES

The door marked "MRS. MCCHESNEY" was closed. T. A. Buck, president of
the Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company, coming gaily down the hall,
stopped before it, dismayed, as one who, with a spicy bit of news at
his tongue's end, is met with rebuff before the first syllable is
voiced. That closed door meant:  "Busy. Keep out." "She'll be reading a letter," T. A. Buck told himself grimly. Then he
turned the knob and entered his partner's office. Mrs. Emma McChesney was reading a letter. More than that, she was
poring over it so that, at the interruption, she glanced up in a
maddeningly half-cocked manner which conveyed the impression that,
while her physical eye beheld the intruder, her mental eye was still on
the letter. "I knew it," said T. A. Buck morosely. Emma McChesney put down the letter and smiled. "Sit down--now that you're in. And if you expect me to say, 'Knew
what?' you're doomed to disappointment." T. A. Buck remained standing, both gloved hands clasping his walking
stick on which he leaned. "Every time I come into this office, you're reading the latest scrawl
from your son. One would think Jock's letters were deathless
masterpieces. I believe you read them at half-hour intervals all week,
and on Sunday get 'em all out and play solitaire with them." Emma McChesney's smile widened frankly to a grin. "You make me feel like a cash-girl who's been caught flirting with the
elevator starter. Have I been neglecting business?" "Business? No; you've been neglecting me!" "Now, T. A., you've just come from the tailor's, and I suppose it
didn't fit in the back." "It isn't that," interrupted Buck, "and you know it. Look here! That
day Jock went away and we came back to the office, and you said----"

"I know I said it, T. A., but don't remind me of it. That wasn't a
fair test. I had just seen Jock leave me to take his own place in the
world. You know that my day began and ended with him. He was my
reason for everything. When I saw him off for Chicago that day, and
knew he was going there to stay, it seemed a million miles from New
York. I was blue and lonely and heart-sick. If the office-boy had
thrown a kind word to me I'd have broken down and wept on his shoulder." Buck, still standing, looked down between narrowed lids at his business
partner. "Emma McChesney," he said steadily, "do you mean that?" Mrs. McChesney, the straightforward, looked up, looked down, fiddled
with the letter in her hand. "Well--practically yes--that is--I thought, now that you're going to
the mountains for a month, it might give me a chance to think--to----"

"And d'you know what I'll do meanwhile, out of revenge on the sex? I've just ordered three suits of white flannel, and I shall break every
feminine heart in the camp, regardless-- Oh, say, that's what I came in
to tell you! Guess whom I saw at the tailor's?" "Well, Mr. Bones, whom did you, and so forth?" "Fat Ed Meyers. I just glimpsed him in one of the fitting-rooms. And
they were draping him in white." Emma McChesney sat up with a jerk. "Are you sure?" "Sure? There's only one figure like that. He had the thing on and was
surveying himself in the mirror--or as much of himself as could be seen
in one ordinary mirror. In that white suit, with his red face above
it, he looked like those pictures you see labeled, 'Sunrise on
Snow-covered Mountain.'" "Did he see----"

"He dodged when he saw me. Actually! At least, he seems to have the
decency to be ashamed of the deal he gave us when he left us flat in
the thick of his Middle Western trip and went back to the Sans-Silk
Skirt Company. I wanted him to know I had seen him. As  I passed, I
said, 'You'll mow 'em down in those clothes, Meyers.'" Buck sat down
in his leisurely fashion, and laughed his low, pleasant laugh. "Can't
you see him, Emma, at the seashore?" But something in Emma McChesney's eyes, and something in her set,
unsmiling face, told him that she was not seeing seashores. She was
staring straight at him, straight through him, miles beyond him. There
was about her that tense, electric, breathless air of complete
detachment, which always enveloped her when her lightning mind was
leaping ahead to a goal unguessed by the slower thinking. "What's your tailor's name?" "Name? Trotter. Why?" Emma McChesney had the telephone operator before he could finish. "Get me Trotter, the tailor, T-r-o-double-t-e-r.  Say I want to speak
to the tailor who fits Mr. Ed Meyers, of the Sans-Silk Skirt Company." T. A. Buck leaned forward, mouth open, eyes wide. "Well, what in the
name of----"

"I'll let you know in a minute. Maybe I'm wrong. It's just one of my
hunches. But for  ten years I sold Featherlooms through the same
territory that Ed Meyers was covering for the Sans-Silk Skirt people. It didn't take me ten years to learn that Fat Ed hadn't the decency to
be ashamed of any deal he turned, no matter how raw. And let me tell
you, T. A.:  If he dodged when he saw you it wasn't because he was
ashamed of having played us low-down. He was contemplating playing
lower-down. Of course, I may be----"

She picked up the receiver in answer to the bell. Then, sweetly, her
calm eyes smiling into Buck's puzzled ones:

"Hello! Is this Mr. Meyers' tailor? I'm to ask if you are sure that
the grade he selected is the proper weight for the tropics. What? Oh,
you say you assured him it was the weight of flannel you always advise
for South America. And you said they'd be ready when? Next week? Thank you." She hung up the receiver. The pupils of her eyes were dilated. Her
cheeks were very pink as always under excitement. She stood up, her
breath coming rather quickly. "Hurray for the hunch! It holds. Fat Ed Meyers is going down to South
America for the Sans-Silk Company. It's what I've been planning to do
for the last six months. You remember I spoke of it. You pooh-poohed
the idea. It means hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Sans-Silk
people if they get it. But they won't get it." T. A. Buck stood up suddenly. "Look here, Emma! If you're----"

"I certainly am. Nothing can stop me. The skirt business has
been--well, you know what it's been for the last two years. The South
American boats sail twice a month. Fat Ed Meyers' clothes are promised
for next week. That means he isn't sailing until week after next. But
the next boat sails in three days." She picked up a piece of paper
from her desk and tossed it into Buck's hand. "That's the letter I was
reading when you came in. No; don't read it. Let me tell you instead." Buck threw cane, hat, gloves, and letter on the broad desk, thrust his
hands into his pockets, and prepared for argument. But he got only as
far as:  "But I won't allow it! You couldn't get away in three days,
at any rate. And at the end of two weeks you'll have come to your
senses, and besides----"

"T. A., I don't mean to be rude. But here are your hat and stick and
gloves. It's going to take me just forty-eight hours to mobilize." "But, Emma, even if you do get in ahead of Meyers, it's an insane idea. A woman can't go down there alone. It isn't safe. It's bad enough for
a man to tackle it. Besides, we're holding our own." "That's just it. When a doctor issues a bulletin to the effect that
the patient is holding his own, you may have noticed that the relatives
always begin to gather." "It's a bubble, this South American idea. Oshkosh and Southport and
Altoona money has always been good enough for us. If we can keep that
trade, we ought to be thankful." Emma McChesney pushed her hair back from her forehead with one gesture
and patted it into place with another. Those two gestures, to one who
knew her, meant loss of composure for one instant, followed by the
quick regaining of it the next. "Let's not argue about it now. Suppose we wait until to-morrow--when
it's too late. I am thankful for the trade we've got. But I don't
want to be narrow about it. My thanking capacity is such that I can
stretch it out to cover some things we haven't got yet. I've been
reading up on South America." "Reading!" put in Buck hotly. "What actual first-hand information can
you get about a country from books?" "Well, then, I haven't only been reading. I've been talking to
everyone I could lay my hands on who has been down there and who knows. Those South American women love dress--especially the Argentines. And
do you know what they've been wearing? Petticoats made in England! You
know what that means. An English woman chooses a petticoat like she
does a husband--for life. It isn't only a garment. It's a shelter. It's built like a tent. If once I can introduce the T. A. Buck
Featherloom petticoat and knickerbocker into sunny South America,
they'll use those English and German petticoats for linoleum
floor-coverings. Heaven knows they'll fit the floor better than the
human form!" But Buck was unsmiling. The muscles of his jaw were tense. "I won't let you go. Understand that! I won't allow it!" "Tut, tut, T. A.! What is this? Cave-man stuff?" "Emma, I tell you it's dangerous. It isn't worth the risk, no matter
what it brings us." Emma McChesney struck an attitude, hand on heart. "'Heaven will
protect the working girrul,'" she sang. Buck grabbed his hat. "I'm going to wire Jock." "All right! That'll save me fifty cents. Do you know what he'll wire
back? 'Go to it. Get the tango on its native tairn'--or words to that
effect." "Emma, use a little logic and common sense!" There was a note in Buck's voice that brought a quick response from
Mrs. McChesney. She dropped her little air of gayety. The pain in his
voice, and the hurt in his eyes, and the pleading in his whole attitude
banished the smile from her face. It had not been much of a smile,
anyway. T. A. knew her genuine smiles well enough to recognize a
counterfeit at sight. And Emma McChesney knew that he knew. She came
over and laid a hand lightly on his arm. "T. A., I don't know anything about logic. It is a hot-house plant. But common sense is a field flower, and I've gathered whole bunches of
it in my years of business experience. I'm not going down to South
America for a lark. I'm going because the time is ripe to go. I'm
going because the future of our business needs it. I'm going because
it's a job to be handled by the most experienced salesman on our staff. And I'm just that. I say it because it's true. Your father, T. A.,
used to see things straighter and farther than any business man I ever
knew. Since his death made me a partner in this firm, I find myself,
when I'm troubled or puzzled, trying to see a situation as he'd see it
if he were alive. It's like having an expert stand back of you in a
game of cards, showing you the next move. That's the way I'm playing
this hand. And I think we're going to take most of the tricks away
from Fat Ed Meyers." T. A. Buck's eyes traveled from Emma McChesney's earnest, glowing face
to the hand that rested on his arm. He reached over and gently covered
that hand with his own. "I suppose you must be right, little woman. You always are. Dad was
the founder of this business. It was the pride of his life. That
word 'founder' has two meanings. I never want to be responsible for
its second meaning in connection with this concern." "You never will be, T. A." "Not with you at the helm." He smiled rather sadly. "I'm a good,
ordinary, common seaman. But you've got imagination, and foresight,
and nerve, and daring, and that's the stuff that admirals are made of." "Bless you, T. A.! I knew you'd see the thing as I do after the first
shock was over. It has always been nip and tuck between the Sans-Silk
Company and us. You gave me the hint that showed me their plans. Now
help me follow it up." Buck picked up his hat, squared his shoulders and fumbled with his
gloves like a bashful schoolboy. "You--you couldn't kill two birds with one stone on this trip, could
you, Mrs. Mack?" Mrs. McChesney, back at her desk again, threw him an inquiring glance
over her shoulder. "You might make it a combination honeymoon and Featherloom expedition." "T. A. Buck!" exclaimed Emma McChesney. Then, as Buck dodged for the
door:  "Just for that, I'm going to break this to you. You know that I
intended to handle the Middle Western territory for one trip, or until
we could get a man to take Fat Ed Meyers' place." "Well?" said Buck apprehensively. "I leave in three days. Goodness knows how long I'll be gone! A
business deal down there is a ceremony. And--you won't need any
white-flannel clothes in Rock Island, Illinois." Buck, aghast, faced her from the doorway. "You mean, I----"

"Just that," smiled Emma McChesney pleasantly. And pressed the button
that summoned the stenographer. In the next forty-eight hours, Mrs. McChesney performed a series of
mental and physical calisthenics that would have landed an ordinary
woman in a sanatorium. She cleaned up with the thoroughness and
dispatch of a housewife who, before going to the seashore, forgets not
instructions to the iceman, the milkman, the janitor, and the maid. She surveyed her territory, behind and before, as a general studies
troops and countryside before going into battle; she foresaw factory
emergencies, dictated office  policies, made sure of staff organization
like the business woman she was. Out in the stock-room, under her
supervision, there was scientifically packed into sample-trunks and
cases a line of Featherloom skirts and knickers calculated to dazzle
Brazil and entrance Argentina. And into her own personal trunk there
went a wardrobe, each article of which was a garment with a purpose. Emma McChesney knew the value of a smartly tailored suit in a business
argument. T. A. Buck canceled his order at the tailor's, made up his own line for
the Middle West, and prepared to storm that prosperous and important
territory for the first time in his business career. The South American boat sailed Saturday afternoon. Saturday morning
found the two partners deep in one of those condensed, last-minute
discussions. Mrs. McChesney opened a desk drawer, took out a
leather-covered pocket notebook, and handed it to Buck. A tiny smile
quivered about her lips. Buck took it, mystified. "Your last diary?" "Something much more important. I call it  'The Salesman's Who's Who.' Read it as you ought your Bible." "But what?" Buck turned the pages wonderingly. He glanced at a
paragraph, frowned, read it aloud, slowly. "Des Moines, Iowa, Klein & Company. Miss Ella Sweeney, skirt buyer. Old girl. Skittish. Wants to be entertained. Take her to dinner and
the theater." He looked up, dazed. "Good Lord, what is this? A joke?" "Wait until you see Ella; you won't think it's a joke. She'll buy only
your smoothest numbers, ask sixty days' dating, and expect you to
entertain her as you would your rich aunt." Buck returned to the little book dazedly. He flipped another
leaf--another. Then he read in a stunned sort of voice:


"Sam Bloom, Paris Emporium, Duluth. See Sadie." He closed the book. "Say, see here, Emma, do you mean to----"

"Sam is the manager," interrupted Mrs. McChesney pleasantly, "and he
thinks he does the  buying, but the brains of that business is a little
girl named Sadie Harris. She's a wonder. Five years from now, if she
doesn't marry Sam, she'll be one of those ten-thousand-a-year foreign
buyers. Play your samples up to Sammy, but quote your prices down to
Sadie. Read the next one, T. A." Buck read on, his tone lifeless:


"Miss Sharp. Berg Brothers, Omaha. Strictly business. Known among
the trade as the human cactus. Canceled a ten-thousand-dollar order
once because the grateful salesman called her 'girlie.' Stick to
skirts." Buck slapped the book smartly against the palm of his hand. "Do you mean to tell me that you made this book out for me? Do you
mean to say that I have to cram on this like a kid studying for exams? That I'll have to cater to the personality of the person I'm selling
to? Why--it's--it's----"

Emma McChesney nodded calmly. "I don't know how this trip of yours is going to affect the firm's
business, T. A. But it's going to be a liberal education for you. You'll  find that you'll need that little book a good many times before
you're through. And while you're following its advice, do this: forget
that your name is Buck, except for business purposes; forget that your
family has always lived in a brownstone mausoleum in Seventy-second
street; forget that you like your chops done just so, and your wine at
such-and-such a temperature; get close to your trade. They're an
awfully human lot, those Middle Western buyers. Don't chuck them under
the chin, but smile on 'em. And you've got a lovely smile, T. A." Buck looked up from the little leather book. And, as he gazed at Emma
McChesney, the smile appeared and justified its praise. "I'll have this to comfort me, anyway, Emma. I'll know that while I'm
smirking on the sprightly Miss Sweeney, your face will be undergoing
various agonizing twists in the effort to make American prices
understood by an Argentine who can't speak anything but Spanish." "Maybe I am short on Spanish, but I'm long on Featherlooms. I may not
know a senora from a chili con carne, but I know Featherlooms from the
waistband to the hem." She leaned forward, dimpling like fourteen
instead of forty. "And you've noticed--haven't you, T. A.?--that I've
got an expressive countenance." Buck leaned forward, too. His smile was almost gone. "I've noticed a lot of things, Emma McChesney. And if you persist in
deviling me for one more minute, I'm going to mention a few." Emma McChesney surveyed her cleared desk, locked the top drawer with a
snap, and stood up. "If you do I'll miss my boat. Just time to make Brooklyn. Suppose you
write 'em." That Ed Meyers might know nothing of her sudden plans, she had kept the
trip secret. Besides Buck and the office staff, her son Jock was the
only one who knew. But she found her cabin stocked like a prima
donna's on a farewell tour. There were boxes of flowers, a package of
books, baskets of fruit, piles of magazines, even a neat little sheaf
of telegrams, one from the faithful bookkeeper, one from the workroom
foreman, two from salesmen long in the firm's employ, two from Jock in
Chicago. She read them, her face glowing. He and Buck had vied with
each other in supplying her with luxuries that would make pleasanter
the twenty-three days of her voyage. She looked about the snug cabin, her eyes suddenly misty. Buck poked
his head in at the door. "Come on up on deck, Emma; I've only a few minutes left." She snatched a pink rose from the box, and together they went on deck. "Just ten minutes," said Buck. He was looking down at her. "Remember,
Emma, nothing that concerns the firm's business, however big, is half
as important as the things that concern you personally, however small. I realize what this trip will mean to us, if it pans, and if you can
beat Meyers to it. But if anything should happen to you, why----"

"Nothing's going to happen, T. A., except that I'll probably come home
with my complexion ruined. I'll feel a great deal more at home talking
pidgin-English to Senor Alvarez in Buenos Aires than you will talking
Featherlooms to Miss Skirt-Buyer in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. But remember
this, T. A.:  When you get to know--really to know--the Sadie Harrises
and the Sammy Blochs and the  Ella Sweeneys of this world, you've
learned just about all there is to know about human beings. Quick--the
gangplank! Goodby, T. A." The dock reached, he gazed up at her as she leaned far over the
railing. He made a megaphone of his hands. "I feel like an old maid who's staying home with her knitting," he
called. The boat began to move. Emma McChesney passed a quick hand over her
eyes. "Don't drop any stitches, T. A." With unerring aim she flung the big
pink rose straight at him. She went about arranging her affairs on the boat like the business
woman that she was. First she made her cabin shipshape. She placed
nearest at hand the books on South America, and the Spanish-American
pocket interpreter. She located her deck chair, and her seat in the
dining-room. Then, quietly, unobtrusively, and guided by those years
spent in meeting men and women face to face in business, she took
thorough, conscientious mental stock of those others who were to be her
fellow travelers for twenty-three days. For the most part, the first-class passengers were men. There were
American business men--salesmen, some of them, promoters others, or
representatives of big syndicates shrewd, alert, well dressed, smooth
shaven. Emma McChesney knew that she would gain valuable information
from many of them before the trip was over. She sighed a little
regretfully as she thought of those smoking-room talks--those intimate,
tobacco-mellowed business talks from which she would be barred by her
sex. There were two engineers, one British, one American, both very
intelligent-looking, both inclined to taciturnity, as is often the case
in men of their profession. They walked a good deal, and smoked
nut-brown, evil-smelling pipes, and stared unblinkingly across the
water. There were Argentines--whole families of them--Brazilians, too. The
fat, bejeweled Brazilian men eyed Emma McChesney with open approval,
even talked to her, leering objectionably. Emma McChesney refused to
be annoyed. Her ten years on the road served her in good stead now. But most absorbing of all to Emma McChesney, watching quietly over her
book or magazine, was a tall, erect, white-bearded Argentine who, with
his family, occupied chairs near hers. His name had struck her with
the sound of familiarity when she read it on the passenger list. She
had asked the deck-steward to point out the name's owner. "Pages," she
repeated to herself, worriedly, "Pages? P----"  Suddenly she knew. Pages y Hernandez, the owner of the great Buenos Aires shop--a shop
finer than those of Paris. And this was Pages! All the Featherloom
instinct in Emma McChesney came to the surface and stayed there,
seething. That was the morning of the second day out. By afternoon, she had
bribed and maneuvered so that her deck chair was next that of the
Pages-family flock of chairs. Senor Pages reminded her of one of those
dashing, white-haired, distinguished-looking men whose likeness graces
the cover of a box of your favorite cigars. General Something-or-other-ending-in-z he should have been, with a
revolutionary background. He dressed somberly in black, like most of
the other Argentine men on board. There was Senora Pages, very fat,
very indolent, very blank, much given to pink satin and diamonds at
dinner. Senorita Pages, over-powdered, overfrizzed, marvelously
gowned, with overplumpness just a few years away, sat quietly by Senora
Pages' side, but her darting, flashing, restless eyes were never still. The son (Emma heard them call him Pepe) was barely eighteen, she
thought, but quite a man of the world, with his cigarettes, his drinks,
his bold eyes. She looked at his sallow, pimpled skin, his lean, brown
hands, his lack-luster eyes, and she thought of Jock and was happy. Mrs. McChesney knew that she might visit the magnificent Buenos Aires
shop of Pages y Hernandez day after day for months without ever
obtaining a glimpse of either Pages or Hernandez. And here was Senor
Pages, so near that she could reach out and touch him from her deck
chair. Here was opportunity! A caller who had never been obliged to
knock twice at Emma McChesney's door. Her methods were so simple that she herself smiled at them. She donned
her choicest suit of white serge that she had been saving for shore
wear. Its skirt had been cut by the very newest trick. Its coat was
the kind to make you go home and get out your own white serge and gaze
at it with loathing. Senorita Pages' eyes leaped to that suit as iron
leaps to the magnet. Emma McChesney, passing her deck chair, detached
the eyes with a neat smile. Why hadn't she spent six months neglecting
Skirts for Spanish? she asked herself, groaning. As she approached her
own deck chair again she risked a bright, "Good morning." Her heart
bounded, stood still, bounded again, as from the lips of the assembled
Pages there issued a combined, courteous, perfectly good American,
"Good morning!" "You speak English!" Emma McChesney's tone expressed flattery and
surprise. Pages pere made answer. "Ah, yes, it is necessary. There are many English in Argentina." A sigh--a fluttering, tremulous sigh of perfect peace and
happiness--welled up from Emma McChesney's heart and escaped through
her smiling lips. By noon, Senorita Pages had tried on the fascinating coat and secured
the address of its builder. By afternoon, Emma McChesney was showing
the newest embroidery stitch to the slow but docile Senora Pages. Next
morning she was playing shuffleboard with the elegant, indolent Pepe,
and talking North American football and baseball to him. She had not
been Jock McChesney's mother all those years for nothing. She could
discuss sports with the best of them. Young Pages was avidly
interested. Outdoor sports had become the recent fashion among the
rich young Argentines. The problem of papa Pages was not so easy. Emma McChesney approached
her subject warily, skirting the bypaths of politics, war, climate,
customs--to business. Business! "But a lady as charming as you can understand nothing of business,"
said Senor Pages. "Business is for your militant sisters." "But we American women do understand business. Many--many charming
American women are in business." Senor Pages turned his fine eyes upon her. She had talked most
interestingly, this pretty American woman. "Perhaps--but pardon me if I think not. A woman cannot be really
charming and also capable in business." Emma McChesney dimpled becomingly. "But I know a woman who is as--well, as charming as you say I am. Still, she is known  as a capable, successful business woman. She'll
be in Buenos Aires when I am." Senor Pages shook an unbelieving head. Emma McChesney leaned forward. "Will you let me bring her in to meet you, just to prove my point?" "She must be as charming as you are." His Argentine betting
proclivities rose. "Here; we shall make a wager!" He took a card from
his pocket, scribbled on it, handed it to Emma McChesney. "You will
please present that to my secretary, who will conduct you immediately
to my office. We will pretend it is a friendly call. Your friend need
not know. If I lose----"

"If you lose, you must promise to let her show you her sample line." "But, dear madam, I do no buying." "Then you must introduce her favorably to the department buyer of her
sort of goods." "But if I win?" persisted Senor Pages. "If she isn't as charming as--as you say I am, you may make your own
terms." Senor Pages' fine eyes opened wide. It was on the fourteenth day of their trip that they came into quaint
Bahia. The stay there was short. Brazilian business methods  are
long. Emma McChesney took no chances with sample-trunks or cases. She
packed her three leading samples into her own personal suitcase, eluded
the other tourists, secured an interpreter, and prepared to brave
Bahia. She returned just in time to catch the boat, flushed, tired,
and orderless. Bahia would have none of her. In three days they would reach Rio de Janeiro, the magnificent. They
would have three days there. She told herself that Bahia didn't count,
anyway--sleepy little half-breed town! But the arrow rankled. It had
been the first to penetrate the armor of her business success. But she
had learned things from that experience at Bahia. She had learned that
the South American dislikes the North American because his Northern
cousin patronizes him. She learned that the North American business
firm is thought by the Southern business man to be tricky and
dishonest, and that, because the Northerner has not learned how to pack
a case of goods scientifically, as have the English, Germans, and
French, the South American rages to pay cubic-feet rates on boxes that
are three-quarters empty. So it was with a heavy heart but a knowing head that she faced Rio de
Janeiro. They had entered in the evening, the sunset splashing the bay
and the hills in the foreground and the Sugar-loaf Mountain with an
unbelievable riot of crimson and gold and orange and blue. Suddenly
the sun jerked down, as though pulled by a string, and the magic purple
night came up as though pulled by another. "Well, anyway, I've seen that," breathed Emma McChesney thankfully. Next morning, she packed her three samples, as before, her heart heavy,
her mind on Fat Ed Meyers coming up two weeks behind her. Three days in
Rio! And already she had bumped her impatient, quick-thinking,
quick-acting North American business head up against the stone wall of
South American leisureliness and prejudice. She meant no irreverence,
no impiety as she prayed, meanwhile packing Nos. 79, 65, and 48 into
her personal bag:

"O Lord, let Fat Ed Meyers have Bahia; but please, please help me to
land Rio and Buenos Aires!" Then, in smart tailored suit and hat, interpreter in tow, a prayer in
her heart, and excitement blazing in cheeks and eyes, she made her way
to the dock, through the customs, into a cab that was to take her to
her arena, the broad Avenida. Exactly two hours later, there dashed into the customs-house a
well-dressed woman whose hat was very much over one ear. She was
running as only a woman runs when she's made up her mind to get there. She came hot-foot, helter-skelter, regardless of modishly crippling
skirt, past officers, past customs officials, into the section where
stood the one small sample-trunk that she had ordered down in case of
emergency. The trunk had not gone through the customs. It had not
even been opened. But Emma McChesney heeded not trifles like that. Rio de Janeiro had fallen for Featherlooms. Those three samples, Nos. 79, 65, and 48, that boasted style, cut, and workmanship never before
seen in Rio, had turned the trick. They were as a taste of blood to a
hungry lion. Rio wanted more! Emma McChesney was kneeling before her trunk, had whipped out her key,
unlocked it, and was swiftly selecting the numbers wanted from the
trays, her breath coming quickly, her deft fingers choosing unerringly,
when an indignant voice said, in Portuguese, "It is forbidden!" Emma McChesney did not glance around. Her head was buried in the
depths of the trunk. But her quick ears had caught the word, "PROHIBA!" "Speak English," she said, and went on unpacking. "INGLES!" shouted the official. "No!" Then, with a superhuman effort,
as Emma McChesney stood up, her arms laden with Featherloom samples of
rainbow hues, "PARE! Ar-r-r-rest!" Mrs. McChesney slammed down the trunk top, locked it, clutched her
samples firmly, and faced the enraged official. "Go 'way! I haven't time to be arrested this morning. This is my busy
day. Call around this evening." Whereupon she fled to her waiting cab, leaving behind her a Brazilian
official stunned and raging by turns. When she returned, happy, triumphant, order-laden, he was standing
there, stunned no longer but raging still. Emma McChesney had
forgotten all about him. The gold-braided official advanced,
mustachios bristling. A volley of Portuguese burst from his long-pent
lips. Emma McChesney glanced behind her. Her interpreter threw up
helpless hands, replying with a still more terrifying burst of vowels. Bewildered, a little frightened, Mrs. McChesney stood helplessly by. The official laid a none too gentle hand on her shoulder. A little
group of lesser officials stood, comic-opera fashion, in the
background. And then Emma McChesney's New York training came to her
aid. She ignored the voluble interpreter. She remained coolly
unruffled by the fusillade of Portuguese. Quietly she opened her hand
bag and plunged her fingers deep, deep therein. Her blue eyes gazed
confidingly up into the Brazilian's snapping black ones, and as she
withdrew her hand from the depths of her purse, there passed from her
white fingers to his brown ones that which is the Esperanto of the
nations, the universal language understood from Broadway to Brazil. The hand on her shoulder relaxed and fell away. On deck once more, she encountered the suave Senor Pages. He stood at
the rail surveying Rio's shores with that lip-curling contempt of the
Argentine for everything Brazilian. He regarded Emma McChesney's
radiant face. "You are pleased with this--this Indian Rio?" Mrs. McChesney paused to gaze with him at the receding shores. "Like it! I'm afraid I haven't seen it. From here it looks like
Coney. But it buys like Seattle. Like it! Well, I should say I do!" "Ah, senora," exclaimed Pages, distressed, "wait! In six days you will
behold Buenos Aires. Your New York, Londres, Paris--bah! You shall
drive with my wife and daughter through Palermo. You shall see jewels,
motors, toilettes as never before. And you will visit my
establishment?" He raised an emphatic forefinger. "But surely!" Emma McChesney regarded him solemnly. "I promise to do that. You may rely on me." Six days later they swept up the muddy and majestic Plata, whose color
should have won it the name of River of Gold instead of River of
Silver. From the boat's upper deck, Emma McChesney beheld a sky line
which was so like the sky line of her own New York that it gave her a
shock. She was due for still another shock when, an hour later, she
found herself in a maelstrom of motors, cabs, street cars, newsboys,
skyscrapers, pedestrians, policemen, subway stations. Where was the
South American languor? Where the Argentine inertia? The rush and
roar of it, the bustle and the bang of it made the twenty-three-day
voyage seem a myth. "I'm going to shut my eyes," she told herself, "and then open them
quickly. If that little brown traffic-policeman turns out to be a big,
red-faced traffic-policeman, then I'm right, and this IS Broadway and
Forty-second." Shock number three came upon her entrance at the Grande Hotel. It had
been Emma McChesney's boast that her ten years on the road had
familiarized her with every type, grade, style, shape, cut, and mold of
hotel clerk. She knew him from the Knickerbocker to the Eagle House at
Waterloo, Iowa. At the moment she entered the Grande Hotel, she knew
she had overlooked one. Accustomed though she was  to the sartorial
splendors of the man behind the desk, she might easily have mistaken
this one for the president of the republic. In his glittering uniform,
he looked a pass between the supreme chancellor of the K.P. 's in full
regalia and a prince of India during the Durbar. He was regal. He was
overwhelming. He would have made the most splendid specimen of North
American hotel clerk look like a scullery boy. Mrs. McChesney spent
two whole days in Buenos Aires before she discovered that she could
paralyze this personage with a peso. A peso is forty-three cents. Her experience at Bahia and at Rio de Janeiro had taught her things. So for two days, haunted, as she was, by visions of Fat Ed Meyers
coming up close behind her, she possessed her soul in patience and
waited. On the great firm of Pages y Hernandez rested the success of
this expedition. When she thought of her little trick on Senor Pages,
her blithe spirits sank. Suppose, after all, that this powerful South
American should resent her little Yankee joke! Her trunks went through the customs. She secured an interpreter. She
arranged her samples with loving care. Style, cut, workmanship--she
ran over their strong points in her mind. She looked at them as a
mother's eyes rest fondly on the shining faces, the well-brushed hair,
the clean pinafores of her brood. And her heart swelled with pride. They lay on their tables, the artful knickerbockers, the gleaming
petticoats, the pink and blue pajamas, the bifurcated skirts. Emma
McChesney ran one hand lightly over the navy blue satin folds of a
sample. "Pages or no Pages, you're a credit to your mother," she said,
whimsically. Up in her room once more, she selected her smartest tailor costume, her
most modish hat, the freshest of gloves and blouses. She chose the hours between four and six, when wheel traffic was
suspended in the Calle Florida and throughout the shopping-district,
the narrow streets of which are congested to the point of suffocation
at other times. As she swung down the street they turned to gaze after her--these
Argentines. The fat senoras turned, and the smartly costumed, sallow
senoritas, and the men--all of them. They spoke to her, these last,
but she had expected that, and marched on with her free, swinging
stride, her chin high, her color very bright. Into the great shop of
Pages y Hernandez at last, up to the private offices, her breath coming
a little quickly, into the presence of the shiny secretary--shiny
teeth, shiny hair, shiny skin, shiny nails. He gazed upon Emma
McChesney, the shine gleaming brighter. He took in his slim, brown
fingers the card on which Senor Pages had scribbled that day on board
ship. The shine became dazzling. He bowed low and backed his way into
the office of Senor Pages. A successful man is most impressive when in those surroundings which
have been built up by his success. On shipboard, Senor Pages had been
a genial, charming, distinguished fellow passenger. In his luxurious
business office he still was genial, charming, but his environment
seemed to lend him a certain austerity. "Senora McChesney!" ("How awful that sounds!" Emma McChesney told herself.) "We spoke of you but last night. And now you come to win the wager,
yes?" He smiled, but shook his head. "Yes," replied Emma McChesney. And tried to smile, too. Senor Pages waved a hand toward the outer office. "She is with you, this business friend who is also so charming?" "Oh, yes," said Emma McChesney, "she's--she's with me." Then, as he
made a motion toward the push-button, which would summon the secretary:
"No, don't do that! Wait a minute!" From her bag she drew her business
card, presented it. "Read that first." Senor Pages read it. He looked up. Then he read it again. He gazed
again at Emma McChesney. Emma McChesney looked straight at him and
tried in vain to remember ever having heard of the South American's
sense of humor. A moment passed. Her heart sank. Then Senor Pages
threw back his fine head and laughed--laughed as the Latin laughs,
emphasizing his mirth with many ejaculations and gestures. "Ah, you Northerners! You are too quick for us. Come; I myself must
see this garment which you honor by selling." His glance rested
approvingly on Emma McChesney's trim, smart figure. "That which you
sell, it must be quite right." "I not only sell it," said Emma McChesney; "I wear it." "That--how is it you Northerners say?--ah, yes--that settles it!" Six weeks later, in his hotel room in Columbus, Ohio, T. A. Buck sat
reading a letter forwarded from New York and postmarked Argentina. As
he read he chuckled, grew serious, chuckled again and allowed his cigar
to grow cold. For the seventh time:

DEAR T. A.:

They've fallen for Featherlooms the way an Eskimo takes to gum-drops. My letter of credit is all shot to pieces, but it was worth it. They
make you pay a separate license fee in each province, and South America
is just one darn province after another. If they'd lump a peddler's
license for $5,000 and tell you to go ahead, it would be cheaper. I landed Pages y Hernandez by a trick. The best of it is the man I
played it on saw the point and laughed with me. We North Americans
brag too much about our sense of humor. I thought ten years on the road had hardened me to the most fiendish
efforts of a hotel chef. But the food at the Grande here makes a
quarter-inch round steak with German fried look like Sherry's latest
triumph. You know I'm not fussy. I'm the kind of woman who, given her
choice of ice cream or cheese for dessert, will take cheese. Here,
given my choice, I play safe and take neither. I've reached the point
where I make a meal of radishes. They kill their beef in the morning
and serve it for lunch. It looks and tastes like an Ethiop's ear. But
I don't care, because I'm getting gorgeously thin. If the radishes hold out I'll invade Central America and Panama. I've
one eye on Valparaiso already. I know it sounds wild, but it means a
future and a fortune for Featherlooms. I find I don't even have to
talk skirts. They're self-sellers. But I have to talk honesty and
packing. How did you hit it off with Ella Sweeney? Haven't seen a sign of Fat
Ed Meyers. I'm getting nervous. Do you think he may have exploded at
the equator? EMMA. But kind fortune saw fit to add a last sweet drop to Emma McChesney's
already brimming cup. As she reached the docks on the day of her
departure, clad in cool, crisp white from hat to shoes, her quick eye
spied a red-faced, rotund, familiar figure disembarking from the New
York boat, just arrived. The fates, grinning, had planned this moment
like a stage-manager. Fat Ed Meyers came heavily down the gangplank. His hat was off. He was mopping the top of his head with a large, damp
handkerchief. His gaze swept over the busy landing-docks, darted
hither and thither, alighted on Emma McChesney with a shock, and rested
there. A distinct little shock went through that lady, too. But she
waited at the foot of her boat's gangway until the unbelievably nimble
Meyers reached her. He was a fiery spectacle. His cheeks were distended, his eyes
protuberant. He wasted no words. They understood each other, those
two. "Coming or going?" "Going," replied Emma McChesney. "Clean up this--this Bonez Areez, too?" "Absolutely." "Did, huh?" Meyers stood a moment panting, his little eyes glaring into her calm
ones. "Well, I beat you in Bahia, anyway." he boasted. Emma McChesney snapped her fingers blithely. "Bah, for Bahia!" She took a step or two up the gangplank, and turned. "Good-by, Ed. And good luck. I can recommend the radishes, but pass
up the beef. Dangerous." Fat Ed Meyers, still staring, began to stutter unintelligibly, his lips
moving while no words came. Emma McChesney held up a warning hand. "Don't do that, Ed! Not in this climate! A man of your build, too! I'm surprised. Consider the feelings of your firm!" Fat Ed Meyers glared up at the white-clad, smiling, gracious figure. His hands unclenched. The words came. "Oh, if only you were a man for just ten minutes!" he moaned. II

THANKS TO MISS MORRISSEY

It was Fat Ed Meyers, of the Sans-Silk Skirt Company, who first said
that Mrs. Emma McChesney was the Maude Adams of the business world. It
was on the occasion of his being called to the carpet for his failure
to make Sans-silks as popular as Emma McChesney's famed Featherlooms. He spoke in self-defense, heatedly. "It isn't Featherlooms. It's McChesney. Her line is no better than
ours. It's her personality, not her petticoats. She's got a following
that swears by her. If Maude Adams was to open on Broadway in 'East
Lynne,' they'd flock to see her, wouldn't they? Well, Emma McChesney
could sell hoop-skirts, I'm telling you. She could sell bustles. She
could sell red-woolen mittens on Fifth Avenue!" The title stuck. It was late in September when Mrs. McChesney, sunburned, decidedly
under weight, but  gloriously triumphant, returned from a four months'
tour of South America. Against the earnest protests of her business
partner, T. A. Buck, president of the Buck Featherloom Petticoat
Company, she had invaded the southern continent and left it abloom with
Featherlooms from the Plata to the Canal. Success was no stranger to Mrs. McChesney. This last business victory
had not turned her head. But it had come perilously near to tilting
that extraordinarily well-balanced part. A certain light in her eyes,
a certain set of her chin, an added briskness of bearing, a cocky slant
of the eyebrow revealed the fact that, though Mrs. McChesney's feet
were still on the ground, she might be said to be standing on tiptoe. When she had sailed from Brooklyn pier that June afternoon, four months
before, she had cast her ordinary load of business responsibilities on
the unaccustomed shoulders of T. A. Buck. That elegant person, although
president of the company which his father had founded, had never been
its real head. When trouble threatened in the workroom, it was to Mrs.
McChesney that the forewoman came. When an irascible customer in
Green Bay, Wisconsin, waxed impatient over the delayed shipment of a
Featherloom order, it was to Emma McChesney that his typewritten
protest was addressed. When the office machinery needed mental oiling,
when a new hand demanded to be put on silk-work instead of mercerized,
when a consignment of skirt-material turned out to be more than usually
metallic, it was in Mrs. Emma McChesney's little private office that
the tangle was unsnarled. She walked into that little office, now, at nine o'clock of a brilliant
September morning. It was a reassuring room, bright, orderly,
workmanlike, reflecting the personality of its owner. She stood in the
center of it now and looked about her, eyes glowing, lips parted. She
raised her hands high above her head, then brought them down to her
sides again with an unconsciously dramatic gesture that expressed
triumph, peace, content, relief, accomplishment, and a great and deep
satisfaction. T. A. Buck, in the doorway, saw the gesture--and
understood. "Not so bad to get back to it, is it?" "Bad! It's like a drink of cool spring water after too much champagne. In those miserable South American hotels, how I used to long for the
orderliness and quiet of this!" She took off hat and coat. In a vase on the desk, a cluster of yellow
chrysanthemums shook their shaggy heads in welcome. Emma McChesney's
quick eye jumped to them, then to Buck, who had come in and was
surveying the scene appreciatively. "You--of course." She indicated the flowers with a nod and a radiant
smile. "Sorry--no. The office staff did that. There's a card of welcome, I
believe." "Oh," said Emma McChesney. The smile was still there, but the radiance
was gone. She seated herself at her desk. Buck took the chair near by. She
unlocked a drawer, opened it, rummaged, closed it again, unlocked
another. She patted the flat top of her desk with loving fingers. "I can't help it," she said, with a little shamed laugh; "I'm so glad
to be back. I'll probably hug the forewoman and bite a piece out of
the first Featherloom I lay hands on. I had to use all my self-control
to keep from kissing Jake, the elevator-man, coming up." Out of the corner of her eye, Emma McChesney had been glancing at her
handsome business partner. She had found herself doing the same thing
from the time he had met her at the dock late in the afternoon of the
day before. Those four months had wrought some subtle change. But
what? Where? She frowned a moment in thought. Then:

"Is that a new suit, T. A.?" "This? Lord, no! Last summer's. Put it on because of this July
hangover in September. Why?" "Oh, I don't know"--vaguely--"I just--wondered." There was nothing vague about T. A. Buck, however. His old air of
leisureliness was gone. His very attitude as he sat there, erect,
brisk, confident, was in direct contrast to his old, graceful indolence. "I'd like to go over the home grounds with you this morning," he said. "Of course, in our talk last night, we didn't cover the South American
situation thoroughly. But your letters and the orders told the story. You carried the thing through to success. It's marvelous! But we
stay-at-homes haven't been marking time during your absence." The puzzled frown still sat on Emma McChesney's brow. As though
thinking aloud, she said,

"Have you grown thinner, or fatter or--something?" "Not an ounce. Weighed at the club yesterday." He leaned forward a little, his face suddenly very sober. "Emma, I want to tell you now that--that mother--she--I lost her just a
few weeks after you sailed." Emma McChesney gave a little cry. She came quickly over to him, and
one hand went to his shoulder as she stood looking down at him, her
face all sympathy and contrition and sorrow. "And you didn't write me! You didn't even tell me, last night!" "I didn't want to distress you. I knew you were having a hard-enough
pull down there without additional worries. It happened very suddenly
while I was out on the road. I got the wire in Peoria. She died very
suddenly  and quite painlessly. Her companion, Miss Tate, was with her. She had never been herself since Dad's death." "And you----"

"I could only do what was to be done. Then I went back on the road. I
closed up the house, and now I've leased it. Of course it's big enough
for a regiment. But we stayed on because mother was used to it. I
sold some of the furniture, but stored the things she had loved. She
left some to you." "To me!" "You know she used to enjoy your visits so much, partly because of the
way in which you always talked of Dad. She left you some jewelry that
she was fond of, and that colossal old mahogany buffet that you used to
rave over whenever you came up. Heaven knows what you'll do with it! It's a white elephant. If you add another story to it, you could rent
it out as an apartment." "Indeed I shall take it, and cherish it, and polish it up myself every
week--the beauty!" She came back to her chair. They sat a moment in silence. Then Emma
McChesney spoke musingly. "So that was it." Buck looked up. "I sensed something--different. I
didn't know. I couldn't explain it." Buck passed a quick hand over his eyes, shook himself, sat up, erect
and brisk again, and plunged, with a directness that was as startling
as it was new in him, into the details of Middle Western business. "Good!" exclaimed Emma McChesney. "It's all very well to know that Featherlooms are safe in South
America. But the important thing is to know how they're going in the
corn country." Buck stood up. "Suppose we transfer this talk to my office. All the papers are there,
all the correspondence--all the orders, everything. You can get the
whole situation in half an hour. What's the use of talking when
figures will tell you." He walked swiftly over to the door and stood there waiting. Emma
McChesney rose. The puzzled look was there again. "No, that wasn't it, after all," she said. "Eh?" said Buck. "Wasn't what?" "Nothing," replied Emma McChesney. "I'm wool-gathering this morning. I'm afraid  it's going to take me a
day or two to get back into harness again." "If you'd rather wait, if you think you'll be more fit to-morrow or the
day after, we'll wait. There's no real hurry. I just thought----"

But Mrs. McChesney led the way across the hall that separated her
office from her partner's. Halfway across, she stopped and surveyed
the big, bright, busy main office, with its clacking typewriters and
rustle and crackle of papers and its air of concentration. "Why, you've run up a partition there between Miss Casey's desk and the
workroom door, haven't you?" "Yes; it's much better that way." "Yes, of course. And--why, where are the boys' desks? Spalding's and
Hutchinson's, and--they're all gone!" She turned in amazement. "Break it to me! Aren't we using traveling men any more?" Buck laughed his low, pleasant laugh. "Oh, yes; but I thought their desks belonged somewhere else than in the
main office. They're now installed in the little room between the shop
and Healy's office. Close quarters, but better than having them out
here where they were inclined to neglect their reports in order to
shine in the eyes of that pretty new stenographer. There are one or
two other changes. I hope you'll approve of them." "I'm sure I shall," replied Emma McChesney, a little stiffly. In Buck's office, she settled back in her chair to watch him as he
arranged neat sheaves of papers for her inspection. Her eyes traveled
from his keen, eager face to the piles of paper and back again. "Tell me, did you hit it off with the Ella Sweeneys and the Sadie
Harrises of the great Middle West? Is business as bad as the howlers
say it is? You said something last night about a novelty bifurcated
skirt. Was that the new designer's idea? How have the early buyers
taken to it?" Buck crooked an elbow over his head in self-defense. "Stop it! You make me feel like Rheims cathedral. Don't bombard until
negotiations fail." He handed her the first sheaf of papers. But, before she began to
read:  "I'll say this  much. Miss Sharp, of Berg Brothers, Omaha--the
one you warned against as the human cactus--had me up for dinner. Well, I know you don't, but it's true. Her father and I hit it off
just like that. He's a character, that old boy. Ever meet him? No? And Miss Sharp told me something about herself that explains her
porcupine pose. That poor child was engaged to a chap who was killed
in the Spanish-American war, and she----"

"Kate Sharp!" interrupted Emma McChesney. "Why, T. A. Buck, in all her
vinegary, narrow life, that girl has never had a beau, much less----"

Buck's eyebrows came up slightly. "Emma McChesney, you haven't developed--er--claws, have you?" With a gasp, Emma McChesney plunged into the papers before her. For ten
minutes, the silence of the room was unbroken except for the crackling
of papers. Then Emma McChesney put down the first sheaf and looked up
at her business partner. "Is that a fair sample?" she demanded. "Very," answered T. A. Buck, and handed her another set. Another ten minutes of silence. Emma McChesney reached out a hand for
still another set of papers. The pink of repressed excitement was
tinting her cheeks. "They're--they're all like this?" "Practically, yes." Mrs. McChesney faced him, her eyes wide, her breath coming fast. "T. A. Buck," she slapped the papers before her smartly with the back
of her hand, "this means you've broken our record for Middle Western
sales!" "Yes," said T. A., quietly. "Dad would have enjoyed a morning like
this, wouldn't he?" Emma McChesney stood up. "Enjoyed it! He is enjoying it. Don't tell me that T. A., Senior,
just because he is no longer on earth, has failed to get the joy of
knowing that his son has realized his fondest dreams. Why, I can feel
him here in this room, I can see those bright brown eyes of his
twinkling behind his glasses. Not know it! Of course he knows it." Buck looked down at the desk, smiling curiously. "D'you know, I felt that way, too." Suddenly Emma McChesney began to laugh. It was not all mirth--that
laugh. Buck waited. "And to think that I--I kindly and patronizingly handed you a little
book full of tips on how to handle Western buyers, 'The Salesman's
Who's Who'--I, who used to think I was the witch of the West when it
came to selling! You, on your first selling-trip, have made me look
like--like a shoe-string peddler." Buck put out a hand suddenly. "Don't say that, Emma. I--somehow it takes away all the pleasure." "It's true. And now that I know, it explains a lot of things that I've
been puzzling about in the last twenty-four hours." "What kind of things?" "The way you look and act and think. The way you carry your head. The
way you sit in a chair. The very words you use, your gestures, your
intonations. They're different." T. A. Buck, busy with his cigar, laughed a little self-consciously. "Oh, nonsense!" he said. "You're imagining things." Which remark, while not a particularly happy one, certainly was not in
itself so unfortunate as to explain why Mrs. McChesney should have
turned rather suddenly and bolted into her own office across the hall
and closed the door behind her. T. A. Buck, quite cool and unruffled, viewed her sudden departure
quizzically. Then he took his cigar from his mouth and stood eying it
a moment with more attention, perhaps, than it deserved, in spite of
its fine aroma. When he put it back between his lips and sat down at
his desk once more he was smiling ever so slightly. Then began a new order of things in the offices of the T. A. Buck
Featherloom Petticoat Company. Feet that once had turned quite as a
matter of course toward the door marked "MRS. MCCHESNEY," now took the
direction of the door opposite--and that door bore the name of Buck. Those four months of Mrs. McChesney's absence had put her partner to
the test. That acid test had washed away the accumulated dross of
years and revealed the precious metal beneath. T. A. Buck had proved
to be his father's son. If Mrs. McChesney noticed that the head office had miraculously moved
across the hall, if her sharp ears marked that the many feet that once
had paused at her door now stopped at the door opposite, if she
realized that instead of, "I'd like your opinion on this, Mrs.
McChesney," she often heard the new, "I'll ask Mr. Buck," she did not
show it by word or sign. The first of October found buyers still flocking into New York from
every State in the country. Shrewd men and women, these--bargain
hunters on a grand scale. Armed with the long spoon of business
knowledge, they came to skim the cream from factory and workroom
products set forth for their inspection. For years, it had been Emma McChesney's quiet boast that of those whose
business brought them to the offices and showrooms of the T. A. Buck
Featherloom Petticoat Company, the foremost insisted on dealing only
with her. She was proud of her following. She liked their loyalty. Their preference for her was the subtlest compliment that was in their
power to pay. Ethel Morrissey, whose friendship dated back to the days
when Emma McChesney had sold Featherlooms through the Middle West, used
to say laughingly, her plump, comfortable shoulders shaking, "Emma, if
you ever give me away by telling how many years I've been buying
Featherlooms of you, I'll--I'll call down upon you the spinster's
curse." Early Monday morning, Mrs. McChesney, coming down the hall from the
workroom, encountered Miss Ella Sweeney, of Klein & Company, Des
Moines, Iowa, stepping out of the elevator. A very skittish Miss
Sweeney, rustling, preening, conscious of her dangling black earrings
and her Robespierre collar and her beauty-patch. Emma McChesney met
this apparition with outstretched, welcoming hand. "Ella Sweeney! Well, I'd almost given you up. You're late this fall. Come into my office." She led the way, not noticing that Miss Sweeney came reluctantly, her
eyes on the closed door across the way. "Sit down," said Emma McChesney, and pulled a chair nearer her desk. "No; wait a minute! Let me look at you. Now, Ella, don't try to tell
me that THAT dress came from Des Moines, Iowa! Do I! Why, child, it's
distinctive!" Miss Sweeney, still standing, smiled a  pleased but rather preoccupied
smile. Her eyes roved toward the door. Emma McChesney, radiating good will and energy, went on:

"Wait till you see our new samples! You'll buy a million dollars'
worth. Just let me lead you to our new Walk-Easy bifurcated skirt. We
call it the 'one-stepper's delight.'" She put a hand on Ella Sweeney's
arm, preparatory to guiding her to the showrooms in the rear. But Miss
Sweeney's strange reluctance grew into resolve. A blush, as real as it
was unaccustomed, arose to her bepowdered cheeks. "Is--I--that is--Mr. Buck is in, I suppose?" "Mr. Buck? Oh, yes, he's in." Miss Sweeney's eyes sought the closed door across the hall. "Is that--his office?" Emma McChesney stiffened a little. Her eyes narrowed thoughtfully. "You have guessed it," she said crisply. "Mr. Buck's name is on the
door, and you are looking at it." Miss Sweeney looked down, looked up, twiddled the chain about her neck. "You want to see Mr. Buck?" asked Emma McChesney quietly. Miss Sweeney simpered down at her glove-tips, fluttered her eyelids. "Well--yes--I--I--you see, I bought of him this year, and when you buy
of a person, why, naturally, you----"

"Naturally; I understand." She walked across the hall, threw open the door, and met T. A. Buck's
glance coolly. "Mr. Buck, Miss Sweeney, of Des Moines, is here, and I'm sure you want
to see her. This way, Miss Sweeney." Miss Sweeney, sidling, blushing, fluttering, teetered in. Emma
McChesney, just before she closed the door, saw a little spasm cross
Buck's face. It was gone so quickly, and a radiant smile sat there so
reassuringly, that she wondered if she had not been mistaken, after
all. He had advanced, hand outstretched, with:

"Miss Sweeney! It--it's wonderful to see you again! You're
looking----"

The closed door stifled the rest. Emma McChesney, in her office across
the way, stood a moment in the center of the room, her hand covering
her eyes. The hardy chrysanthemums still glowed sunnily from their
vase. The little room was very quiet except for the ticking  of the
smart, leather-encased clock on the desk. The closed door shut out factory and office sounds. And Emma McChesney
stood with one hand over her eyes. So Napoleon might have stood after
Waterloo. After this first lesson, Mrs. McChesney did not err again. When, two
days later, Miss Sharp, of Berg Brothers, Omaha, breezed in, looking
strangely juvenile and distinctly anticipatory, Emma greeted her
smilingly and waved her toward the door opposite. Miss Sharp, the
erstwhile bristling, was strangely smooth and sleek. She glanced ever
so softly, sighed ever so flutteringly. "Working side by side with him, seeing him day after day, how have you
been able to resist him?" Emma McChesney was only human, after all. "By remembering that this is a business house, not a matrimonial
parlor." The dart found no lodging place in Miss Sharp's sleek armor. She
seemed scarcely to have heard. "My dear," she whispered, "his eyes! And his manner! You must
be--whatchamaycallit--adamant. Is that the way you pronounce it? You
know what I mean." "Oh, yes," replied Emma McChesney evenly, "I--know what you mean." She told herself that she was justified in the righteous contempt which
she felt for this sort of thing. A heart-breaker! A cheap
lady-killer! Whereupon in walked Sam Bloom, of the Paris Emporium,
Duluth, one of Mrs. McChesney's stanchest admirers and a long-tried
business friend. The usual thing:  "Younger than ever, Mrs. McChesney! You're a
wonder--yes, you are! How's business? Same here. Going to have lunch
with me to-day?" Then:  "I'll just run in and see Buck. Say, where's
he been keeping himself all these years? Chip off the old block, that
boy." So he had the men, too! It was in this frame of mind that Miss Ethel Morrissey found her on the
morning that she came into New York on her semi-annual buying-trip. Ethel Morrissey, plump, matronly-looking, quiet, with her hair fast
graying at the sides, had nothing of the skittish Middle Western buyer
about her. She might have passed for the mother of a brood of six if
it were not for her eyes--the shrewd, twinkling, far-sighted, reckoning
eyes of the business woman. She and Emma McChesney had been friends
from the day that Ethel Morrissey had bought her first cautious bill of
Featherlooms. Her love for Emma McChesney had much of the maternal in
it. She felt a personal pride in Emma McChesney's work, her success,
her clean reputation, her life of self-denial for her son Jock. When
Ethel Morrissey was planned by her Maker, she had not been meant to be
wasted on the skirt-and-suit department of a small-town store. That
broad, gracious breast had been planned as a resting-place for heads in
need of comfort. Those plump, firm arms were meant to enfold the weak
and distressed. Those capable hands should have smoothed troubled
heads and patted plump cheeks, instead of wasting their gifts in
folding piles of petticoats and deftly twitching a plait or a tuck into
place. She was playing Rosalind in buskins when she should have been
cast for the Nurse. She entered Emma McChesney's office, now, in her quiet blue suit and
her neat hat, and she  looked very sane and cheerful and rosy-cheeked
and dependable. At least, so Emma McChesney thought, as she kissed
her, while the plump arms held her close. Ethel Morrissey, the hugging process completed, held her off and eyed
her. "Well, Emma McChesney, flourish your Featherlooms for me. I want to
buy and get it over, so we can talk." "Are you sure that you want to buy of me?" 