



Produced by Charles Keller. HTML version by Al Haines. ONE BASKET

THIRTY-ONE SHORT STORIES


BY

EDNA FERBER




  INTRODUCTION                               ix
  THE WOMAN WHO TRIED TO BE GOOD              1
  THE GAY OLD DOG                            11
  THAT'S MARRIAGE                            29
  FARMER IN THE DELL                         49
  UN MORSO DOO PANG                          68
  LONG DISTANCE                              89
  THE MATERNAL FEMININE                      94
  .... remainder not included




The Woman Who Tried to Be Good [1913]


Before she tried to be a good woman she had been a very bad woman--so
bad that she could trail her wonderful apparel up and down Main Street,
from the Elm Tree Bakery to the railroad tracks, without once having a
man doff his hat to her or a woman bow. You passed her on the street
with a surreptitious glance, though she was well worth looking at--in
her furs and laces and plumes. She had the only full-length mink coat
in our town, and Ganz's shoe store sent to Chicago for her shoes. Hers
were the miraculously small feet you frequently see in stout women. Usually she walked alone; but on rare occasions, especially round
Christmastime, she might have been seen accompanied by some silent,
dull-eyed, stupid-looking girl, who would follow her dumbly in and out
of stores, stopping now and then to admire a cheap comb or a chain set
with flashy imitation stones--or, queerly enough, a doll with yellow
hair and blue eyes and very pink cheeks. But, alone or in company, her
appearance in the stores of our town was the signal for a sudden jump
in the cost of living. The storekeepers mulcted her; and she knew it
and paid in silence, for she was of the class that has no redress. She
owned the House with the Closed Shutters, near the freight depot--did
Blanche Devine. In a larger town than ours she would have passed unnoticed. She did
not look like a bad woman. Of course she used too much make-up, and as
she passed you caught the oversweet breath of a certain heavy scent. Then, too, her diamond eardrops would have made any woman's features
look hard; but her plump face, in spite of its heaviness, wore an
expression of good-humored intelligence, and her eyeglasses gave her
somehow a look of respectability. We do not associate vice with
eyeglasses. So in a large city she would have passed for a
well-dressed, prosperous, comfortable wife and mother who was in danger
of losing her figure from an overabundance of good living; but with us
she was a town character, like Old Man Givins, the drunkard, or the
weak-minded Binns girl. When she passed the drug-store corner there
would be a sniggering among the vacant-eyed loafers idling there, and
they would leer at each other and jest in undertones. So, knowing Blanche Devine as we did, there was something resembling a
riot in one of our most respectable neighborhoods when it was learned
that she had given up her interest in the house near the freight depot
and was going to settle down in the white cottage on the corner and be
good. All the husbands in the block, urged on by righteously indignant
wives, dropped in on Alderman Mooney after supper to see if the thing
could not be stopped. The fourth of the protesting husbands to arrive
was the Very Young Husband who lived next door to the corner cottage
that Blanche Devine had bought. The Very Young Husband had a Very
Young Wife, and they were the joint owners of Snooky. Snooky was
three-going-on-four, and looked something like an angel--only healthier
and with grimier hands. The whole neighborhood borrowed her and tried
to spoil her; but Snooky would not spoil. Alderman Mooney was down in the cellar, fooling with the furnace. He was in his furnace overalls; a short black pipe in his mouth. Three
protesting husbands had just left. As the Very Young Husband,
following Mrs. Mooney's directions, descended the cellar stairs,
Alderman Mooney looked up from his tinkering. He peered through a haze
of pipe smoke. "Hello!" he called, and waved the haze away with his open palm. "Come on down! Been tinkering with this blamed furnace since supper. She don't draw like she ought. 'Long toward spring a furnace always
gets balky. How many tons you used this winter?" "Oh-five," said the Very Young Husband shortly. Alderman Mooney
considered it thoughtfully. The Young Husband leaned up against the
side of the water tank, his hands in his pockets. "Say, Mooney, is that
right about Blanche Devine's having bought the house on the corner?" "You're the fourth man that's been in to ask me that this evening. I'm
expecting the rest of the block before bedtime. She bought it all
right." The Young Husband flushed and kicked at a piece of coal with the toe of
his boot. "Well, it's a darned shame!" he began hotly. "Jen was ready to cry at
supper. This'll be a fine neighborhood for Snooky to grow up in! What's a woman like that want to come into a respectable street for,
anyway? I own my home and pay my taxes--"

Alderman Mooney looked up. "So does she," he interrupted. "She's going to improve the
place--paint it, and put in a cellar and a furnace, and build a porch,
and lay a cement walk all round." The Young Husband took his hands out of his pockets in order to
emphasize his remarks with gestures. "What's that got to do with it? I don't care if she puts in diamonds
for windows and sets out Italian gardens and a terrace with peacocks on
it. You're the alderman of this ward, aren't you? Well, it was up to
you to keep her out of this block! You could have fixed it with an
injunction or something. I'm going to get up a petition--that's what
I'm going----"

Alderman Mooney closed the furnace door with a bang that drowned the
rest of the threat. He turned the draft in a pipe overhead and brushed
his sooty palms briskly together like one who would put an end to a
profitless conversation. "She's bought the house," he said mildly, "and paid for it. And it's
hers. She's got a right to live in this neighborhood as long as she
acts respectable." The Very Young Husband laughed. "She won't last! They never do." Alderman Mooney had taken his pipe out of his mouth and was rubbing his
thumb over the smooth bowl, looking down at it with unseeing eyes. On
his face was a queer look--the look of one who is embarrassed because
he is about to say something honest. "Look here! I want to tell you something:  I happened to be up in the
mayor's office the day Blanche signed for the place. She had to go
through a lot of red tape before she got it--had quite a time of it,
she did! And say, kid, that woman ain't so--bad." The Very Young Husband exclaimed impatiently:

"Oh, don't give me any of that, Mooney! Blanche Devine's a town
character. Even the kids know what she is. If she's got religion or
something, and wants to quit and be decent, why doesn't she go to
another town--Chicago or someplace--where nobody knows her?" That motion of Alderman Mooney's thumb against the smooth pipe bowl
stopped. He looked up slowly. "That's what I said--the mayor too. But Blanche Devine said she wanted
to try it here. She said this was home to her. Funny--ain't it? Said
she wouldn't be fooling anybody here. They know her. And if she moved
away, she said, it'd leak out some way sooner or later. It does, she
said. Always! Seems she wants to live like--well, like other women. She put it like this: she says she hasn't got religion, or any of that. She says she's no different than she was when she was twenty. She says
that for the last ten years the ambition of her life has been to be
able to go into a grocery store and ask the price of, say, celery; and,
if the clerk charged her ten when it ought to be seven, to be able to
sass him with a regular piece of her mind--and then sail out and trade
somewhere else until he saw that she didn't have to stand anything from
storekeepers, any more than any other woman that did her own marketing. She's a smart woman, Blanche is! God knows I ain't taking her
part--exactly; but she talked a little, and the mayor and me got a
little of her history." A sneer appeared on the face of the Very Young Husband. He had been
known before he met Jen as a rather industrious sower of wild oats. He
knew a thing or two, did the Very Young Husband, in spite of his youth! He always fussed when Jen wore even a V-necked summer gown on the
street. "Oh, she wasn't playing for sympathy," went on Alderman Mooney in
answer to the sneer. "She said she'd always paid her way and always
expected to. Seems her husband left her without a cent when she was
eighteen--with a baby. She worked for four dollars a week in a cheap
eating house. The two of 'em couldn't live on that. Then the baby----"

"Good night!" said the Very Young Husband. "I suppose Mrs. Mooney's
going to call?" "Minnie! It was her scolding all through supper that drove me down to
monkey with the furnace. She's wild--Minnie is." He peeled off his
overalls and hung them on a nail. The Young Husband started to ascend
the cellar stairs. Alderman Mooney laid a detaining finger on his
sleeve. "Don't say anything in front of Minnie! She's boiling! Minnie and the kids are going to visit her folks out West this summer;
so I wouldn't so much as dare to say 'Good morning!' to the Devine
woman. Anyway, a person wouldn't talk to her, I suppose. But I kind
of thought I'd tell you about her. "Thanks!" said the Very Young Husband dryly. In the early spring, before Blanche Devine moved in, there came
stone-masons, who began to build something. It was a great stone
fireplace that rose in massive incongruity at the side of the little
white cottage. Blanche Devine was trying to make a home for herself. Blanche Devine used to come and watch them now and then as the work
progressed. She had a way of walking round and round the house,
looking up at it and poking at plaster and paint with her umbrella or
finger tip. One day she brought with her a man with a spade. He
spaded up a neat square of ground at the side of the cottage and a long
ridge near the fence that separated her yard from that of the Very
Young Couple next door. The ridge spelled sweet peas and nasturtiums
to our small-town eyes. On the day that Blanche Devine moved in there was wild agitation among
the white-ruffed bedroom curtains of the neighborhood. Later on certain
odors, as of burning dinners, pervaded the atmosphere. Blanche Devine,
flushed and excited, her hair slightly askew, her diamond eardrops
flashing, directed the moving, wrapped in her great fur coat; but on
the third morning we gasped when she appeared out-of-doors, carrying a
little household ladder, a pail of steaming water, and sundry
voluminous white cloths. She reared the little ladder against the side
of the house, mounted it cautiously, and began to wash windows with
housewifely thoroughness. Her stout figure was swathed in a gray
sweater and on her head was a battered felt hat--the sort of
window--washing costume that has been worn by women from time
immemorial. We noticed that she used plenty of hot water and clean
rags, and that she rubbed the glass until it sparkled, leaning
perilously sideways on the ladder to detect elusive streaks. Our
keenest housekeeping eye could find no fault with the way Blanche
Devine washed windows. By May, Blanche Devine had left off her diamond eardrops--perhaps it
was their absence that gave her face a new expression. When she went
downtown we noticed that her hats were more like the hats the other
women in our town wore; but she still affected extravagant footgear, as
is right and proper for a stout woman who has cause to be vain of her
feet. We noticed that her trips downtown were rare that spring and
summer. She used to come home laden with little bundles; and before
supper she would change her street clothes for a neat, washable
housedress, as is our thrifty custom. Through her bright windows we
could see her moving briskly about from kitchen to sitting room; and
from the smells that floated out from her kitchen door, she seemed to
be preparing for her solitary supper the same homely viands that were
frying or stewing or baking in our kitchens. Sometimes you could
detect the delectable scent of browning, hot tea biscuit. It takes a
determined woman to make tea biscuit for no one but herself. Blanche Devine joined the church. On the first Sunday morning she came
to the service there was a little flurry among the ushers at the
vestibule door. They seated her well in the rear. The second Sunday
morning a dreadful thing happened. The woman next to whom they seated
her turned, regarded her stonily for a moment, then rose agitatedly and
moved to a pew across the aisle. Blanche Devine's face went a dull red beneath her white powder. She
never came again--though we saw the minister visit her once or twice. She always accompanied him to the door pleasantly, holding it well open
until he was down the little flight of steps and on the sidewalk. The
minister's wife did not call. She rose early, like the rest of us; and as summer came on we used to
see her moving about in her little garden patch in the dewy, golden
morning. She wore absurd pale-blue negligees that made her stout figure
loom immense against the greenery of garden and apple tree. The
neighborhood women viewed these negligees with Puritan disapproval as
they smoothed down their own prim, starched gingham skirts. They said
it was disgusting--and perhaps it was; but the habit of years is not
easily overcome. Blanche Devine--snipping her sweet peas, peering
anxiously at the Virginia creeper that clung with such fragile fingers
to the trellis, watering the flower baskets that hung from her
porch--was blissfully unconscious of the disapproving eyes. I wish one
of us had just stopped to call good morning to her over the fence, and
to say in our neighborly, small-town way:  "My, ain't this a scorcher! So early too! It'll be fierce by noon!" But we did not. I think perhaps the evenings must have been the loneliest for her. The
summer evenings in our little town are filled with intimate, human,
neighborly sounds. After the heat of the day it is pleasant to relax
in the cool comfort of the front porch, with the life of the town
eddying about us. We sew and read out there until it grows dusk. We
call across lots to our next-door neighbor. The men water the lawns
and the flower boxes and get together in little, quiet groups to
discuss the new street paving. I have even known Mrs. Hines to bring
her cherries out there when she had canning to do, and pit them there
on the front porch partially shielded by her porch vine, but not so
effectually that she was deprived of the sights and sounds about her. The kettle in her lap and the dishpan full of great ripe cherries on
the porch floor by her chair, she would pit and chat and peer out
through the vines, the red juice staining her plump bare arms. I have wondered since what Blanche Devine thought of us those lonesome
evenings--those evenings filled with friendly sights and sounds. It
must have been difficult for her, who had dwelt behind closed shutters
so long, to seat herself on the new front porch for all the world to
stare at; but she did sit there--resolutely--watching us in silence. She seized hungrily upon the stray crumbs of conversation that fell to
her. The milkman and the iceman and the butcher boy used to hold daily
conversation with her. They--sociable gentlemen--would stand on her
door-step, one grimy hand resting against the white of her doorpost,
exchanging the time of day with Blanche in the doorway--a tea towel in
one hand, perhaps, and a plate in the other. Her little house was a
miracle of cleanliness. It was no uncommon sight to see her down on
her knees on the kitchen floor, wielding her brush and rag like the
rest of us. In canning and preserving time there floated out from her
kitchen the pungent scent of pickled crab apples; the mouth-watering
smell that meant sweet pickles; or the cloying, divinely sticky odor
that meant raspberry jam. Snooky, from her side of the fence, often
used to peer through the pickets, gazing in the direction of the
enticing smells next door. Early one September morning there floated out from Blanche Devine's
kitchen that fragrant, sweet scent of fresh-baked cookies--cookies with
butter in them, and spice, and with nuts on top. Just by the smell of
them your mind's eye pictured them coming from the oven-crisp brown
circlets, crumbly, delectable. Snooky, in her scarlet sweater and cap,
sniffed them from afar and straightway deserted her sand pile to take
her stand at the fence. She peered through the restraining bars,
standing on tiptoe. Blanche Devine, glancing up from her board and
rolling pin, saw the eager golden head. And Snooky, with guile in her
heart, raised one fat, dimpled hand above the fence and waved it
friendlily. Blanche Devine waved back. Thus encouraged, Snooky's two
hands wigwagged frantically above the pickets. Blanche Devine hesitated
a moment, her floury hand on her hip. Then she went to the pantry shelf
and took out a clean white saucer. She selected from the brown jar on
the table three of the brownest, crumbliest, most perfect cookies, with
a walnut meat perched atop of each, placed them temptingly on the
saucer and, descending the steps, came swiftly across the grass to the
triumphant Snooky. Blanche Devine held out the saucer, her lips
smiling, her eyes tender. Snooky reached up with one plump white arm. "Snooky!" shrilled a high voice. "Snooky!" A voice of horror and of
wrath. "Come here to me this minute! And don't you dare to touch
those!" Snooky hesitated rebelliously, one pink finger in her pouting
mouth. "Snooky! Do you hear me?" And the Very Young Wife began to descend the steps of her back porch. Snooky, regretful eyes on the toothsome dainties, turned away
aggrieved. The Very Young Wife, her lips set, her eyes flashing,
advanced and seized the shrieking Snooky by one arm and dragged her
away toward home and safety. Blanche Devine stood there at the fence, holding the saucer in her
hand. The saucer tipped slowly, and the three cookies slipped off and
fell to the grass. Blanche Devine stood staring at them a moment. Then she turned quickly, went into the house, and shut the door. It was about this time we noticed that Blanche Devine was away much of
the time. The little white cottage would be empty for weeks. We knew
she was out of town because the expressman would come for her trunk. We
used to lift our eyebrows significantly. The newspapers and handbills
would accumulate in a dusty little heap on the porch; but when she
returned there was always a grand cleaning, with the windows open, and
Blanche--her head bound turbanwise in a towel--appearing at a window
every few minutes to shake out a dustcloth. She seemed to put an
enormous amount of energy into those cleanings--as if they were a sort
of safety valve. As winter came on she used to sit up before her grate fire long, long
after we were asleep in our beds. When she neglected to pull down the
shades we could see the flames of her cosy fire dancing gnomelike on
the wall. There came a night of sleet and snow, and wind and rattling
hail--one of those blustering, wild nights that are followed by
morning-paper reports of trains stalled in drifts, mail delayed,
telephone and telegraph wires down. It must have been midnight or past
when there came a hammering at Blanche Devine's door--a persistent,
clamorous rapping. Blanche Devine, sitting before her dying fire half
asleep, started and cringed when she heard it, then jumped to her feet,
her hand at her breast--her eyes darting this way and that, as though
seeking escape. She had heard a rapping like that before. It had meant bluecoats
swarming up the stairway, and frightened cries and pleadings, and wild
confusion. So she started forward now, quivering. And then she
remembered, being wholly awake now--she remembered, and threw up her
head and smiled a little bitterly and walked toward the door. The
hammering continued, louder than ever. Blanche Devine flicked on the
porch light and opened the door. The half-clad figure of the Very
Young Wife next door staggered into the room. She seized Blanche
Devine's arm with both her frenzied hands and shook her, the wind and
snow beating in upon both of them. "The baby!" she screamed in a high, hysterical voice. "The baby! The
baby----!" Blanche Devine shut the door and shook the Young Wife smartly by the
shoulders. "Stop screaming," she said quietly. "Is she sick?" The Young Wife told her, her teeth chattering:

"Come quick! She's dying! Will's out of town. I tried to get the
doctor. The telephone wouldn't---- I saw your light! For God's
sake----"

Blanche Devine grasped the Young Wife's arm, opened the door, and
together they sped across the little space that separated the two
houses. Blanche Devine was a big woman, but she took the stairs like a
girl and found the right bedroom by some miraculous woman instinct. A
dreadful choking, rattling sound was coming from Snooky's bed. "Croup," said Blanche Devine, and began her fight. It was a good fight. She marshaled her inadequate forces, made up of
the half-fainting Young Wife and the terrified and awkward hired girl. "Get the hot water on--lots of it!" Blanche Devine pinned up her
sleeves. "Hot cloths! Tear up a sheet--or anything! Got an oilstove? I want a tea-kettle boiling in the room. She's got to have the steam. If that don't do it we'll raise an umbrella over her and throw a sheet
over, and hold the kettle under till the steam gets to her that way. Got any ipecac?" The Young Wife obeyed orders, white-faced and shaking. Once Blanche
Devine glanced up at her sharply. "Don't you dare faint!" she commanded. And the fight went on. Gradually the breathing that had been so
frightful became softer, easier. Blanche Devine did not relax. It was
not until the little figure breathed gently in sleep that Blanche
Devine sat back, satisfied. Then she tucked a cover at the side of the
bed, took a last satisfied look at the face on the pillow, and turned
to look at the wan, disheveled Young Wife. "She's all right now. We can get the doctor when morning comes--though
I don't know's you'll need him." The Young Wife came round to Blanche Devine's side of the bed and stood
looking up at her. "My baby died," said Blanche Devine simply. The Young Wife gave a
little inarticulate cry, put her two hands on Blanche Devine's broad
shoulders, and laid her tired head on her breast. "I guess I'd better be going," said Blanche Devine. The Young Wife raised her head. Her eyes were round with fright. "Going! Oh, please stay! I'm so afraid. Suppose she should take sick
again! That awful--breathing----"

"I'll stay if you want me to." "Oh, please! I'll make up your bed and you can rest----"

"I'm not sleepy. I'm not much of a hand to sleep anyway. I'll sit up
here in the hall, where there's a light. You get to bed. I'll watch
and see that everything's all right. Have you got something I can read
out here--something kind of lively--with a love story in it?" So the night went by. Snooky slept in her white bed. The Very Young
Wife half dozed in her bed, so near the little one. In the hall, her
stout figure looming grotesque in wall shadows, sat Blanche Devine,
pretending to read. Now and then she rose and tiptoed into the bedroom
with miraculous quiet, and stooped over the little bed and listened and
looked--and tiptoed away again, satisfied. The Young Husband came home from his business trip next day with tales
of snowdrifts and stalled engines. Blanche Devine breathed a sigh of
relief when she saw him from her kitchen window. She watched the house
now with a sort of proprietary eye. She wondered about Snooky; but she
knew better than to ask. So she waited. The Young Wife next door had
told her husband all about that awful night--had told him with tears
and sobs. The Very Young Husband had been very, very angry with
her--angry, he said, and astonished! Snooky could not have been so
sick! Look at her now! As well as ever. And to have called such a
woman! Well, he did not want to be harsh; but she must understand that
she must never speak to the woman again. Never! So the next day the Very Young Wife happened to go by with the Young
Husband. Blanche Devine spied them from her sitting-room window, and
she made the excuse of looking in her mailbox in order to go to the
door. She stood in the doorway and the Very Young Wife went by on the
arm of her husband. She went by--rather white-faced--without a look or
a word or a sign! And then this happened! There came into Blanche Devine's face a look
that made slits of her eyes, and drew her mouth down into an ugly,
narrow line, and that made the muscles of her jaw tense and hard. It
was the ugliest look you can imagine. Then she smiled--if having one's
lips curl away from one's teeth can be called smiling. Two days later there was great news of the white cottage on the corner. The curtains were down; the furniture was packed; the rugs were rolled. The wagons came and backed up to the house and took those things that
had made a home for Blanche Devine. And when we heard that she had
bought back her interest in the House with the Closed Shutters, near
the freight depot, we sniffed. "I knew she wouldn't last!" we said. "They never do!" said we. The Gay Old Dog [1917]


Those of you who have dwelt--or even lingered--in Chicago, Illinois,
are familiar with the region known as the Loop. For those others of
you to whom Chicago is a transfer point between New York and California
there is presented this brief explanation:

The Loop is a clamorous, smoke-infested district embraced by the iron
arms of the elevated tracks. In a city boasting fewer millions, it
would be known familiarly as downtown. From Congress to Lake Street,
from Wabash almost to the river, those thunderous tracks make a
complete circle, or loop. Within it lie the retail shops, the
commercial hotels, the theaters, the restaurants. It is the Fifth
Avenue and the Broadway of Chicago. And he who frequents it by night in search of amusement and cheer is
known, vulgarly, as a Loop-hound. Jo Hertz was a Loop-hound. On the occasion of those sparse first
nights granted the metropolis of the Middle West he was always present,
third row, aisle, left. When a new Loop cafe' was opened, Jo's table
always commanded an unobstructed view of anything worth viewing. On
entering he was wont to say, "Hello, Gus," with careless cordiality to
the headwaiter, the while his eye roved expertly from table to table as
he removed his gloves. He ordered things under glass, so that his
table, at midnight or thereabouts, resembled a hotbed that favors the
bell system. The waiters fought for him. He was the kind of man who
mixes his own salad dressing. He liked to call for a bowl, some cracked
ice, lemon, garlic, paprika, salt, pepper, vinegar, and oil and make a
rite of it. People at near-by tables would lay down their knives and
forks to watch, fascinated. The secret of it seemed to lie in using
all the oil in sight and calling for more. That was Jo--a plump and lonely bachelor of fifty. A plethoric,
roving-eyed, and kindly man, clutching vainly at the garments of a
youth that had long slipped past him. Jo Hertz, in one of those
pinch-waist suits and a belted coat and a little green hat, walking up
Michigan Avenue of a bright winter's afternoon, trying to take the curb
with a jaunty youthfulness against which every one of his fat-encased
muscles rebelled, was a sight for mirth or pity, depending on one's
vision. The gay-dog business was a late phase in the life of Jo Hertz. He had
been a quite different sort of canine. The staid and harassed brother
of three unwed and selfish sisters is an underdog. At twenty-seven Jo had been the dutiful, hard-working son (in the
wholesale harness business) of a widowed and gummidging mother, who
called him Joey. Now and then a double wrinkle would appear between
Jo's eyes--a wrinkle that had no business there at twenty-seven. Then
Jo's mother died, leaving him handicapped by a deathbed promise, the
three sisters, and a three-story-and-basement house on Calumet Avenue. Jo's wrinkle became a fixture. "Joey," his mother had said, in her high, thin voice, "take care of the
girls." "I will, Ma," Jo had choked. "Joey," and the voice was weaker, "promise me you won't marry till the
girls are all provided for." Then as Jo had hesitated, appalled:
"Joey, it's my dying wish. Promise!" "I promise, Ma," he had said. Whereupon his mother had died, comfortably, leaving him with a
completely ruined life. They were not bad-looking girls, and they had a certain style, too. That is, Stell and Eva had. Carrie, the middle one, taught school over
on the West Side. In those days it took her almost two hours each way. She said the kind of costume she required should have been corrugated
steel. But all three knew what was being worn, and they wore it--or
fairly faithful copies of it. Eva, the housekeeping sister, had a
needle knack. She could skim the State Street windows and come away
with a mental photograph of every separate tuck, hem, yoke, and ribbon. Heads of departments showed her the things they kept in drawers, and
she went home and reproduced them with the aid of a seamstress by the
day. Stell, the youngest, was the beauty. They called her Babe. Twenty-three years ago one's sisters did not strain at the household
leash, nor crave a career. Carrie taught school, and hated it. Eva
kept house expertly and complainingly. Babe's profession was being the
family beauty, and it took all her spare time. Eva always let her
sleep until ten. This was Jo's household, and he was the nominal head of it. But it was
an empty title. The three women dominated his life. They weren't
consciously selfish. If you had called them cruel they would have put
you down as mad. When you are the lone brother of three sisters, it
means that you must constantly be calling for, escorting, or dropping
one of them somewhere. Most men of Jo's age were standing before their
mirror of a Saturday night, whistling blithely and abstractedly while
they discarded a blue polka-dot for a maroon tie, whipped off the
maroon for a shot-silk and at the last moment decided against the
shot-silk in favor of a plain black-and-white because she had once said
she preferred quiet ties. Jo, when he should have been preening his
feathers for conquest, was saying:

"Well, my God, I AM hurrying! Give a man time, can't you? I just got
home. You girls been laying around the house all day. No wonder you're
ready." He took a certain pride in seeing his sisters well dressed, at a time
when he should have been reveling in fancy waistcoats and
brilliant-hued socks, according to the style of that day and the
inalienable right of any unwed male under thirty, in any day. On those
rare occasions when his business necessitated an out-of-town trip, he
would spend half a day floundering about the shops selecting
handkerchiefs, or stockings, or feathers, or gloves for the girls. They always turned out to be the wrong kind, judging by their reception. From Carrie, "What in the world do I want of long white gloves!" "I thought you didn't have any," Jo would say. "I haven't. I never wear evening clothes." Jo would pass a futile hand over the top of his head, as was his way
when disturbed. "I just thought you'd like them. I thought every girl
liked long white gloves. Just," feebly, "just to--to have." "Oh, for pity's sake!" And from Eva or Babe, "I've GOT silk stockings, Jo." Or, "You brought
me handkerchiefs the last time." There was something selfish in his giving, as there always is in any
gift freely and joyfully made. They never suspected the exquisite
pleasure it gave him to select these things, these fine, soft, silken
things. There were many things about this slow-going, amiable brother
of theirs that they never suspected. If you had told them he was a
dreamer of dreams, for example, they would have been amused. Sometimes, dead-tired by nine o'clock after a hard day downtown, he
would doze over the evening paper. At intervals he would wake,
red-eyed, to a snatch of conversation such as, "Yes, but if you get a
blue you can wear it anywhere. It's dressy, and at the same time it's
quiet, too." Eva, the expert, wrestling with Carrie over the problem
of the new spring dress. They never guessed that the commonplace man
in the frayed old smoking jacket had banished them all from the room
long ago; had banished himself, for that matter. In his place was a
tall, debonair, and rather dangerously handsome man to whom six o'clock
spelled evening clothes. The kind of man who can lean up against a
mantel, or propose a toast, or give an order to a manservant, or
whisper a gallant speech in a lady's ear with equal ease. The shabby
old house on Calumet Avenue was transformed into a brocaded and
chandeliered rendezvous for the brilliance of the city. Beauty was
here, and wit. But none so beautiful and witty as She. Mrs.--er--Jo
Hertz. There was wine, of course; but no vulgar display. There was
music; the soft sheen of satin; laughter. And he, the gracious, tactful
host, king of his own domain----

"Jo, for heaven's sake, if you're going to snore, go to bed!" "Why--did I fall asleep?" "You haven't been doing anything else all evening. A person would
think you were fifty instead of thirty." And Jo Hertz was again just the dull, gray, commonplace brother of
three well-meaning sisters. Babe used to say petulantly, "Jo, why don't you ever bring home any of
your men friends? A girl might as well not have any brother, all the
good you do." Jo, conscience-stricken, did his best to make amends. But a man who
has been petticoat-ridden for years loses the knack, somehow, of
comradeship with men. One Sunday in May Jo came home from a late-Sunday-afternoon walk to
find company for supper. Carrie often had in one of her schoolteacher
friends, or Babe one of her frivolous intimates, or even Eva a staid
guest of the old-girl type. There was always a Sunday-night supper of
potato salad, and cold meat, and coffee, and perhaps a fresh cake. Jo
rather enjoyed it, being a hospitable soul. But he regarded the guests
with the undazzled eyes of a man to whom they were just so many
petticoats, timid of the night streets and requiring escort home. If
you had suggested to him that some of his sisters' popularity was due
to his own presence, or if you had hinted that the more kittenish of
these visitors were probably making eyes at him, he would have stared
in amazement and unbelief. This Sunday night it turned out to be one of Carrie's friends. "Emily," said Carrie, "this is my brother, Jo." Jo had learned what to expect in Carrie's friends. Drab-looking women
in the late thirties, whose facial lines all slanted downward. "Happy to meet you," said Jo, and looked down at a different sort
altogether. A most surprisingly different sort, for one of Carrie's
friends. This Emily person was very small, and fluffy, and blue-eyed,
and crinkly looking. The corners of her mouth when she smiled, and her
eyes when she looked up at you, and her hair, which was brown, but had
the miraculous effect, somehow, of looking golden. Jo shook hands with her. Her hand was incredibly small, and soft, so
that you were afraid of crushing it, until you discovered she had a
firm little grip all her own. It surprised and amused you, that grip,
as does a baby's unexpected clutch on your patronizing forefinger. As
Jo felt it in his own big clasp, the strangest thing happened to him. Something inside Jo Hertz stopped working for a moment, then lurched
sickeningly, then thumped like mad. It was his heart. He stood
staring down at her, and she up at him, until the others laughed. Then
their hands fell apart, lingeringly. "Are you a schoolteacher, Emily?" he said. "Kindergarten. It's my first year. And don't call me Emily, please." "Why not? It's your name. I think it's the prettiest name in the
world." Which he hadn't meant to say at all. In fact, he was perfectly
aghast to find himself saying it. But he meant it. At supper he passed her things, and stared, until everybody laughed
again, and Eva said acidly, "Why don't you feed her?" It wasn't that Emily had an air of helplessness. She just made him
feel he wanted her to be helpless, so that he could help her. Jo took her home, and from that Sunday night he began to strain at the
leash. He took his sisters out, dutifully, but he would suggest, with
a carelessness that deceived no one, "Don't you want one of your girl
friends to come along? That little What's-her-name-Emily, or
something. So long's I've got three of you, I might as well have a
full squad." For a long time he didn't know what was the matter with him. He only
knew he was miserable, and yet happy. Sometimes his heart seemed to
ache with an actual physical ache. He realized that he wanted to do
things for Emily. He wanted to buy things for Emily--useless, pretty,
expensive things that he couldn't afford. He wanted to buy everything that Emily needed, and everything that
Emily desired. He wanted to marry Emily. That was it. He discovered
that one day, with a shock, in the midst of a transaction in the
harness business. He stared at the man with whom he was dealing until
that startled person grew uncomfortable. "What's the matter, Hertz?" "Matter?" "You look as if you'd seen a ghost or found a gold mine. I
don't know which." "Gold mine," said Jo. And then, "No. Ghost." For
he remembered that high, thin voice, and his promise. And the harness
business was slithering downhill with dreadful rapidity, as the
automobile business began its amazing climb. Jo tried to stop it. But
he was not that kind of businessman. It never occurred to him to jump
out of the down-going vehicle and catch the up-going one. He stayed
on, vainly applying brakes that refused to work. "You know, Emily, I
couldn't support two households now. Not the way things are. But if
you'll wait. If you'll only wait. The girls might--that is, Babe and
Carrie--"

She was a sensible little thing, Emily. "Of course I'll wait. But we
mustn't just sit back and let the years go by. We've got to help." She went about it as if she were already a little matchmaking matron. She corralled all the men she had ever known and introduced them to
Babe, Carrie, and Eva separately, in pairs, and en masse. She got up
picnics. She stayed home while Jo took the three about. When she was
present she tried to look as plain and obscure as possible, so that the
sisters should show up to advantage. She schemed, and planned, and
contrived, and hoped; and smiled into Jo's despairing eyes. And three years went by. Three precious years. Carrie still taught
school, and hated it. Eva kept house more and more complainingly as
prices advanced and allowance retreated. Stell was still Babe, the
family beauty. Emily's hair, somehow, lost its glint and began to look
just plain brown. Her crinkliness began to iron out. "Now, look here!" Jo argued, desperately, one night. "We could be
happy, anyway. There's plenty of room at the house. Lots of people
begin that way. Of course, I couldn't give you all I'd like to, at
first. But maybe, after a while--"  No dreams of salons, and brocade,
and velvet-footed servitors, and satin damask now. Just two rooms, all
their own, all alone, and Emily to work for. That was his dream. But
it seemed less possible than that other absurd one had been. Emily was as practical a little thing as she looked fluffy. She knew
women. Especially did she know Eva, and Carrie, and Babe. She tried to
imagine herself taking the household affairs and the housekeeping
pocket-book out of Eva's expert hands. So then she tried to picture
herself allowing the reins of Jo's house to remain in Eva's hands. And
everything feminine and normal in her rebelled. Emily knew she'd want
to put away her own freshly laundered linen, and smooth it, and pat it. She was that kind of woman. She knew she'd want to do her own
delightful haggling with butcher and grocer. She knew she'd want to
muss Jo's hair, and sit on his knee, and even quarrel with him, if
necessary, without the awareness of three ever-present pairs of maiden
eyes and ears. "No! No! We'd only be miserable. I know. Even if they didn't
object. And they would, Jo. Wouldn't they?" His silence was miserable assent. Then, "But you do love me, don't
you, Emily?" "I do, Jo. I love you--and love you--and love you. But, Jo, I--can't." "I know it, dear. I knew it all the time, really. I just thought,
maybe, somehow----"

The two sat staring for a moment into space, their hands clasped. Then they both shut their eyes with a little shudder, as though what
they saw was terrible to look upon. Emily's hand, the tiny hand that
was so unexpectedly firm, tightened its hold on his, and his crushed
the absurd fingers until she winced with pain. That was the beginning of the end, and they knew it. Emily wasn't the kind of girl who would be left to pine. There are too
many Jos in the world whose hearts are prone to lurch and then thump at
the feel of a soft, fluttering, incredibly small hand in their grip. One year later Emily was married to a young man whose father owned a
large, pie-shaped slice of the prosperous state of Michigan. That being safely accomplished, there was something grimly humorous in
the trend taken by affairs in the old house on Calumet. For Eva
married. Married well, too, though he was a great deal older than she. She went off in a hat she had copied from a French model at Field's,
and a suit she had contrived with a home dressmaker, aided by pressing
on the part of the little tailor in the basement over on Thirty-first
Street. It was the last of that, though. The next time they saw her,
she had on a hat that even she would have despaired of copying, and a
suit that sort of melted into your gaze. She moved to the North Side
(trust Eva for that), and Babe assumed the management of the household
on Calumet Avenue. It was rather a pinched little household now, for
the harness business shrank and shrank. "I don't see how you can expect me to keep house decently on this!" Babe would say contemptuously. Babe's nose, always a little inclined
to sharpness, had whittled down to a point of late. "If you knew what
Ben gives Eva." "It's the best I can do, Sis. Business is something rotten." "Ben says if you had the least bit of----"  Ben was Eva's husband, and
quotable, as are all successful men. "I don't care what Ben says," shouted Jo, goaded into rage. "I'm sick
of your everlasting Ben. Go and get a Ben of your own, why don't you,
if you're so stuck on the way he does things." And Babe did. She made a last desperate drive, aided by Eva, and she
captured a rather surprised young man in the brokerage way, who had
made up his mind not to marry for years and years. Eva wanted to give
her her wedding things, but at that Jo broke into sudden rebellion. "No, sir! No Ben is going to buy my sister's wedding clothes,
understand? I guess I'm not broke--yet. I'll furnish the money for her
things, and there'll be enough of them, too." Babe had as useless a
trousseau, and as filled with extravagant pink-and-blue and lacy and
frilly things, as any daughter of doting parents. Jo seemed to find a
grim pleasure in providing them. But it left him pretty well pinched. After Babe's marriage (she insisted that they call her Estelle now) Jo
sold the house on Calumet. He and Carrie took one of those little
flats that were springing up, seemingly overnight, all through
Chicago's South Side. There was nothing domestic about Carrie. She had given up teaching two
years before, and had gone into social-service work on the West Side. She had what is known as a legal mind--hard, clear, orderly--and she
made a great success of it. Her dream was to live at the Settlement
House and give all her time to the work. Upon the little household she
bestowed a certain amount of grim, capable attention. It was the same
kind of attention she would have given a piece of machinery whose
oiling and running had been entrusted to her care. She hated it, and
didn't hesitate to say so. Jo took to prowling about department-store basements, and household
goods sections. He was always sending home a bargain in a ham, or a
sack of potatoes, or fifty pounds of sugar, or a window clamp, or a new
kind of paring knife. He was forever doing odd jobs that the janitor
should have done. It was the domestic in him claiming its own. Then, one night, Carrie came home with a dull glow in her leathery
cheeks, and her eyes alight with resolve. They had what she called a
plain talk. "Listen, Jo. They've offered me the job of first assistant resident
worker. And I'm going to take it. Take it! I know fifty other girls
who'd give their ears for it. I go in next month." They were at dinner. Jo looked up from his plate, dully. Then he
glanced around the little dining room, with its ugly tan walls and its
heavy, dark furniture (the Calumet Avenue pieces fitted cumbersomely
into the five-room flat). "Away? Away from here, you mean--to live?" Carrie laid down her fork. "Well, really, Jo! After all that
explanation." "But to go over there to live! Why, that neighborhood's full of dirt,
and disease, and crime, and the Lord knows what all. I can't let you
do that, Carrie." Carrie's chin came up. She laughed a short little laugh. "Let me! That's eighteenth-century talk, Jo. My life's my own to live. I'm
going." And she went. Jo stayed on in the apartment until the lease was up. Then he sold
what furniture he could, stored or gave away the rest, and took a room
on Michigan Avenue in one of the old stone mansions whose decayed
splendor was being put to such purpose. Jo Hertz was his own master. Free to marry. Free to come and go. And
he found he didn't even think of marrying. He didn't even want to come
or go, particularly. A rather frumpy old bachelor, with thinning hair
and a thickening neck. Every Thursday evening he took dinner at Eva's, and on Sunday noon at
Stell's. He tucked his napkin under his chin and openly enjoyed the
homemade soup and the well-cooked meats. After dinner he tried to talk
business with Eva's husband, or Stell's. His business talks were the
old-fashioned kind, beginning:

"Well, now, looka here. Take, f'rinstance, your raw hides and
leathers." But Ben and George didn't want to take, f'rinstance, your raw hides and
leathers. They wanted, when they took anything at all, to take golf,
or politics, or stocks. They were the modern type of businessman who
prefers to leave his work out of his play. Business, with them, was a
profession--a finely graded and balanced thing, differing from Jo's
clumsy, down-hill style as completely as does the method of a great
criminal detective differ from that of a village constable. They would
listen, restively, and say, "Uh-uh," at intervals, and at the first
chance they would sort of fade out of the room, with a meaning glance
at their wives. Eva had two children now. Girls. They treated Uncle
Jo with good-natured tolerance. Stell had no children. Uncle Jo
degenerated, by almost imperceptible degrees, from the position of
honored guest, who is served with white meat, to that of one who is
content with a leg and one of those obscure and bony sections which,
after much turning with a bewildered and investigating knife and fork,
leave one baffled and unsatisfied. Eva and Stell got together and decided that Jo ought to marry. "It isn't natural," Eva told him. "I never saw a man who took so
little interest in women." "Me!" protested Jo, almost shyly. "Women!" "Yes. Of course. You act like a frightened schoolboy." So they had in for dinner certain friends and acquaintances of fitting
age. They spoke of them as "splendid girls." Between thirty-six and
forty. They talked awfully well, in a firm, clear way, about civics,
and classes, and politics, and economics, and boards. They rather
terrified Jo. He didn't understand much that they talked about, and he
felt humbly inferior, and yet a little resentful, as if something had
passed him by. He escorted them home, dutifully, though they told him
not to bother, and they evidently meant it. They seemed capable not
only of going home quite unattended but of delivering a pointed lecture
to any highwayman or brawler who might molest them. The following Thursday Eva would say, "How did you like her, Jo?" "Like who?" Joe would spar feebly. "Miss Matthews." "Who's she?" "Now, don't be funny, Jo. You know very well I mean the girl who was
here for dinner. The one who talked so well on the emigration
question." "Oh, her! Why, I liked her all right. Seems to be a smart woman." "Smart! She's a perfectly splendid girl." "Sure," Jo would agree cheerfully. "But didn't you like her?" "I can't say I did, Eve. And I can't say I didn't. She made me think
a lot of a teacher I had in the fifth reader. Name of Himes. As I
recall her, she must have been a fine woman. But I never thought of
Himes as a woman at all. She was just Teacher." "You make me tired," snapped Eva impatiently. "A man of your age. You
don't expect to marry a girl, do you? A child!" "I don't expect to marry anybody," Jo had answered. And that was the truth, lonely though he often was. The following spring Eva moved to Winnetka. Anyone who got the meaning
of the Loop knows the significance of a move to a North Shore suburb,
and a house. Eva's daughter, Ethel, was growing up, and her mother had
an eye on society. That did away with Jo's Thursday dinners. Then Stell's husband bought
a car. They went out into the country every Sunday. Stell said it was
getting so that maids objected to Sunday dinners, anyway. Besides,
they were unhealthful, old-fashioned things. They always meant to ask
Jo to come along, but by the time their friends were placed, and the
lunch, and the boxes, and sweaters, and George's camera, and
everything, there seemed to be no room for a man of Jo's bulk. So that
eliminated the Sunday dinners. "Just drop in any time during the week," Stell said, "for dinner. Except Wednesday--that's our bridge night--and Saturday. And, of
course, Thursday. Cook is out that night. Don't wait for me to phone." And so Jo drifted into that sad-eyed, dyspeptic family made up of those
you see dining in second-rate restaurants, their paper propped up
against the bowl of oyster crackers, munching solemnly and with
indifference to the stare of the passer-by surveying them through the
brazen plate-glass window. And then came the war. The war that spelled death and destruction to
millions. The war that brought a fortune to Jo Hertz, and transformed
him, overnight, from a baggy-kneed old bachelor whose business was a
failure to a prosperous manufacturer whose only trouble was the
shortage in hides for the making of his product. Leather! The armies
of Europe called for it. Harnesses! More harnesses! Straps! Millions
of straps. More! More! The musty old harness business over on Lake Street was magically
changed from a dust-covered, dead-alive concern to an orderly hive that
hummed and glittered with success. Orders poured in. Jo Hertz had
inside information on the war. He knew about troops and horses. He
talked with French and English and Italian buyers commissioned by their
countries to get American-made supplies. And now, when he said to Ben
or George, "Take, f'rinstance, your raw hides and leathers," they
listened with respectful attention. And then began the gay-dog business in the life of Jo Hertz. He
developed into a Loop-hound, ever keen on the scent of fresh pleasure. That side of Jo Hertz which had been repressed and crushed and ignored
began to bloom, unhealthily. At first he spent money on his rather
contemptuous nieces. He sent them gorgeous furs, and watch bracelets,
and bags. He took two expensive rooms at a downtown hotel, and there
was something more tear-compelling than grotesque about the way he
gloated over the luxury of a separate ice-water tap in the bathroom. He explained it. "Just turn it on. Any hour of the day or night. Ice water!" He bought a car. Naturally. A glittering affair; in color a bright
blue, with pale-blue leather straps and a great deal of gold fittings,
and special tires. Eva said it was the kind of thing a chorus girl
would use, rather than an elderly businessman. You saw him driving
about in it, red-faced and rather awkward at the wheel. You saw him,
too, in the Pompeian Room at the Congress Hotel of a Saturday afternoon
when roving-eyed matrons in mink coats are wont to congregate to sip
pale-amber drinks. Actors grew to recognize the semibald head and the
shining, round, good-natured face looming out at them from the dim well
of the theater, and sometimes, in a musical show, they directed a quip
at him, and he liked it. He could pick out the critics as they came
down the aisle, and even had a nodding acquaintance with two of them. "Kelly, of the Herald," he would say carelessly. "Bean, of the Trib. They're all afraid of him." So he frolicked, ponderously. In New York he might have been called a
Man About Town. And he was lonesome. He was very lonesome. So he searched about in
his mind and brought from the dim past the memory of the luxuriously
furnished establishment of which he used to dream in the evenings when
he dozed over his paper in the old house on Calumet. So he rented an
apartment, many-roomed and expensive, with a manservant in charge, and
furnished it in styles and periods ranging through all the Louis. The
living room was mostly rose color. It was like an unhealthy and
bloated boudoir. And yet there was nothing sybaritic or uncleanly in
the sight of this paunchy, middle-aged man sinking into the
rosy-cushioned luxury of his ridiculous home. It was a frank and naive
indulgence of long-starved senses, and there was in it a great
resemblance to the rolling-eyed ecstasy of a schoolboy smacking his
lips over an all-day sucker. The war went on, and on, and on. And the money continued to roll in--a
flood of it. Then, one afternoon, Eva, in town on shopping bent,
entered a small, exclusive, and expensive shop on Michigan Avenue. Eva's weakness was hats. She was seeking a hat now. She described
what she sought with a languid conciseness, and stood looking about her
after the saleswoman had vanished in quest of it. The room was
becomingly rose-illumined and somewhat dim, so that some minutes had
passed before she realized that a man seated on a raspberry brocade
settee not five feet away--a man with a walking stick, and yellow
gloves, and tan spats, and a check suit--was her brother Jo. From him
Eva's wild-eyed glance leaped to the woman who was trying on hats
before one of the many long mirrors. She was seated, and a saleswoman
was exclaiming discreetly at her elbow. Eva turned sharply and encountered her own saleswoman returning
hat-laden. "Not today," she gasped. "I'm feeling ill. Suddenly." And
almost ran from the room. That evening she told Stell, relating her news in that telephone pidgin
English devised by every family of married sisters as protection
against the neighbors. Translated, it ran thus:

"He looked straight at me. My dear, I thought I'd die! But at least
he had sense enough not to speak. She was one of those limp, willowy
creatures with the greediest eyes that she tried to keep softened to a
baby stare, and couldn't, she was so crazy to get her hands on those
hats. I saw it all in one awful minute. You know the way I do. I
suppose some people would call her pretty. I don't. And her color. Well! And the most expensive-looking hats. Not one of them under
seventy-five. Isn't it disgusting! At his age! Suppose Ethel had
been with me!" The next time it was Stell who saw them. In a restaurant. She said it
spoiled her evening. And the third time it was Ethel. She was one of
the guests at a theater party given by Nicky Overton II. The North
Shore Overtons. Lake Forest. They came in late, and occupied the
entire third row at the opening performance of Believe Me! And Ethel
was Nicky's partner. She was glowing like a rose. When the lights
went up after the first act Ethel saw that her uncle Jo was seated just
ahead of her with what she afterward described as a blonde. Then her
uncle had turned around, and seeing her, had been surprised into a
smile that spread genially all over his plump and rubicund face. Then
he had turned to face forward again, quickly. "Who's the old bird?" Nicky had asked. Ethel had pretended not to
hear, so he had asked again. "My uncle," Ethel answered, and flushed all over her delicate face, and
down to her throat. Nicky had looked at the blonde, and his eyebrows
had gone up ever so slightly. It spoiled Ethel's evening. More than that, as she told her mother of
it later, weeping, she declared it had spoiled her life. Eva talked it over with her husband in that intimate hour that precedes
bedtime. She gesticulated heatedly with her hairbrush. "It's disgusting, that's what it is. Perfectly disgusting. There's no
fool like an old fool. Imagine! A creature like that. At his time of
life." "Well, I don't know," Ben said, and even grinned a little. "I suppose
a boy's got to sow his wild oats sometime." "Don't be any more vulgar than you can help," Eva retorted. "And I
think you know, as well as I, what it means to have that Overton boy
interested in Ethel." "If he's interested in her," Ben blundered, "I guess the fact that
Ethel's uncle went to the theater with someone who isn't Ethel's aunt
won't cause a shudder to run up and down his frail young frame, will
it?" "All right," Eva had retorted. "If you're not man enough to stop it,
I'll have to, that's all. I'm going up there with Stell this week." They did not notify Jo of their coming. Eva telephoned his apartment
when she knew he would be out, and asked his man if he expected his
master home to dinner that evening. The man had said yes. Eva
arranged to meet Stell in town. They would drive to Jo's apartment
together, and wait for him there. When she reached the city Eva found turmoil there. The first of the
American troops to be sent to France were leaving. Michigan Boulevard
was a billowing, surging mass: flags, pennants, banners, crowds. All
the elements that make for demonstration. And over the whole-quiet. No
holiday crowd, this. A solid, determined mass of people waiting
patient hours to see the khaki-clads go by. Three years had brought
them to a clear knowledge of what these boys were going to. "Isn't it dreadful!" Stell gasped. "Nicky Overton's too young, thank goodness." Their car was caught in the jam. When they moved at all, it was by
inches. When at last they reached Jo's apartment they were flushed,
nervous, apprehensive. But he had not yet come in. So they waited. No, they were not staying to dinner with their brother, they told the
relieved houseman. Stell and Eva, sunk in rose-colored cushions, viewed the place with
disgust and some mirth. They rather avoided each other's eyes. "Carrie ought to be here," Eva said. They both smiled at the thought
of the austere Carrie in the midst of those rosy cushions, and
hangings, and lamps. Stell rose and began to walk about restlessly. She picked up a vase and laid it down; straightened a picture. Eva got
up, too, and wandered into the hall. She stood there a moment,
listening. Then she turned and passed into Jo's bedroom, Stell
following. And there you knew Jo for what he was. This room was as bare as the other had been ornate. It was Jo, the
clean-minded and simplehearted, in revolt against the cloying luxury
with which he had surrounded himself. The bedroom, of all rooms in any
house, reflects the personality of its occupant. True, the actual
furniture was paneled, cupid-surmounted, and ridiculous. It had been
the fruit of Jo's first orgy of the senses. But now it stood out in
that stark little room with an air as incongruous and ashamed as that
of a pink tarlatan danseuse who finds herself in a monk's cell. None
of those wall pictures with which bachelor bedrooms are reputed to be
hung. No satin slippers. No scented notes. Two plain-backed military
brushes on the chiffonier (and he so nearly hairless!). A little
orderly stack of books on the table near the bed. Eva fingered their
titles and gave a little gasp. One of them was on gardening. "Well, of all things!" exclaimed Stell. A book on the war, by an
Englishman. A detective story of the lurid type that lulls us to sleep. His shoes ranged in a careful row in the closet, with a shoe tree in
every one of them. There was something speaking about them. They
looked so human. Eva shut the door on them quickly. Some bottles on
the dresser. A jar of pomade. An ointment such as a man uses who is
growing bald and is panic-stricken too late. An insurance calendar on
the wall. Some rhubarb-and-soda mixture on the shelf in the bathroom,
and a little box of pepsin tablets. "Eats all kinds of things at all hours of the night," Eva said, and
wandered out into the rose-colored front room again with the air of one
who is chagrined at her failure to find what she has sought. Stell
followed her furtively. "Where do you suppose he can be?" she demanded. "It's"--she glanced at
her wrist--"why, it's after six!" And then there was a little click. The two women sat up, tense. The
door opened. Jo came in. He blinked a little. The two women in the
rosy room stood up. "Why--Eve! Why, Babe! Well! Why didn't you let me know?" "We were just about to leave. We thought you weren't coming home." Jo came in slowly. "I was in the jam on Michigan, watching the boys go by." He sat down,
heavily. The light from the window fell on him. And you saw that his
eyes were red. He had found himself one of the thousands in the jam on Michigan
Avenue, as he said. He had a place near the curb, where his big frame
shut off the view of the unfortunates behind him. He waited with the
placid interest of one who has subscribed to all the funds and
societies to which a prosperous, middle-aged businessman is called upon
to subscribe in war-time. Then, just as he was about to leave,
impatient at the delay, the crowd had cried, with a queer, dramatic,
exultant note in its voice, "Here they come! Here come the boys!" Just at that moment two little, futile, frenzied fists began to beat a
mad tattoo on Jo Hertz's broad back. Jo tried to turn in the crowd,
all indignant resentment. "Say, looka here!" The little fists kept up their frantic beating and pushing. And a
voice--a choked, high little voice--cried, "Let me by! I can't see! You MAN, you! You big fat man! My boy's going by--to war--and I can't
see! Let me by!" Jo scrooged around, still keeping his place. He looked down. And
upturned to him in agonized appeal was the face of Emily. They stared
at each other for what seemed a long, long time. It was really only
the fraction of a second. Then Jo put one great arm firmly around
Emily's waist and swung her around in front of him. His great bulk
protected her. Emily was clinging to his hand. She was breathing
rapidly, as if she had been running. Her eyes were straining up the
street. "Why, Emily, how in the world----!" "I ran away. Fred didn't want me to come. He said it would excite me
too much." "Fred?" "My husband. He made me promise to say good-by to Jo at home." "Jo?" "Jo's my boy. And he's going to war. So I ran away. I had to see
him. I had to see him go." She was dry-eyed. Her gaze was straining up the street. "Why, sure," said Jo. "Of course you want to see him." And then the
crowd gave a great roar. There came over Jo a feeling of weakness. He
was trembling. The boys went marching by. "There he is," Emily shrilled, above the din. "There he is! There he
is! There he----"  And waved a futile little hand. It wasn't so much a
wave as a clutching. A clutching after something beyond her reach. "Which one? Which one, Emily?" "The handsome one. The handsome one." Her voice quavered and died. Jo put a steady hand on her shoulder. "Point him out," he commanded
"Show me." And the next instant, "Never mind. I see him." Somehow, miraculously, he had picked him from among the hundreds. Had
picked him as surely as his own father might have. It was Emily's boy. He was marching by, rather stiffly. He was nineteen, and fun-loving,
and he had a girl, and he didn't particularly want to go to France
and--to go to France. But more than he had hated going, he had hated
not to go. So he marched by, looking straight ahead, his jaw set so
that his chin stuck out just a little. Emily's boy. Jo looked at him, and his face flushed purple. His eyes, the
hard-boiled eyes of a Loop-hound, took on the look of a sad old man. And suddenly he was no longer Jo, the sport; old J. Hertz, the gay dog. He was Jo Hertz, thirty, in love with life, in love with Emily, and
with the stinging blood of young manhood coursing through his veins. Another minute and the boy had passed on up the broad street--the fine,
flag-bedecked street--just one of a hundred service hats bobbing in
rhythmic motion like sandy waves lapping a shore and flowing on. Then he disappeared altogether. Emily was clinging to Jo. She was mumbling something, over and over. "I can't. I can't. Don't ask me to. I can't let him go. Like that. I can't." Jo said a queer thing. "Why, Emily! We wouldn't have him stay home, would we? We wouldn't
want him to do anything different, would we? Not our boy. I'm glad he
enlisted. I'm proud of him. So are you glad." Little by little he quieted her. He took her to the car that was
waiting, a worried chauffeur in charge. They said good-by, awkwardly. Emily's face was a red, swollen mass. So it was that when Jo entered his own hallway half an hour later he
blinked, dazedly, and when the light from the window fell on him you
saw that his eyes were red. Eva was not one to beat about the bush. She sat forward in her chair,
clutching her bag rather nervously. "Now, look here, Jo. Stell and I are here for a reason. We're here to
tell you that this thing's going to stop." "Thing? Stop?" "You know very well what I mean. You saw me at the milliner's that
day. And night before last, Ethel. We're all disgusted. If you must
go about with people like that, please have some sense of decency." Something gathering in Jo's face should have warned her. But he was
slumped down in his chair in such a huddle, and he looked so old and
fat that she did not heed it. She went on. "You've got us to
consider. Your sisters. And your nieces. Not to speak of your
own----"

But he got to his feet then, shaking, and at what she saw in his face
even Eva faltered and stopped. 