



Produced by Jo Churcher





REWARDS AND FAIRIES

By Rudyard Kipling



Contents

        A Charm
     Introduction
     Cold Iron
        Cold Iron
     Gloriana
        The Two Cousins
        The Looking-Glass
     The Wrong Thing
        A Truthful Song
        King Henry VII and the Shipwrights
     Marklake Witches
        The Way through the Woods
        Brookland Road
     The Knife and the Naked Chalk
        The Run of the Downs
        Song of the Men's Side
     Brother Square-Toes
        Philadelphia
        If--
        Rs
        'A Priest in Spite of Himself'
        A St Helena Lullaby
        'Poor Honest Men'
     The Conversion of St Wilfrid
        Eddi's Service
        Song of the Red War-Boat
     A Doctor of Medicine
        An Astrologer's Song
        'Our Fathers of Old'
     Simple Simon
        The Thousandth Man
        Frankie's Trade
     The Tree of Justice
        The Ballad of Minepit Shaw
        A Carol




A Charm


     Take of English earth as much
     As either hand may rightly clutch. In the taking of it breathe
     Prayer for all who lie beneath--
     Not the great nor well-bespoke,
     But the mere uncounted folk
     Of whose life and death is none
     Report or lamentation. Lay that earth upon thy heart,
     And thy sickness shall depart! It shall sweeten and make whole
     Fevered breath and festered soul;
     It shall mightily restrain
     Over-busy hand and brain;
     it shall ease thy mortal strife
     'Gainst the immortal woe of life,
     Till thyself restored shall prove
     By what grace the Heavens do move. Take of English flowers these--
     Spring's full-faced primroses,
     Summer's wild wide-hearted rose,
     Autumn's wall-flower of the close,
     And, thy darkness to illume,
     Winter's bee-thronged ivy-bloom. Seek and serve them where they bide
     From Candlemas to Christmas-tide,
     For these simples used aright
     Shall restore a failing sight. These shall cleanse and purify
     Webbed and inward-turning eye;
     These shall show thee treasure hid,
     Thy familiar fields amid,
     At thy threshold, on thy hearth,
     Or about thy daily path;
     And reveal (which is thy need)
     Every man a King indeed! Introduction


Once upon a time, Dan and Una, brother and sister, living in the English
country, had the good fortune to meet with Puck, alias Robin Goodfellow,
alias Nick o' Lincoln, alias Lob-lie-by-the-Fire, the last survivor
in England of those whom mortals call Fairies. Their proper name, of
course, is 'The People of the Hills'. This Puck, by means of the magic
of Oak, Ash, and Thorn, gave the children power

     To see what they should see and hear what they should hear,
     Though it should have happened three thousand year. The result was that from time to time, and in different places on the
farm and in the fields and in the country about, they saw and talked to
some rather interesting people. One of these, for instance, was a Knight
of the Norman Conquest, another a young Centurion of a Roman Legion
stationed in England, another a builder and decorator of King Henry
VII's time; and so on and so forth; as I have tried to explain in a book
called PUCK OF POOK'S HILL. A year or so later, the children met Puck once more, and though they
were then older and wiser, and wore boots regularly instead of going
barefooted when they got the chance, Puck was as kind to them as ever,
and introduced them to more people of the old days. He was careful, of course, to take away their memory of their walks and
conversations afterwards, but otherwise he did not interfere; and Dan
and Una would find the strangest sort of persons in their gardens or
woods. In the stories that follow I am trying to tell something about those
people. COLD IRON


When Dan and Una had arranged to go out before breakfast, they did not
remember that it was Midsummer Morning. They only wanted to see the
otter which, old Hobden said, had been fishing their brook for weeks;
and early morning was the time to surprise him. As they tiptoed out of
the house into the wonderful stillness, the church clock struck five. Dan took a few steps across the dew-blobbed lawn, and looked at his
black footprints. 'I think we ought to be kind to our poor boots,' he said. 'They'll get
horrid wet.' It was their first summer in boots, and they hated them, so they took
them off, and slung them round their necks, and paddled joyfully over
the dripping turf where the shadows lay the wrong way, like evening in
the East. The sun was well up and warm, but by the brook the last of
the night mist still fumed off the water. They picked up the chain of
otter's footprints on the mud, and followed it from the bank, between
the weeds and the drenched mowing, while the birds shouted with
surprise. Then the track left the brook and became a smear, as though a
log had been dragged along. They traced it into Three Cows meadow, over the mill-sluice to the
Forge, round Hobden's garden, and then up the slope till it ran out
on the short turf and fern of Pook's Hill, and they heard the
cock-pheasants crowing in the woods behind them. 'No use!' said Dan, questing like a puzzled hound. 'The dew's drying
off, and old Hobden says otters'll travel for miles.' 'I'm sure we've travelled miles.' Una fanned herself with her hat. 'How
still it is! It's going to be a regular roaster.' She looked down the
valley, where no chimney yet smoked. 'Hobden's up!' Dan pointed to the open door of the Forge cottage. 'What
d'you suppose he has for breakfast?' 'One of them. He says they eat good
all times of the year,' Una jerked her head at some stately pheasants
going down to the brook for a drink. A few steps farther on a fox broke almost under their bare feet, yapped,
and trotted off. 'Ah, Mus' Reynolds--Mus' Reynolds'--Dan was quoting from old
Hobden,--'if I knowed all you knowed, I'd know something.' [See 'The
Winged Hats' in PUCK OF POOK'S HILL.] I say,'--Una lowered her voice--'you know that funny feeling of things
having happened before. I felt it when you said "Mus' Reynolds."' 'So did I,' Dan began. 'What is it?' They faced each other, stammering with excitement. 'Wait a shake! I'll remember in a minute. Wasn't it something about a
fox--last year? Oh, I nearly had it then!' Dan cried. 'Be quiet!' said Una, prancing excitedly. 'There was something happened
before we met the fox last year. Hills! Broken Hills--the play at the
theatre--see what you see--'

'I remember now,' Dan shouted. 'It's as plain as the nose on your
face--Pook's Hill--Puck's Hill--Puck!' 'I remember, too,' said Una. 'And it's Midsummer Day again!' The young
fern on a knoll rustled, and Puck walked out, chewing a green-topped
rush. 'Good Midsummer Morning to you! Here's a happy meeting,' said he. They
shook hands all round, and asked questions. 'You've wintered well,' he said after a while, and looked them up and
down. 'Nothing much wrong with you, seemingly.' 'They've put us into boots,' said Una. 'Look at my feet--they're all
pale white, and my toes are squidged together awfully.' 'Yes--boots make a difference.' Puck wriggled his brown, square, hairy
foot, and cropped a dandelion flower between the big toe and the next. 'I could do that--last year,' Dan said dismally, as he tried and failed. 'And boots simply ruin one's climbing.' 'There must be some advantage to them, I suppose,'said Puck, or folk
wouldn't wear them. Shall we come this way?' They sauntered along side
by side till they reached the gate at the far end of the hillside. Here
they halted just like cattle, and let the sun warm their backs while
they listened to the flies in the wood. 'Little Lindens is awake,' said Una, as she hung with her chin on the
top rail. 'See the chimney smoke?' 'Today's Thursday, isn't it?' Puck turned to look at the old pink
farmhouse across the little valley. 'Mrs Vincey's baking day. Bread
should rise well this weather.' He yawned, and that set them both
yawning. The bracken about rustled and ticked and shook in every direction. They
felt that little crowds were stealing past. 'Doesn't that sound like--er--the People of the Hills? 'said Una. 'It's the birds and wild things drawing up to the woods before people
get about,' said Puck, as though he were Ridley the keeper. 'Oh, we know that. I only said it sounded like.' 'As I remember 'em, the People of the Hills used to make more noise. They'd settle down for the day rather like small birds settling down for
the night. But that was in the days when they carried the high hand. Oh,
me! The deeds that I've had act and part in, you'd scarcely believe!' 'I like that!' said Dan. 'After all you told us last year, too!' 'Only, the minute you went away, you made us forget everything,' said
Una. Puck laughed and shook his head. 'I shall this year, too. I've given you
seizin of Old England, and I've taken away your Doubt and Fear, but your
memory and remembrance between whiles I'll keep where old Billy Trott
kept his night-lines--and that's where he could draw 'em up and hide 'em
at need. Does that suit?' He twinkled mischievously. 'It's got to suit,'said Una, and laughed. 'We Can't magic back at you.' She folded her arms and leaned against the gate. 'Suppose, now, you
wanted to magic me into something--an otter? Could you?' 'Not with those boots round your neck.' 'I'll take them off.' She threw
them on the turf. Dan's followed immediately. 'Now!' she said. 'Less than ever now you've trusted me. Where there's true faith, there's
no call for magic.' Puck's slow smile broadened all over his face. 'But what have boots to do with it?' said Una, perching on the gate. 'There's Cold Iron in them,' said Puck, and settled beside her. 'Nails
in the soles, I mean. It makes a difference.' 'How?' 'Can't you feel it does? You wouldn't like to go back to bare
feet again, same as last year, would you? Not really?' 'No-o. I suppose I shouldn't--not for always. I'm growing up, you know,'
said Una. 'But you told us last year, in the Long Slip--at the theatre--that you
didn't mind Cold Iron,'said Dan. 'I don't; but folks in housen, as the People of the Hills call them,
must be ruled by Cold Iron. Folk in housen are born on the near side of
Cold Iron--there's iron 'in every man's house, isn't there? They handle
Cold Iron every day of their lives, and their fortune's made or spoilt
by Cold Iron in some shape or other. That's how it goes with Flesh and
Blood, and one can't prevent it.' 'I don't quite see. How do you mean? 'said Dan. 'It would take me some time to tell you.' 'Oh, it's ever so long to breakfast,' said Dan. 'We looked in the
larder before we came out.' He unpocketed one big hunk of bread and Una
another, which they shared with Puck. 'That's Little Lindens' baking,' he said, as his white teeth sunk in
it. 'I know Mrs Vincey's hand.' He ate with a slow sideways thrust and
grind, just like old Hobden, and, like Hobden, hardly dropped a crumb. The sun flashed on Little Lindens' windows, and the cloudless sky grew
stiller and hotter in the valley. 'AH--Cold Iron,' he said at last to the impatient children. 'Folk in
housen, as the People of the Hills say, grow careless about Cold Iron. They'll nail the Horseshoe over the front door, and forget to put it
over the back. Then, some time or other, the People of the Hills slip
in, find the cradle-babe in the corner, and--'

'Oh, I know. Steal it and leave a changeling,'Una cried. 'No,' said Puck firmly. 'All that talk of changelings is people's excuse
for their own neglect. Never believe 'em. I'd whip 'em at the cart-tail
through three parishes if I had my way.' 'But they don't do it now,' said Una. 'Whip, or neglect children? Umm! Some folks and some fields never alter. But the People of the Hills didn't work any changeling tricks. They'd tiptoe in and whisper and weave round the cradle-babe in the
chimney-corner--a fag-end of a charm here, or half a spell there--like
kettles singing; but when the babe's mind came to bud out afterwards,
it would act differently from other people in its station. That's no
advantage to man or maid. So I wouldn't allow it with my folks' babies
here. I told Sir Huon so once.' 'Who was Sir Huon?' Dan asked, and Puck turned on him in quiet
astonishment. 'Sir Huon of Bordeaux--he succeeded King Oberon. He had been a bold
knight once, but he was lost on the road to Babylon, a long while back. Have you ever heard "How many miles to Babylon?"?' 'Of course,' said Dan, flushing. 'Well, Sir Huon was young when that song was new. But about tricks
on mortal babies. I said to Sir Huon in the fern here, on just such a
morning as this: "If you crave to act and influence on folk in housen,
which I know is your desire, why don't you take some human cradle-babe
by fair dealing, and bring him up among yourselves on the far side
of Cold Iron--as Oberon did in time past? Then you could make him a
splendid fortune, and send him out into the world." '"Time past is past time," says Sir Huon. "I doubt if we could do it. For one thing, the babe would have to be taken without wronging man,
woman, or child. For another, he'd have to be born on the far side of
Cold Iron--in some house where no Cold Iron ever stood; and for yet the
third, he'd have to be kept from Cold Iron all his days till we let
him find his fortune. No, it's not easy," he said, and he rode off,
thinking. You see, Sir Huon had been a man once. 'I happened to attend
Lewes Market next Woden's Day even, and watched the slaves being sold
there--same as pigs are sold at Robertsbridge Market nowadays. Only,
the pigs have rings on their noses, and the slaves had rings round their
necks.' 'What sort of rings?' said Dan. 'A ring of Cold Iron, four fingers wide, and a thumb thick, just like
a quoit, but with a snap to it for to snap round the slave's neck. They
used to do a big trade in slave-rings at the Forge here, and ship
them to all parts of Old England, packed in oak sawdust. But, as I was
saying, there was a farmer out of the Weald who had bought a woman with
a babe in her arms, and he didn't want any encumbrances to her driving
his beasts home for him.' 'Beast himself!' said Una, and kicked her bare heel on the gate. 'So he blamed the auctioneer. "It's none o' my baby," the wench puts in. "I took it off a woman in our gang who died on Terrible Down yesterday." "I'll take it off to the church then," says the farmer. "Mother
Church'll make a monk of it, and we'll step along home." 'It was dusk then. He slipped down to St Pancras' Church, and laid the
babe at the cold chapel door. I breathed on the back of his stooping
neck--and--I've heard he never could be warm at any fire afterwards. I
should have been surprised if he could! Then I whipped up the babe, and
came flying home here like a bat to his belfry. 'On the dewy break of morning of Thor's own day--just such a day as
this--I laid the babe outside the Hill here, and the People flocked up
and wondered at the sight. '"You've brought him, then?" Sir Huon said, staring like any mortal man. '"Yes, and he's brought his mouth with him, too," I said. The babe was
crying loud for his breakfast. '"What is he?" says Sir Huon, when the womenfolk had drawn him under to
feed him. '"Full Moon and Morning Star may know," I says. "I don't. By what I
could make out of him in the moonlight, he's without brand or blemish. I'll answer for it that he's born on the far side of Cold Iron, for he
was born under a shaw on Terrible Down, and I've wronged neither man,
woman, nor child in taking him, for he is the son of a dead slave-woman." '"All to the good, Robin," Sir Huon said. "He'll be the less anxious to
leave us. Oh, we'll give him a splendid fortune, and we shall act and
influence on folk in housen as we have always craved." His Lady came up
then, and drew him under to watch the babe's wonderful doings.' 'Who was
his Lady? 'said Dan. 'The Lady Esclairmonde. She had been a woman once,
till she followed Sir Huon across the fern, as we say. Babies are no
special treat to me--I've watched too many of them--so I stayed on the
Hill. Presently I heard hammering down at the Forge there. 'Puck pointed
towards Hobden's cottage. 'It was too early for any workmen, but it
passed through my mind that the breaking day was Thor's own day. A slow
north-east wind blew up and set the oaks sawing and fretting in a way I
remembered; so I slipped over to see what I could see.' 'And what did you see?' 'A smith forging something or other out of Cold
Iron. When it was finished, he weighed it in his hand (his back was
towards me), and tossed it from him a longish quoit-throw down the
valley. I saw Cold Iron flash in the sun, but I couldn't quite make out
where it fell. That didn't trouble me. I knew it would be found sooner
or later by someone.' 'How did you know? 'Dan went on. 'Because I knew the Smith that made it,' said Puck quietly. 'Wayland Smith?' Una suggested. [See 'Weland's Sword' in PUCK OF POOK'S
HILL.] 'No. I should have passed the time o' day with Wayland Smith, of course. This other was different. So'--Puck made a queer crescent in the air
with his finger--'I counted the blades of grass under my nose till the
wind dropped and he had gone--he and his Hammer.' 'Was it Thor then?' Una murmured under her breath. 'Who else? It was Thor's own day.' Puck repeated the sign. 'I didn't
tell Sir Huon or his Lady what I'd seen. Borrow trouble for yourself if
that's your nature, but don't lend it to your neighbours. Moreover,
I might have been mistaken about the Smith's work. He might have been
making things for mere amusement, though it wasn't like him, or he might
have thrown away an old piece of made iron. One can never be sure. So I
held my tongue and enjoyed the babe. He was a wonderful child--and the
People of the Hills were so set on him, they wouldn't have believed me. He took to me wonderfully. As soon as he could walk he'd putter forth
with me all about my Hill here. Fern makes soft falling! He knew when
day broke on earth above, for he'd thump, thump, thump, like an old
buck-rabbit in a bury, and I'd hear him say "Opy!" till some one who
knew the Charm let him out, and then it would be "Robin! Robin!" all
round Robin Hood's barn, as we say, till he'd found me.' 'The dear!' said Una. 'I'd like to have seen him!' 'Yes, he was a boy. And when it came to learning his words--spells and such-like--he'd sit
on the Hill in the long shadows, worrying out bits of charms to try on
passersby. And when the bird flew to him, or the tree bowed to him for
pure love's sake (like everything else on my Hill), he'd shout, "Robin! Look--see! Look, see, Robin!" and sputter out some spell or other that
they had taught him, all wrong end first, till I hadn't the heart to
tell him it was his own dear self and not the words that worked the
wonder. When he got more abreast of his words, and could cast spells for
sure, as we say, he took more and more notice of things and people in
the world. People, of course, always drew him, for he was mortal all
through. 'Seeing that he was free to move among folk in housen, under or over
Cold Iron, I used to take him along with me, night-walking, where he
could watch folk, and I could keep him from touching Cold Iron. That
wasn't so difficult as it sounds, because there are plenty of things
besides Cold Iron in housen to catch a boy's fancy. He was a handful,
though! I shan't forget when I took him to Little Lindens--his first
night under a roof. The smell of the rushlights and the bacon on the
beams--they were stuffing a feather-bed too, and it was a drizzling warm
night--got into his head. Before I could stop him--we were hiding in
the bakehouse--he'd whipped up a storm of wildfire, with flashlights
and voices, which sent the folk shrieking into the garden, and a girl
overset a hive there, and--of course he didn't know till then such
things could touch him--he got badly stung, and came home with his face
looking like kidney potatoes! 'You can imagine how angry Sir Huon and
Lady Esclairmonde were with poor Robin! They said the Boy was never to
be trusted with me night-walking any more--and he took about as much
notice of their order as he did of the bee-stings. Night after night,
as soon as it was dark, I'd pick up his whistle in the wet fern, and
off we'd flit together among folk in housen till break of day--he asking
questions, and I answering according to my knowledge. Then we fell into
mischief again! 'Puck shook till the gate rattled. 'We came across a man up at Brightling who was beating his wife with
a bat in the garden. I was just going to toss the man over his own
woodlump when the Boy jumped the hedge and ran at him. Of course the
woman took her husband's part, and while the man beat him, the woman
scratted his face. It wasn't till I danced among the cabbages like
Brightling Beacon all ablaze that they gave up and ran indoors. The
Boy's fine green-and-gold clothes were torn all to pieces, and he had
been welted in twenty places with the man's bat, and scratted by the
woman's nails to pieces. He looked like a Robertsbridge hopper on a
Monday morning. '"Robin," said he, while I was trying to clean him down with a bunch of
hay, "I don't quite understand folk in housen. I went to help that old
woman, and she hit me, Robin!" '"What else did you expect?" I said. "That was the one time when you
might have worked one of your charms, instead of running into three
times your weight." '"I didn't think," he says. "But I caught the man one on the head that
was as good as any charm. Did you see it work, Robin?" '"Mind your nose," I said. "Bleed it on a dockleaf--not your sleeve, for
pity's sake." I knew what the Lady Esclairmonde would say. 'He didn't care. He was as happy as a gipsy with a stolen pony, and the
front part of his gold coat, all blood and grass stains, looked like
ancient sacrifices. 'Of course the People of the Hills laid the blame on me. The Boy could
do nothing wrong, in their eyes. '"You are bringing him up to act and influence on folk in housen, when
you're ready to let him go," I said. "Now he's begun to do it, why do
you cry shame on me? That's no shame. It's his nature drawing him to his
kind." '"But we don't want him to begin that way," the Lady Esclairmonde
said. "We intend a splendid fortune for him--not your flitter-by-night,
hedge-jumping, gipsy-work." '"I don't blame you, Robin," says Sir Huon, "but I do think you might
look after the Boy more closely." '"I've kept him away from Cold Iron these sixteen years," I said. "You
know as well as I do, the first time he touches Cold Iron he'll find
his own fortune, in spite of everything you intend for him. You owe me
something for that." 'Sir Huon, having been a man, was going to allow me the right of it, but
the Lady Esclairmonde, being the Mother of all Mothers, over-persuaded
him. '"We're very grateful," Sir Huon said, "but we think that just for the
present you are about too much with him on the Hill." '"Though you have said it," I said, "I will give you a second chance." I did not like being called to account for my doings on my own Hill. I
wouldn't have stood it even that far except I loved the Boy. '"No! No!" says the Lady Esclairmonde. "He's never any trouble when he's
left to me and himself. It's your fault." '"You have said it," I answered. "Hear me! From now on till the Boy has
found his fortune, whatever that may be, I vow to you all on my Hill, by
Oak, and Ash, and Thorn, and by the Hammer of Asa Thor"--again Puck made
that curious double-cut in the air--'"that you may leave me out of
all your counts and reckonings." Then I went out'--he snapped his
fingers--'like the puff of a candle, and though they called and cried,
they made nothing by it. I didn't promise not to keep an eye on the Boy,
though. I watched him close--close--close! 'When he found what his people had forced me to do, he gave them a piece
of his mind, but they all kissed and cried round him, and being only
a boy, he came over to their way of thinking (I don't blame him), and
called himself unkind and ungrateful; and it all ended in fresh shows
and plays, and magics to distract him from folk in housen. Dear heart
alive! How he used to call and call on me, and I couldn't answer, or
even let him know that I was near!' 'Not even once?' said Una. 'If he was very lonely?' 'No, he couldn't,'
said Dan, who had been thinking. 'Didn't you swear by the Hammer of Thor
that you wouldn't, Puck?' 'By that Hammer!' was the deep rumbled reply. Then he came back to his
soft speaking voice. 'And the Boy was lonely, when he couldn't see me
any more. He began to try to learn all learning (he had good teachers),
but I saw him lift his eyes from the big black books towards folk in
housen all the time. He studied song-making (good teachers he had too! ),
but he sang those songs with his back toward the Hill, and his face
toward folk. I know! I have sat and grieved over him grieving within a
rabbit's jump of him. Then he studied the High, Low, and Middle Magic. He had promised the Lady Esclairmonde he would never go near folk in
housen; so he had to make shows and shadows for his mind to chew on.' 'What sort of shows?' said Dan. 'Just boy's Magic as we say. I'll show you some, some time. It pleased
him for the while, and it didn't hurt any one in particular except a few
men coming home late from the taverns. But I knew what it was a sign of,
and I followed him like a weasel follows a rabbit. As good a boy as ever
lived! I've seen him with Sir Huon and the Lady Esclairmonde stepping
just as they stepped to avoid the track of Cold Iron in a furrow, or
walking wide of some old ash-tot because a man had left his swop-hook or
spade there; and all his heart aching to go straightforward among folk
in housen all the time. Oh, a good boy! They always intended a fine
fortune for him--but they could never find it in their heart to let him
begin. I've heard that many warned them, but they wouldn't be warned. So
it happened as it happened. 'One hot night I saw the Boy roving about here wrapped in his flaming
discontents. There was flash on flash against the clouds, and rush on
rush of shadows down the valley till the shaws were full of his hounds
giving tongue, and the woodways were packed with his knights in armour
riding down into the water-mists--all his own Magic, of course. Behind
them you could see great castles lifting slow and splendid on arches
of moonshine, with maidens waving their hands at the windows, which all
turned into roaring rivers; and then would come the darkness of his
own young heart wiping out the whole slateful. But boy's Magic doesn't
trouble me--or Merlin's either for that matter. I followed the Boy by
the flashes and the whirling wildfire of his discontent, and oh, but I
grieved for him! Oh, but I grieved for him! He pounded back and
forth like a bullock in a strange pasture--sometimes alone--sometimes
waist-deep among his shadow-hounds--sometimes leading his shadow-knights
on a hawk-winged horse to rescue his shadow-girls. I never guessed he
had such Magic at his command; but it's often that way with boys. 'Just when the owl comes home for the second time, I saw Sir Huon and
the Lady ride down my Hill, where there's not much Magic allowed except
mine. They were very pleased at the Boy's Magic--the valley flared with
it--and I heard them settling his splendid fortune when they should
find it in their hearts to let him go to act and influence among folk in
housen. Sir Huon was for making him a great King somewhere or other, and
the Lady was for making him a marvellous wise man whom all should praise
for his skill and kindness. She was very kind-hearted. 'Of a sudden we saw the flashes of his discontents turned back on the
clouds, and his shadow-hounds stopped baying. '"There's Magic fighting Magic over yonder," the Lady Esclairmonde
cried, reigning up. "Who is against him?" 'I could have told her, but I did not count it any of my business to
speak of Asa Thor's comings and goings. 'How did you know? 'said Una. 'A slow North-East wind blew up, sawing and fretting through the oaks in
a way I remembered. The wildfire roared up, one last time in one sheet,
and snuffed out like a rushlight, and a bucketful of stinging hail fell. We heard the Boy walking in the Long Slip--where I first met you. '"Here, oh, come here!" said the Lady Esclairmonde, and stretched out
her arms in the dark. 'He was coming slowly, but he stumbled in the footpath, being, of
course, mortal man. '"Why, what's this?" he said to himself. We three heard him. '"Hold, lad, hold! 'Ware Cold Iron!" said Sir Huon, and they two swept
down like nightjars, crying as they rode. 'I ran at their stirrups, but it was too late. We felt that the Boy
had touched Cold Iron somewhere in the dark, for the Horses of the Hill
shied off, and whipped round, snorting. 'Then I judged it was time for me to show myself in my own shape; so I
did. '"Whatever it is," I said, "he has taken hold of it. Now we must find
out whatever it is that he has taken hold of, for that will be his
fortune." '"Come here, Robin," the Boy shouted, as soon as he heard my voice. "I
don't know what I've hold of." '"It is in your hands," I called back. "Tell us if it is hard and cold,
with jewels atop. For that will be a King's Sceptre." '"Not by a furrow-long," he said, and stooped and tugged in the dark. We heard him. '"Has it a handle and two cutting edges?" I called. "For
that'll be a Knight's Sword." '"No, it hasn't," he says. "It's neither ploughshare, whittle, hook,
nor crook, nor aught I've yet seen men handle." By this time he was
scratting in the dirt to prise it up. '"Whatever it is, you know who put it there, Robin," said Sir Huon to
me, "or you would not ask those questions. You should have told me as
soon as you knew." '"What could you or I have done against the Smith that made it and laid
it for him to find?" I said, and I whispered Sir Huon what I had seen at
the Forge on Thor's Day, when the babe was first brought to the Hill. '"Oh, good-bye, our dreams!" said Sir Huon. "It's neither sceptre,
sword, nor plough! Maybe yet it's a bookful of learning, bound with iron
clasps. There's a chance for a splendid fortune in that sometimes." 'But we knew we were only speaking to comfort ourselves, and the Lady
Esclairmonde, having been a woman, said so. '"Thur aie! Thor help us!" the Boy called. "It is round, without end,
Cold Iron, four fingers wide and a thumb thick, and there is writing on
the breadth of it." '"Read the writing if you have the learning," I called. The darkness had
lifted by then, and the owl was out over the fern again. 'He called back, reading the runes on the iron:

  "Few can see
  Further forth
  Than when the child
  Meets the Cold Iron." And there he stood, in clear starlight, with a new, heavy, shining
slave-ring round his proud neck. '"Is this how it goes?" he asked, while the Lady Esclairmonde cried. '"That is how it goes," I said. He hadn't snapped the catch home yet,
though. '"What fortune does it mean for him?" said Sir Huon, while the Boy
fingered the ring. "You who walk under Cold Iron, you must tell us and
teach us." '"Tell I can, but teach I cannot," I said. "The virtue of the Ring is
only that he must go among folk in housen henceforward, doing what they
want done, or what he knows they need, all Old England over. Never will
he be his own master, nor yet ever any man's. He will get half he gives,
and give twice what he gets, till his life's last breath; and if he lays
aside his load before he draws that last breath, all his work will go
for naught." '"Oh, cruel, wicked Thor!" cried the Lady Esclairmonde. "Ah, look see,
all of you! The catch is still open! He hasn't locked it. He can still
take it off. He can still come back. Come back!" She went as near as
she dared, but she could not lay hands on Cold Iron. The Boy could have
taken it off, yes. We waited to see if he would, but he put up his hand,
and the snap locked home. '"What else could I have done?" said he. '"Surely, then, you will do," I said. "Morning's coming, and if you
three have any farewells to make, make them now, for, after sunrise,
Cold Iron must be your master." 'So the three sat down, cheek by wet
cheek, telling over their farewells till morning light. As good a boy as
ever lived, he was.' 'And what happened to him?' asked Dan. 'When morning came, Cold Iron was master of him and his fortune, and
he went to work among folk in housen. Presently he came across a maid
like-minded with himself, and they were wedded, and had bushels of
children, as the saying is. Perhaps you'll meet some of his breed, this
year.' 'Thank you,' said Una. 'But what did the poor Lady Esclairmonde do?' 'What can you do when Asa Thor lays the Cold Iron in a lad's path? She
and Sir Huon were comforted to think they had given the Boy good store
of learning to act and influence on folk in housen. For he was a good
boy! Isn't it getting on for breakfast-time? I'll walk with you a
piece.' When they were well in the centre of the bone-dry fern, Dan nudged Una,
who stopped and put on a boot as quickly as she could. 'Now,' she said,
'you can't get any Oak, Ash, and Thorn leaves from here, and'--she
balanced wildly on one leg--'I'm standing on Cold Iron. What'll you do
if we don't go away?' 'E-eh? Of all mortal impudence! 'said Puck, as Dan, also in one boot,
grabbed his sister's hand to steady himself. He walked round them,
shaking with delight. 'You think I can only work with a handful of dead
leaves? This comes of taking away your Doubt and Fear! I'll show you!' A minute later they charged into old Hobden at his simple breakfast of
cold roast pheasant, shouting that there was a wasps' nest in the fern
which they had nearly stepped on, and asking him to come and smoke it
out. 'It's too early for wops-nests, an' I don't go diggin' in the Hill,
not for shillin's,' said the old man placidly. 'You've a thorn in your
foot, Miss Una. Sit down, and put on your t'other boot. You're too old
to be caperin' barefoot on an empty stomach. Stay it with this chicken
o' mine.' Cold Iron


     'Gold is for the mistress--silver for the maid! Copper for the craftsman cunning at his trade.' 'Good!' said the Baron, sitting in his hall,
     'But Iron--Cold Iron--is master of them all!' So he made rebellion 'gainst the King his liege,
     Camped before his citadel and summoned it to siege--
     'Nay!' said the cannoneer on the castle wall,
     'But Iron--Cold Iron--shall be master of you all!' Woe for the Baron and his knights so strong,
     When the cruel cannon-balls laid 'em all along! He was taken prisoner, he was cast in thrall,
     And Iron--Cold Iron--was master of it all! Yet his King spake kindly (Oh, how kind a Lord!) 'What if I release thee now and give thee back thy sword?' 'Nay!' said the Baron, 'mock not at my fall,
     For Iron--Cold Iron--is master of men all.' 'Tears are for the craven, prayers are for the clown--
     Halters for the silly neck that cannot keep a crown.' 'As my loss is grievous, so my hope is small,
     For Iron--Cold Iron--must be master of men all!' Yet his King made answer (few such Kings there be!) 'Here is Bread and here is Wine--sit and sup with me. Eat and drink in Mary's Name, the whiles I do recall
     How Iron--Cold Iron--can be master of men all!' He took the Wine and blessed It; He blessed and brake the Bread. With His own Hands He served Them, and presently He said:
     'Look! These Hands they pierced with nails outside my city wall
     Show Iron--Cold Iron--to be master of men all! 'Wounds are for the desperate, blows are for the strong,
     Balm and oil for weary hearts all cut and bruised with wrong. I forgive thy treason--I redeem thy fall--
     For Iron--Cold Iron--must be master of men all!' 'Crowns are for the valiant--sceptres for the bold! Thrones and powers for mighty men who dare to take and hold.' 'Nay!' said the Baron, kneeling in his hall,
     'But Iron--Cold Iron--is master of men all! Iron, out of Calvary, is master of men all!' GLORIANA



The Two Cousins


     Valour and Innocence
     Have latterly gone hence
     To certain death by certain shame attended. Envy--ah! even to tears!--
     The fortune of their years
     Which, though so few, yet so divinely ended. Scarce had they lifted up
     Life's full and fiery cup,
     Than they had set it down untouched before them. Before their day arose
     They beckoned it to close--
     Close in destruction and confusion o'er them. They did not stay to ask
     What prize should crown their task,
     Well sure that prize was such as no man strives for;
     But passed into eclipse,
     Her kiss upon their lips--
     Even Belphoebe's, whom they gave their lives for! Gloriana


Willow Shaw, the little fenced wood where the hop-poles are stacked like
Indian wigwams, had been given to Dan and Una for their very own kingdom
when they were quite small. As they grew older, they contrived to keep
it most particularly private. Even Phillips, the gardener, told them
every time that he came in to take a hop-pole for his beans, and old
Hobden would no more have thought of setting his rabbit-wires there
without leave, given fresh each spring, than he would have torn down the
calico and marking ink notice on the big willow which said: 'Grown-ups
not allowed in the Kingdom unless brought.' Now you can understand their indignation when, one blowy July afternoon,
as they were going up for a potato-roast, they saw somebody moving
among the trees. They hurled themselves over the gate, dropping half the
potatoes, and while they were picking them up Puck came out of a wigwam. 'Oh, it's you, is it?' said Una. 'We thought it was people.' 'I saw you
were angry--from your legs,' he answered with a grin. 'Well, it's our own Kingdom--not counting you, of course.' 'That's rather why I came. A lady here wants to see you.' 'What about?' said Dan cautiously. 'Oh, just Kingdoms and things. She
knows about Kingdoms.' There was a lady near the fence dressed in a long dark cloak that hid
everything except her high red-heeled shoes. Her face was half covered
by a black silk fringed mask, without goggles. And yet she did not look
in the least as if she motored. Puck led them up to her and bowed solemnly. Una made the best
dancing-lesson curtsy she could remember. The lady answered with a long,
deep, slow, billowy one. 'Since it seems that you are a Queen of this Kingdom,'she said, 'I can
do no less than acknowledge your sovereignty.' She turned sharply on
staring Dan. 'What's in your head, lad? Manners?' 'I was thinking how wonderfully you did that curtsy,' he answered. She laughed a rather shrill laugh. 'You're a courtier already. Do you
know anything of dances, wench--or Queen, must I say?' 'I've had some lessons, but I can't really dance a bit,' said Una. 'You should learn, then.' The lady moved forward as though she would
teach her at once. 'It gives a woman alone among men or her enemies
time to think how she shall win or--lose. A woman can only work in man's
play-time. Heigho! 'She sat down on the bank. Old Middenboro, the lawn-mower pony, stumped across the paddock and hung
his sorrowful head over the fence. 'A pleasant Kingdom,' said the lady, looking round. 'Well enclosed. And
how does your Majesty govern it? Who is your Minister?' Una did not quite understand. 'We don't play that,' she said. 'Play?' The lady threw up her hands and laughed. 'We have it for our own, together,' Dan explained. 'And d'you never quarrel, young Burleigh?' 'Sometimes, but then we don't tell.' The lady nodded. 'I've no brats of my own, but I understand keeping a
secret between Queens and their Ministers. Ay de mi! But with no disrespect to present majesty, methinks your realm'
small, and therefore likely to be coveted by man and beast. For Is
example'--she pointed to Middenboro--'yonder old horse, with the face of
a Spanish friar--does he never break in?' 'He can't. Old Hobden stops all our gaps for us,' said Una, 'and we let
Hobden catch rabbits in the Shaw.' The lady laughed like a man. 'I see! Hobden catches conies--rabbits--for
himself, and guards your defences for you. Does he make a profit out of
his coney-catching?' 'We never ask,' said Una. 'Hobden's a particular friend of ours.' 'Hoity-toity!' the lady began angrily. Then she laughed. 'But I forget. It is your Kingdom. I knew a maid once that had a larger one than this
to defend, and so long as her men kept the fences stopped, she asked 'em
no questions either.' 'Was she trying to grow flowers? 'said Una. 'No, trees--perdurable trees. Her flowers all withered.' The lady leaned
her head on her hand. 'They do if you don't look after them. We've got a few. Would you like
to see? I'll fetch you some.' Una ran off to the rank grass in the shade
behind the wigwam, and came back with a handful of red flowers. 'Aren't
they pretty?' she said. 'They're Virginia stock.' 'Virginia?' said the lady, and lifted them to the fringe of her mask. 'Yes. They come from Virginia. Did your maid ever plant any?' 'Not herself--but her men adventured all over the earth to pluck or to
plant flowers for her crown. They judged her worthy of them.' 'And was she?' said Dan cheerfully. 'Quien sabe? [who knows?] But at least, while her men toiled abroad she
toiled in England, that they might find a safe home to come back to.' 'And what was she called?' 'Gloriana--Belphoebe--Elizabeth of England.' Her voice changed at each
word. 'You mean Queen Bess?' The lady bowed her head a little towards Dan. 'You name her lightly
enough, young Burleigh. What might you know of her?' said she. 'Well, I--I've seen the little green shoes she left at Brickwall
House--down the road, you know. They're in a glass case--awfully tiny
things.' 'Oh, Burleigh, Burleigh!' she laughed. 'You are a courtier too soon.' 'But they are,' Dan insisted. 'As little as dolls' shoes. Did you really
know her well?' 'Well. She was a--woman. I've been at her Court all my life. Yes, I
remember when she danced after the banquet at Brickwall. They say she
danced Philip of Spain out of a brand-new kingdom that day. Worth the
price of a pair of old shoes--hey?' She thrust out one foot, and stooped forward to look at its broad
flashing buckle. 'You've heard of Philip of Spain--long-suffering Philip,' she said, her
eyes still on the shining stones. 'Faith, what some men will endure at
some women's hands passes belief! If I had been a man, and a woman had
played with me as Elizabeth played with Philip, I would have--' She
nipped off one of the Virginia stocks and held it up between finger
and thumb. 'But for all that'--she began to strip the leaves one by
one--'they say--and I am persuaded--that Philip loved her.' She tossed
her head sideways. 'I don't quite understand,' said Una. 'The high heavens forbid that you should, wench!' She swept the flowers
from her lap and stood up in the rush of shadows that the wind chased
through the wood. 'I should like to know about the shoes,' said Dan. 'So ye shall, Burleigh. So ye shall, if ye watch me. 'Twill be as good
as a play.' 'We've never been to a play,' said Una. The lady looked at her and laughed. 'I'll make one for you. Watch! You
are to imagine that she--Gloriana, Belphoebe, Elizabeth--has gone on a
progress to Rye to comfort her sad heart (maids are often melancholic),
and while she halts at Brickwall House, the village--what was its name?' She pushed Puck with her foot. 'Norgem,' he croaked, and squatted by the wigwam. 'Norgem village loyally entertains her with a masque or play, and a
Latin oration spoken by the parson, for whose false quantities, if I'd
made 'em in my girlhood, I should have been whipped.' 'You whipped?' said Dan. 'Soundly, sirrah, soundly! She stomachs the affront to her scholarship,
makes her grateful, gracious thanks from the teeth outwards, thus'--(the
lady yawned)--'Oh, a Queen may love her subjects in her heart, and yet
be dog-wearied of 'em 'in body and mind--and so sits down'--her skirts
foamed about her as she sat--'to a banquet beneath Brickwall Oak. Here
for her sins she is waited upon by--What were the young cockerels' names
that served Gloriana at table?' 'Frewens, Courthopes, Fullers, Husseys,' Puck began. She held up her long jewelled hand. 'Spare the rest! They were the best
blood of Sussex, and by so much the more clumsy in handling the dishes
and plates. Wherefore'--she looked funnily over her shoulder--'you
are to think of Gloriana in a green and gold-laced habit, dreadfully
expecting that the jostling youths behind her would, of pure jealousy or
devotion, spatter it with sauces and wines. The gown was Philip's gift,
too! At this happy juncture a Queen's messenger, mounted and mired,
spurs up the Rye road and delivers her a letter'--she giggled--'a letter
from a good, simple, frantic Spanish gentleman called--Don Philip.' 'That wasn't Philip, King of Spain? 'Dan asked. 'Truly, it was. 'Twixt you and me and the bedpost, young Burleigh, these
kings and queens are very like men and women, and I've heard they write
each other fond, foolish letters that none of their ministers should
open.' 'Did her ministers ever open Queen Elizabeth's letters?' said Una. 'Faith, yes! But she'd have done as much for theirs, any day. You are
to think of Gloriana, then (they say she had a pretty hand), excusing
herself thus to the company--for the Queen's time is never her own--and,
while the music strikes up, reading Philip's letter, as I do.' She drew
a real letter from her pocket, and held it out almost at arm's length,
like the old post-mistress in the village when she reads telegrams. 'Hm! Hm! Hm! Philip writes as ever most lovingly. He says his Gloriana
is cold, for which reason he burns for her through a fair written page.' She turned it with a snap. 'What's here? Philip complains that certain
of her gentlemen have fought against his generals in the Low Countries. He prays her to hang 'em when they re-enter her realms. (Hm, that's as
may be.) Here's a list of burnt shipping slipped between two vows of
burning adoration. Oh, poor Philip! His admirals at sea--no less than
three of 'em--have been boarded, sacked, and scuttled on their lawful
voyages by certain English mariners (gentlemen, he will not call them),
who are now at large and working more piracies in his American ocean,
which the Pope gave him. (He and the Pope should guard it, then!) Philip
hears, but his devout ears will not credit it, that Gloriana in some
fashion countenances these villains' misdeeds, shares in their booty,
and--oh, shame!---has even lent them ships royal for their sinful
thefts. Therefore he requires (which is a word Gloriana loves not),
requires that she shall hang 'em when they return to England, and
afterwards shall account to him for all the goods and gold they have
plundered. A most loving request! If Gloriana will not be Philip's
bride, she shall be his broker and his butcher! Should she still
be stiff-necked, he writes--see where the pen digged the innocent
paper!---that he hath both the means and the intention to be revenged
on her. Aha! Now we come to the Spaniard in his shirt!' (She waved
the letter merrily.) 'Listen here! Philip will prepare for Gloriana a
destruction from the West--a destruction from the West--far exceeding
that which Pedro de Avila wrought upon the Huguenots. And he rests and
remains, kissing her feet and her hands, her slave, her enemy, or her
conqueror, as he shall find that she uses him.' She thrust back the letter under her cloak, and went on acting, but in
a softer voice. 'All this while--hark to it--the wind blows through
Brickwall Oak, the music plays, and, with the company's eyes upon her,
the Queen of England must think what this means. She cannot remember the
name of Pedro de Avila, nor what he did to the Huguenots, nor when, nor
where. She can only see darkly some dark motion moving in Philip's dark
mind, for he hath never written before in this fashion. She must smile
above the letter as though it were good news from her ministers--the
smile that tires the mouth and the poor heart. What shall she do?' Again
her voice changed. 'You are to fancy that the music of a sudden wavers away. Chris Hatton,
Captain of her bodyguard, quits the table all red and ruffled, and
Gloriana's virgin ear catches the clash of swords at work behind a wall. The mothers of Sussex look round to count their chicks--I mean those
young gamecocks that waited on her. Two dainty youths have stepped
aside into Brickwall garden with rapier and dagger on a private point of
honour. They are haled out through the gate, disarmed and glaring--the
lively image of a brace of young Cupids transformed into pale, panting
Cains. Ahem! Gloriana beckons awfully--thus! They come up for judgement. Their lives and estates lie at her mercy whom they have doubly offended,
both as Queen and woman. But la! what will not foolish young men do for
a beautiful maid?' 'Why? What did she do? What had they done?' said Una. 'Hsh! You mar the play! Gloriana had guessed the cause of the trouble. They were handsome lads. So she frowns a while and tells 'em not to be
bigger fools than their mothers had made 'em, and warns 'em, if they do
not kiss and be friends on the instant, she'll have Chris Hatton horse
and birch 'em in the style of the new school at Harrow. (Chris looks
sour at that.) Lastly, because she needed time to think on Philip's
letter burning in her pocket, she signifies her pleasure to dance with
'em and teach 'em better manners. Whereat the revived company call down
Heaven's blessing on her gracious head; Chris and the others prepare
Brickwall House for a dance; and she walks in the clipped garden between
those two lovely young sinners who are both ready to sink for shame. They confess their fault. It appears that midway in the banquet the
elder--they were cousins--conceived that the Queen looked upon him with
special favour. The younger, taking the look to himself, after some
words gives the elder the lie. Hence, as she guessed, the duel.' 'And which had she really looked at?' Dan asked. 'Neither--except to wish them farther off. She was afraid all the while
they'd spill dishes on her gown. She tells 'em this, poor chicks--and it
completes their abasement. When they had grilled long enough, she says:
"And so you would have fleshed your maiden swords for me--for me?" Faith, they would have been at it again if she'd egged 'em on! but their
swords--oh, prettily they said it!---had been drawn for her once or
twice already. '"And where?" says she. "On your hobby-horses before you were breeched?" '"On my own ship," says the elder. "My cousin was vice-admiral of our
venture in his pinnace. We would not have you think of us as brawling
children." '"No, no," says the younger, and flames like a very Tudor rose. "At
least the Spaniards know us better." '"Admiral Boy--Vice-Admiral Babe," says Gloriana, "I cry your pardon. The heat of these present times ripens childhood to age more quickly
than I can follow. But we are at peace with Spain. Where did you break
your Queen's peace?" '"On the sea called the Spanish Main, though 'tis
no more Spanish than my doublet," says the elder. Guess how that warmed
Gloriana's already melting heart! She would never suffer any sea to be
called Spanish in her private hearing. '"And why was I not told? What booty got you, and where have you hid
it? Disclose," says she. "You stand in some danger of the gallows for
pirates." '"The axe, most gracious lady," says the elder, "for we are gentle
born." He spoke truth, but no woman can brook contradiction. "Hoity-toity!" says she, and, but that she remembered that she was
Queen, she'd have cuffed the pair of 'em. "It shall be gallows, hurdle,
and dung-cart if I choose." '"Had our Queen known of our going beforehand, Philip might have held
her to blame for some small things we did on the seas," the younger
lisps. '"As for treasure," says the elder, "we brought back but our bare lives. We were wrecked on the Gascons' Graveyard, where our sole company for
three months was the bleached bones of De Avila's men." 'Gloriana's mind jumped back to Philip's last letter. '"De Avila that destroyed the Huguenots? What d'you know of him?" she
says. The music called from the house here, and they three turned back
between the yews. '"Simply that De Avila broke in upon a plantation of Frenchmen on that
coast, and very Spaniardly hung them all for heretics--eight hundred
or so. The next year Dominique de Gorgues, a Gascon, broke in upon De
Avila's men, and very justly hung 'em all for murderers--five hundred or
so. No Christians inhabit there now, says the elder lad, though 'tis a
goodly land north of Florida." '"How far is it from England?" asks prudent Gloriana. '"With a fair wind, six weeks. They say that Philip will plant it again
soon." This was the younger, and he looked at her out of the corner of
his innocent eye. 'Chris Hatton, fuming, meets and leads her into Brickwall Hall, where
she dances--thus. A woman can think while she dances--can think. I'll
show you. Watch!' She took off her cloak slowly, and stood forth in dove-coloured satin,
worked over with pearls that trembled like running water in the running
shadows of the trees. Still talking--more to herself than to the
children--she swam into a majestical dance of the stateliest balancings,
the naughtiest wheelings and turnings aside, the most dignified
sinkings, the gravest risings, all joined together by the elaboratest
interlacing steps and circles. They leaned forward breathlessly to watch
the splendid acting. 'Would a Spaniard,' she began, looking on the ground, 'speak of his
revenge till his revenge were ripe? No. Yet a man who loved a woman
might threaten her 'in the hope that his threats would make her love
him. Such things have been.' She moved slowly across a bar of sunlight. 'A destruction from the West may signify that Philip means to descend on
Ireland. But then my Irish spies would have had some warning. The Irish
keep no secrets. No--it is not Ireland. Now why--why--why'--the red
shoes clicked and paused--'does Philip name Pedro Melendez de Avila,
a general in his Americas, unless'--she turned more quickly--unless he
intends to work his destruction from the Americas? Did he say De Avila
only to put her off her guard, or for this once has his black
pen betrayed his black heart? We'--she raised herself to her full
height--'England must forestall Master Philip. But not openly,'--she
sank again--'we cannot fight Spain openly--not yet--not yet.' She
stepped three paces as though she were pegging down some snare with her
twinkling shoe-buckles. 'The Queen's mad gentlemen may fight Philip's
poor admirals where they find 'em, but England, Gloriana, Harry's
daughter, must keep the peace. Perhaps, after all, Philip loves her--as
many men and boys do. That may help England. Oh, what shall help
England?' She raised her head--the masked head that seemed to have nothing to do
with the busy feet--and stared straight at the children. 'I think this is rather creepy,' said Una with a shiver. 'I wish she'd
stop.' The lady held out her jewelled hand as though she were taking some one
else's hand in the Grand Chain. 'Can a ship go down into the Gascons' Graveyard and wait there?' she
asked into the air, and passed on rustling. 'She's pretending to ask one of the cousins, isn't she?' said Dan, and
Puck nodded. Back she came in the silent, swaying, ghostly dance. They saw she was
smiling beneath the mask, and they could hear her breathing hard. 'I cannot lend you any of my ships for the venture; Philip would hear
of it,' she whispered over her shoulder; 'but as much guns and powder as
you ask, if you do not ask too--'Her voice shot up and she stamped her
foot thrice. 'Louder! Louder, the music in the gallery! Oh, me, but I
have burst out of my shoe!' She gathered her skirts in each hand, and began a curtsy. 'You will go
at your own charges,' she whispered straight before her. 'Oh, enviable
and adorable age of youth!' Her eyes shone through the mask-holes. 'But
I warn you you'll repent it. Put not your trust in princes--or Queens. Philip's ships'll blow you out of water. You'll not be frightened? Well,
we'll talk on it again, when I return from Rye, dear lads.' The wonderful curtsy ended. She stood up. Nothing stirred on her except
the rush of the shadows. 'And so it was finished,' she said to the children. 'Why d'you not
applaud?' 'What was finished?' said Una. 'The dance,' the lady replied offendedly. 'And a pair of green shoes.' 'I don't understand a bit,' said Una. 'Eh? What did you make of it, young Burleigh?' 'I'm not quite sure,' Dan began, 'but--'

'You never can be--with a woman. But--?' 'But I thought Gloriana meant the cousins to go back to the Gascons'
Graveyard, wherever that was.' ''Twas Virginia after-wards. Her plantation of Virginia.' 'Virginia afterwards, and stop Philip from taking it. Didn't she say
she'd lend 'em guns?' 'Right so. But not ships--then.' 'And I thought you meant they must have told her they'd do it off their
own bat, without getting her into a row with Philip. Was I right?' 'Near enough for a Minister of the Queen. But remember she gave the
lads full time to change their minds. She was three long days at Rye
Royal--knighting of fat Mayors. When she came back to Brickwall, they
met her a mile down the road, and she could feel their eyes burn through
her riding-mask. Chris Hatton, poor fool, was vexed at it. '"YOU would not birch them when I gave you the chance," says she to
Chris. "Now you must get me half an hour's private speech with 'em in
Brickwall garden. Eve tempted Adam in a garden. Quick, man, or I may
repent!"' 'She was a Queen. Why did she not send for them herself?' said Una. The lady shook her head. 'That was never her way. I've seen her walk
to her own mirror by bye-ends, and the woman that cannot walk straight
there is past praying for. Yet I would have you pray for her! What
else--what else in England's name could she have done?' She lifted her
hand to her throat for a moment. 'Faith,' she cried, 'I'd forgotten
the little green shoes! She left 'em at Brickwall--so she did. And I
remember she gave the Norgem parson--John Withers, was he?---a text
for his sermon--"Over Edom have I cast out my shoe." Neat, if he'd
understood!' 'I don't understand,' said Una. 'What about the two cousins?' 'You are as cruel as a woman,' the lady answered. 'I was not to blame. I told you I gave 'em time to change their minds. On my honour (ay de
mi! ), she asked no more of 'em at first than to wait a while off that
coast--the Gascons' Graveyard--to hover a little if their ships chanced
to pass that way--they had only one tall ship and a pinnace--only
to watch and bring me word of Philip's doings. One must watch Philip
always. What a murrain right had he to make any plantation there, a
hundred leagues north of his Spanish Main, and only six weeks from
England? By my dread father's soul, I tell you he had none--none!' She stamped her red foot again, and the two children shrunk back for a
second. 'Nay, nay. You must not turn from me too! She laid it all fairly before
the lads in Brickwall garden between the yews. I told 'em that if Philip
sent a fleet (and to make a plantation he could not well send less),
their poor little cock-boats could not sink it. They answered that, with
submission, the fight would be their own concern. She showed 'em again
that there could be only one end to it--quick death on the sea, or slow
death in Philip's prisons. They asked no more than to embrace death
for my sake. Many men have prayed to me for life. I've refused 'em, and
slept none the worse after; but when my men, my tall, fantastical
young men, beseech me on their knees for leave to die for me, it shakes
me--ah, it shakes me to the marrow of my old bones.' Her chest sounded
like a board as she hit it. 'She showed 'em all. I told 'em that this
was no time for open war with Spain. If by miracle inconceivable they
prevailed against Philip's fleet, Philip would hold me accountable. For
England's sake, to save war, I should e'en be forced (I told 'em so) to
give him up their young lives. If they failed, and again by some miracle
escaped Philip's hand, and crept back to England with their bare lives,
they must lie--oh, I told 'em all--under my sovereign displeasure. She
could not know them, see them, nor hear their names, nor stretch out a
finger to save them from the gallows, if Philip chose to ask it. '"Be it the gallows, then," says the elder. (I could have wept, but that
my face was made for the day.) '"Either way--any way--this venture is death, which I know you fear not. But it is death with assured dishonour," I cried. '"Yet our Queen will know in her heart what we have done," says the
younger. '"Sweetheart," I said. "A queen has no heart." '"But she is a woman, and a woman would not forget," says the elder. "We
will go!" They knelt at my feet. '"Nay, dear lads--but here!" I said, and I opened my arms to them and I
kissed them. '"Be ruled by me," I said. "We'll hire some ill-featured old
tarry-breeks of an admiral to watch the Graveyard, and you shall come to
Court." '"Hire whom you please," says the elder; "we are ruled by you, body and
soul"; and the younger, who shook most when I kissed 'em, says between
his white lips, "I think you have power to make a god of a man." '"Come to Court and be sure of't," I said. 'They shook their heads and I knew--I knew, that go they would. If I had
not kissed them--perhaps I might have prevailed.' 'Then why did you do it?' said Una. 'I don't think you knew really what
you wanted done.' 'May it please your Majesty'--the lady bowed her head low--'this
Gloriana whom I have represented for your pleasure was a woman and a
Queen. Remember her when you come to your Kingdom.' 'But--did the cousins go to the Gascons' Graveyard?' said Dan, as Una
frowned. 'They went,' said the lady. 'Did they ever come back?' Una began; but--'Did they stop King Philip's
fleet?' Dan interrupted. The lady turned to him eagerly. 'D'you think they did right to go?' she asked. 'I don't see what else they could have done,' Dan replied, after
thinking it over. 'D'you think she did right to send 'em?' The lady's voice rose a little. 'Well,' said Dan, 'I don't see what else she could have done, either--do
you? How did they stop King Philip from getting Virginia?' 'There's the sad part of it. They sailed out that autumn from Rye Royal,
and there never came back so much as a single rope-yarn to show what
had befallen them. The winds blew, and they were not. Does that make
you alter your mind, young Burleigh?' 'I expect they were drowned, then. Anyhow, Philip didn't score, did he?' 'Gloriana wiped out her score with Philip later. But if Philip had won,
would you have blamed Gloriana for wasting those lads' lives?' 'Of course not. She was bound to try to stop him.' The lady coughed. 'You have the root of the matter in you. Were I Queen,
I'd make you Minister.' 'We don't play that game,' said Una, who felt that she disliked the lady
as much as she disliked the noise the high wind made tearing through
Willow Shaw. 'Play!' said the lady with a laugh, and threw up her hands affectedly. The sunshine caught the jewels on her many rings and made them flash
till Una's eyes dazzled, and she had to rub them. Then she saw Dan on
his knees picking up the potatoes they had spilled at the gate. 'There wasn't anybody in the Shaw, after all,' he said. 'Didn't you
think you saw someone?' 'I'm most awfully glad there isn't,' said Una. Then they went on with
the potato-roast. The Looking-Glass

Queen Bess Was Harry's daughter! The Queen was in her chamber, and she was middling old,
     Her petticoat was satin and her stomacher was gold. Backwards and forwards and sideways did she pass,
     Making up her mind to face the cruel looking-glass. The cruel looking-glass that will never show a lass
     As comely or as kindly or as young as once she was! The Queen was in her chamber, a-combing of her hair,
     There came Queen Mary's spirit and it stood behind her chair,
     Singing, 'Backwards and forwards and sideways you may pass,
     But I will stand behind you till you face the looking-glass. The cruel looking-glass that will never show a lass
     As lovely or unlucky or as lonely as I was!' The Queen was in her chamber, a-weeping very sore,
     There came Lord Leicester's spirit and it scratched upon the door,
     Singing, 'Backwards and forwards and sideways may you pass,
     But I will walk beside you till you face the looking-glass. The cruel looking-glass that will never show a lass
     As hard and unforgiving or as wicked as you was!' The Queen was in her chamber; her sins were on her head;
     She looked the spirits up and down and statelily she said:
     'Backwards and forwards and sideways though I've been,
     Yet I am Harry's daughter and I am England's Queen!' And she faced the looking-glass (and whatever else there was),
     And she saw her day was over and she saw her beauty pass
     In the cruel looking-glass that can always hurt a lass
     More hard than any ghost there is or any man there was! THE WRONG THING




A Truthful Song


       THE BRICKLAYER:

     I tell this tale, which is strictly true,
     just by way of convincing you
     How very little since things were made
     Things have altered in the building trade. A year ago, come the middle o' March,
     We was building flats near the Marble Arch,
     When a thin young man with coal-black hair
     Came up to watch us working there. Now there wasn't a trick in brick or stone
     That this young man hadn't seen or known;
     Nor there wasn't a tool from trowel to maul
     But this young man could use 'em all! Then up and spoke the plumbyers bold,
     Which was laying the pipes for the hot and cold:
     'Since you with us have made so free,
     Will you kindly say what your name might be?' The young man kindly answered them:
     'It might be Lot or Methusalem,
     Or it might be Moses (a man I hate),
     Whereas it is Pharaoh surnamed the Great. 'Your glazing is new and your plumbing's strange,
     But other-wise I perceive no change,
     And in less than a month, if you do as I bid,
     I'd learn you to build me a Pyramid.' THE SAILOR:

     I tell this tale, which is stricter true,
     just by way of convincing you
     How very little since things was made
     Things have altered in the shipwright's trade. In Blackwall Basin yesterday
     A China barque re-fitting lay,
     When a fat old man with snow-white hair
     Came up to watch us working there. Now there wasn't a knot which the riggers knew
     But the old man made it--and better too;
     Nor there wasn't a sheet, or a lift, or a brace,
     But the old man knew its lead and place. Then up and spake the caulkyers bold,
     Which was packing the pump in the after-hold:
     'Since you with us have made so free,
     Will you kindly tell what your name might be?' The old man kindly answered them:
     'it might be Japhet, it might be Shem,
     Or it might be Ham (though his skin was dark),
     Whereas it is Noah, commanding the Ark. 'Your wheel is new and your pumps are strange,
     But otherwise I perceive no change,
     And in less than a week, if she did not ground,
     I'd sail this hooker the wide world round!' BOTH: We tell these tales, which are strictest true, etc. The Wrong Thing


Dan had gone in for building model boats; but after he had filled the
schoolroom with chips, which he expected Una to clear away, they turned
him out of doors and he took all his tools up the hill to Mr Springett's
yard, where he knew he could make as much mess as he chose. Old Mr
Springett was a builder, contractor, and sanitary engineer, and
his yard, which opened off the village street, was always full of
interesting things. At one end of it was a long loft, reached by a
ladder, where he kept his iron-bound scaffold-planks, tins of paints,
pulleys, and odds and ends he had found in old houses. He would sit here
by the hour watching his carts as they loaded or unloaded in the yard
below, while Dan gouged and grunted at the carpenter's bench near the
loft window. Mr Springett and Dan had always been particular friends,
for Mr Springett was so old he could remember when railways were being
made in the southern counties of England, and people were allowed to
drive dogs in carts. One hot, still afternoon--the tar-paper on the roof smelt like
ships--Dan, in his shirt-sleeves, was smoothing down a new schooner's
bow, and Mr Springett was talking of barns and houses he had built. He
said he never forgot any stick or stone he had ever handled, or any
man, woman, or child he had ever met. Just then he was very proud of the
Village Hall at the entrance of the village, which he had finished a few
weeks before. 'An' I don't mind tellin' you, Mus' Dan,' he said, 'that the Hall will
be my last job top of this mortal earth. I didn't make ten pounds--no,
nor yet five--out o' the whole contrac', but my name's lettered on the
foundation stone--Ralph Springett, Builder--and the stone she's bedded
on four foot good concrete. If she shifts any time these five hundred
years, I'll sure-ly turn in my grave. I told the Lunnon architec' so
when he come down to oversee my work.' 'What did he say?' Dan was sandpapering the schooner's port bow. 'Nothing. The Hall ain't more than one of his small jobs for him, but
'tain't small to me, an' my name is cut and lettered, frontin' the
village street, I do hope an' pray, for time everlastin'. You'll want
the little round file for that holler in her bow. Who's there?' Mr
Springett turned stiffly in his chair. A long pile of scaffold-planks ran down the centre of the loft. 