



Produced by Nicole Apostola, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. SEVEN ICELANDIC SHORT STORIES

REYKJAVIK

THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION




CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION BY STEINGRIMUR J. PORSTEINSSON

ANONYMOUS (13TH CENTURY)
THE STORY OF AUDUNN AND THE BEAR
TRANSLATED BY G. TURVILLE-PEIRE

EINAR H. KVARAN
A DRY SPELL (1905)
TRANSLATED BY JAKOBINA JOHNSON

GUEthMUNDUR FRIEthJONSSON
THE OLD HAY (1909)
TRANSLATED BY MEKKIN SVEINSON PERKINS

JON TRAUSTI
WHEN I WAS ON THE FRIGATE (1910)
TRANSLATED BY ARNOLD R. TAYLOR

GUNNAR GUNNARSSON
FATHER AND SON (1916)
TRANSLATED BY PETER FOOTE

GUEthMUNDUR G. HAGALIN
THE FOX SKIN (1923)
TRANSLATED BY MEKKIN SVEINSON PERKINS

HALLDOR KILJAN LAXNESS
NEW ICELAND (1927)
TRANSLATED BY AXEL EYBERG AND JOHN WATKINS




INTRODUCTION

I


Of the seven Icelandic short stories which appear here, the first
was probably written early in the thirteenth century, while the rest
all date from the early twentieth century. It might therefore be
supposed that the earliest of these stories was written in a
language more or less unintelligible to modern Icelanders, and that
there was a gap of many centuries in the literary production of the
nation. This, however, is not the case. The Norsemen who colonized Iceland in the last quarter of the ninth
century brought with than the language then spoken throughout the
whole of Scandinavia. This ancestor of the modern Scandinavian
tongues has been preserved in Iceland so little changed that every
Icelander still understands, without the aid of explanatory
commentaries, the oldest preserved prose written in their country
850 years ago. The principal reasons for this were probably limited
communications between Iceland and other countries, frequent
migrations inside the island, and, not least important, a long and
uninterrupted literary tradition. As a consequence, Icelandic has
not developed any dialects in the ordinary sense. It is to their language and literature, as well as to the island
separateness of their country, that the 175 thousand inhabitants of
this North-Atlantic state of a little more than a hundred thousand
square kilometres owe their existence as an independent and separate
nation. The Icelanders established a democratic legislative assembly, the
Althingi (Alþingi) in 930 A.D., and in the year 1000 embraced
Christianity. Hence there soon arose the necessity of writing down
the law and translations of sacred works. Such matter, along with
historical knowledge, may well have constituted the earliest
writings in Icelandic, probably dating as far back as the eleventh
century, while the oldest preserved texts were composed early in the
twelfth century. This was the beginning of the so-called saga-
writing. The important thing was that most of what was written down
was in the vernacular, Latin being used but sparingly. Thus a
literary style was evolved which soon reached a high standard. This
style, so forceful in its perspicuity, was effectively simple, yet
rich in the variety of its classical structure. There were different categories of sagas. Among the most important
were the sagas of the Norwegian kings and the family sagas. The
latter tell us about the first generations of native Icelanders. They are all anonymous and the majority of them were written in the
thirteenth century. Most of them contain a more or less historical
core. Above all, however, they are fine literature, at times
realistic, whose excellence is clearly seen in their descriptions of
events and character, their dialogue and structure. Most of them are
in fact in the nature of historical novels. The Viking view of life
pervading them is characteristically heroic, but with frequent
traces of the influence of Christian writing. Besides these there were short stories (þaettir) about Icelanders,
of which THE STORY OF AUDUNN AND THE BEAR (Auethunar þattr vestfirzka)
is one of the best known. [Footnote: In this edition, the specially-
Icelandic consonants þ and eth are printed as th and d respectively,
and the superstressed vowels a,i,o, and u, are given without the
acute accent, when they occur in proper names in the stories, e. g.
Porethur: Thordur.] These may be regarded as a preliminary stage in the development of
the longer family saga, simpler, yet having essentially the same
characteristics. Both types then continued to be written side by
side. Although the geographical isolation of the country was stated
above as one of the reasons for the preservation of the language,
too great a stress should not be laid on this factor, especially not
during the early centuries of the settlement. The Icelanders were
great and active navigators who discovered Greenland (shortly after
980) and North America (Leifr Eiriksson, about 1000). Thus THE STORY
OF AUDUNN AND THE BEAR recounts travels to Greenland, Norway,
Denmark and Italy. It was then fashionable for young Icelanders to
go abroad and spend some time at the courts of the Norwegian kings,
where the skalds recited poems of praise dedicated to the king. In
this story the occasion of the voyage is a less common one, the
bringing of a polar bear as a gift to the Danish king. In several
other Icelandic stories, and in some of other countries, we read of
such gifts, and of how European potentates prized these rare
creatures from Greenland. In Scandinavia, Germany, and elsewhere, there have been legends
similar to the story of Audunn, where a man, after having been to
the Norwegian king with a tame bear, decides to present it to the
king of Denmark. However, we know of no earlier source for this
motif than the story of Audunn. Whatever its value as historical
fact, it could well be the model to which the other versions might
be traced. This story is preserved in the Morkinskinna, an Icelandic
manuscript written in the second half of the thirteenth century, as
well as in several later manuscripts. [Footnote: The most valuable
edition of THE STORY OF ADUNN AND THE BEAR is that of Guethni Jonsson
in the series Islenzk fornrit (vol. VI. Reykjavik 1943). The text of
this edition is followed in the present translation, except in a few
cases where reference has been made to the texts of Fornmannasoegur
VI, Copenhagen 1831, and Flateyjarbok III, Oslo 1868.] The story had
probably been written down by 1220, if not earlier. It is given a
historical background in so far as it is set in the time of Haraldr
the Hard-ruler, King of Norway (1046-66), and Sveinn Ulfsson, King
of Denmark (1047-76), when the two countries were at war (c. 1062-
64). Both monarchs are depicted as generous, magnanimous men, but
Audunn was shrewd enough to see which would give the greater reward
for his precious bear. For all his generosity, King Haraldr was
known to be ruthless and grasping. What the writer had in mind may
have been a character-comparison of the two kings and the
description of "one of the luckiest of men", about whom the
translator, G. Turville-Petre says: "Audunn himself, in spite of his
shrewd and purposeful character, is shown as a pious man, thoughtful
of salvation, and richly endowed with human qualities, affection for
his patron and especially for his mother. The story is an optimistic
one, suggesting that good luck may attend those who have good
morals." II


The Icelanders have never waged war against any nation. But in the
thirteenth century they were engaged in a civil war which ended in
their submitting to the authority of the Norwegian king in the
sixties (this authority was transferred to the King of the Danes in
1380). It is interesting that, during the next few decades after
this capitulation, saga-writing seems to reach a climax as an art,
in family sagas like Njals saga, "one of the great prose works of
the world" (W. P. Ker). It is as if the dangers of civil war and the
experiences gained in times of surrender had created in the authors
a kind of inner tension--as if their maturity had found full
expression in the security of peace. However, with the first
generation born in Iceland in subjection, the decline of saga-
writing seems to begin. This can hardly be a mere coincidence. On
the contrary it was brought about by a number of different factors. Subsequently, in the fourteenth century, saga-writing becomes for
the most part extinct. From c. 1400-1800 there is hardly any prose
fiction at all. Hence the fact that several centuries remain
unrepresented in this work (though the gap might have been reduced
to four or five centuries had literary-historical considerations
alone been allowed to influence the present selection). But the sagas continued to be copied and read. After the setting up
of the first printing press (c. 1530), and after the Reformation (c.
1550), religious literature grew much in bulk, both translations
(that of the Bible was printed in 1584) and original works, and a
new kind of historical writing came into being. Side by side with
scholars, we have self-educated commoners who wrote both prose and,
especially, poetry. In Iceland, being a "poet" has never been considered out of the
ordinary. On the contrary, a person unable to make up a verse or two
would almost be considered exceptional. Yet, this requires
considerable skill as the Icelanders are the only nation that has
preserved the ancient common Germanic alliteration (found in all
Germanic poetry till late medieval times). We frequently find this
device accompanied by highly complicated rhyme schemes. Despite this
rather rigid form, restrictive perhaps, yet disciplinary in its
effect, exquisite poetry has nevertheless been produced. This
poetry, however, is not within the scope of this introduction. Suffice it to say that from what exists of their verse it is clear
that poets have been active at all times since the colonization of
the country. It is this uninterrupted flow of poetry that above all
has helped to preserve the language and the continuity of the
literary tradition. During the centuries we have been discussing--especially, however,
the seventeenth--the Icelanders probably wrote more verse than any
other nation has ever done--ranging in quality, to be sure, from the
lowest to the highest. When, in the sixteenth century, they had got
paper to take the place of the more expensive parchment, they could
universally indulge in copying old literature and writing new, an
opportunity which they certainly made use of. It was their only
luxury--and, at the same time, a vital need. We have said that the Icelanders had never waged war against any
other people. But they have had to struggle against foreign rulers,
and against hardships caused by the nature of their country. After
the Reformation, the intervention of the Crown greatly increased,
and, at the same time, its revenues from the country. A Crown
monopoly of all trade was imposed (in 1602). Nature joined forces
with mismanagement by the authorities; on the seas surrounding the
island pack-ice frequently became a menace to shipping, and there
also occurred unusually long and vicious series of volcanic
eruptions. These culminated in the late eighteenth century (1783),
when the world's most extensive lava fields of historical times were
formed, and the mist from the eruption was carried all over Europe
and far into the continent of Asia. Directly or indirectly as a
consequence of this eruption, the greater part of the live-stock,
and a fifth of the human population of the country perished. Still the people continued to tell stories and to compose poems. No
doubt the Icelanders have thus wasted on poetical fantasies and
visionary daydreams much of the energy that they might otherwise
have used in life's real battle. But the greyness of commonplace
existence became more bearable when they listened to tales of the
heroic deeds of the past. In the evening, the living-room
(baethstofa), built of turf and stone, became a little more cheerful,
and hunger was forgotten, while a member of the household read, or
sang, about far-away knights and heroes, and the banquets they gave
in splendid halls. In their imagination people thus tended to make
their environment seem larger, and better, than life, as did Hrolfur
with his fishing-boat in the story When I was on the Frigate. III


About 1800, things began to improve. The monopoly of trade, which
had been relaxed in 1787, was finally abolished in 1854. In the year
1874 Iceland got self-government in its internal affairs, and in
1904 its first minister of state with residence in the country. It
became a sovereign kingdom in union with Denmark in 1918, and an
independent republic in 1944. The climate of the country has improved during the last hundred and
fifty years, though there were a number of severe years in the
eighteen eighties. It was at this time that emigration to the North-
American Continent reached a peak, especially to Canada, where one
of the settlements came to be called New Iceland--the title given to
the last story in this book. Many of these emigrants suffered great
hardships, and, as the story tells, several of them became
disillusioned with the land of promise. Their descendants, however,
have on the whole done well in the New World. Until recently, the Icelanders were almost entirely a nation of
farmers, and the majority of the stories in this collection contain
sketches of country life. A certain amount of perseverance and even
obstinacy was needed for a farmer's life on an island skirting the
Arctic Circle (The Old Hay). Only about a quarter of the country is
fit for human habitation, mainly the districts along the coast. The
uplands, for the most part made up of mountains, glaciers, sand-
deserts, and lava, are often awe-inspiring in their grandeur. Nevertheless it would be wrong to exaggerate the severity of the
land. In many places the soil is fertile, as is often the case in
volcanic countries, and--thanks to the Gulf Stream, which flows up
to the shores of the island--the climate is a good deal more
temperate than one might suppose (the average annual temperatures in
Reykjavik are 4-5 deg. Centigrade). Besides, the surrounding sea makes up for the barrenness of the
country by having some of the richest fishing banks in the world. Hence, in addition to being farmers, the Icelanders have always been
fishermen who brought means of sustenance from the sea--usually in
primitive open boats like those described in When I was on the
Frigate and Father and Son. In the late nineteenth century decked
vessels came into use besides the open boats, succeeded by steam
trawlers at the beginning of the present century. For the last few
decades, the Icelanders have been employing a modern fishing fleet,
and, at the time of writing, fishery products constitute more than
ninety per cent of the country's exports. With the growth of the fisheries and commerce there began to spring
up towards the end of the nineteenth century a number of trading
villages in different parts of the country. Reykjavik, the only
municipality of fairly long standing and by far the biggest one, had
at the turn of the present century a population of only between six
and seven thousand--now about eleven times that number. We catch
glimpses of these small trading stations at the beginning of the
twentieth century in A Dry Spell and Father and Son. Nowadays, four fifths of the population live in villages and
townships--where some light industry has sprung up--and, in
Reykjavik alone, more than two fifths of the population are
concentrated. In the last fifty years, the occupations of the people and their
culture have changed from being in many respects medieval, and have
assumed modern forms. The earlier turfbuilt farmhouses have now been
replaced by comfortable concrete buildings which get their
electricity from a source of water power virtually inexhaustible. Many of these,--e. g. the majority of houses in Reykjavik--are
heated by water from hot springs, so that the purity of the northern
air is seldom spoilt by smoke from coal-fires. The reliable
Icelandic pony--so dear to the farmer in New Iceland, and for long
known as "a man's best friend"--has now for the most part come to
serve the well-to-do who can afford to use it for their joy-rides,
its place in farmwork being taken by modern agricultural machinery. As a means of travel it has been replaced by a host of motorcars,
and by aeroplanes, which in Iceland are as commonly used in going
from one part of the country to another as railway trains in other
countries. In fact, it has not been found feasible to build railways
in Iceland. Besides this, a large number of airliners make daily use
of Icelandic airfields on transatlantic flights. What with most
other nations has been a slow and gradual process lasting several
centuries, has in Iceland come about in more or less a revolutionary
way. It is therefore not to be wondered at that there should have
been a certain instability in the development of the urban and
economic life of the country. In this field, however, there appear
to be signs of consolidation. Foreigners who come to this country in search of the old saga-island
are sometimes a little disappointed at finding here, in place of
saga-tellers and bards, a modern community, with its own university,
a national theatre, and a symphony orchestra. Be this as it may,
literature still holds first place among the arts and cultures. A
collection of books is indeed considered as essential a part of a
home as the furniture itself. For such visitors, there may be some
consolation in the fact that in some places they may have quite a
job in spotting the grocer's among the bookshops. IV


In literature there had, especially in poetry, been a continuity
from the very beginnings. Yet, in the field also, the early
nineteenth century saw the dawn of a new age. The Romantic Movement
was here, as elsewhere, accompanied by a national awakening, so that
literature became the herald and the principal motive force of
social improvement. There was at the same time a new drive for an
increased beauty of language and refinement of style, where the
classical, cultivated, literary language and the living speech of
the time merged. With Romanticism there also emerged poets of so
great merit that only a few such had come forward since the end of
the saga period. But henceforward--let's take as our point of
departure the second quarter of the nineteenth century--each
generation in the country has indeed produced some outstanding
literary works, comparable in quality with the accomplishments of
the ancient classical Edda and saga periods. During this new golden age, several literary tendencies and genres
may be observed. But Romanticism remained the most lasting and
potent literary force for about a century. However, one of the
characteristics of the Icelandic literature of later ages is the
infrequent manifestation of literary trends in their purest and most
extreme forms. Here the stabilizing and moderating influence of the
ancient sagas has, without doubt, been at work. In most cases this
middle course may be said to have been beneficial to the literature. But the saga-literature may also well have had a restraining
influence on later authors in so far as it set a difficult standard
to be emulated. It is probably here that the principal explanation
of the late re-emergence of prose fiction is to be sought. It was
not until about the middle of the nineteenth century that modern
short stories, novels and plays began to be written on anything like
a scale worthy of note. The earliest of these were romantic in
spirit, though most of them had a realistic tinge. With Realism, the
short story came into its own in the eighties and nineties of the
last century. This trend came like a fresh current to take its place
side by side with Romanticism, without, however, ousting it from the
literary scene. But owing to the realistic technique and the tragic
endings of much in the ancient literature--Eddaic poetry and sagas
alike--Realism was never the novel force it generally was felt to be
elsewhere. Still, it brought social criticism into our literature. This was introduced through the activity of young literary-minded
students who, while studying at the University of Copenhagen, had
become full of enthusiasm for Georg Brandes and his school. One of these young men was Einar H. Kvaran (1859-1938), a
clergyman's son from the North, who, after beginning as a student of
politics, soon turned his attention to literature and journalism. He
became editor of Icelandic newspapers in Canada (1885-95), and,
later, in Iceland, mainly in Reykjavik. His chief preoccupation,
however, became the composition of short stories and novels, and
besides these he also wrote some plays and poetry. The delicacy and
the religious bent of his nature could not for long remain the soil
for the satirical asperity and materialism of the realist school,
though his art was always marked by its technique. As he advanced in
years, brotherhood and forgiveness became an evergrowing element in
his idealism, and he became the first bearer of the spiritualist
message in this country. With his stories he had a humanizing
influence on his times, especially in the education of children, and
in the field of culture he remained actively interested right up to
a ripe old age. If somewhat lacking in creative fervour and
colourful raciness of style, he made up for it by the abundance of
his intelligence, his humanity and culture. He wrote A Dry Spell (Ethurrkur) at the beginning of the present
century, when he had disengaged himself from the strongest influence
of Realism, but before moral preaching and the belief in the life
hereafter had become the leading elements in his stories. He had
then, for a few years, been living in the north-country town of
Akureyri, which obviously provides the model for the setting of the
story. It was first printed in the 1905 issue of the periodical
Skirnir. In addition to the travelled, academic realists, there appeared a
group of self-educated popular writers, some of whom had come into
direct contact with this foreign school. They were farmers, even in
the more remote country districts, who had read the latest
Scandinavian literature in the original, and who wrote stories
containing radical social satire. Guethmundur Friethjonsson, for
instance, had begun his career in this way. In many of these
authors, however, we find rather a sort of native realism, where
there is not necessarily a question of the influence of any
particular literary tendency. Their works sprang out of the native
environment of the authors, whose vision, despite a limited horizon,
was often vivid. They convey true impressions of real life. Of this kind are most of the works of Guethmundur Friethjonsson
(1869-1944), a radical who later turned to conservatism--and the
best works of Jon Trausti (1873-1918). These, who had their debut as
writers about the turn of the century, are the authors of the next
two stories in our collection. Both were North-countrymen. The
former, a farmer's son from a district enjoying a high standard of
culture, himself settled down as a farmer in his native locality in
order to earn a living for his large family. In his youth he had
attended a secondary school in the neighbourhood for a couple of
winters, but he never had his experiences enriched by foreign travel
and was during the whole of his life anchored to his native region. Jon Trausti, the son of a farm labourer and his wife, who had been
born on one of the northernmost farms in Iceland in a barren and
outlying district, was brought up in dire poverty. From an early age
he had had to fend for himself as a farmhand and fisherman, finally
settling in Reykjavik as a printer. Apart from his apprenticeship
with the printers, he never went to any sort of school (school
education was first made compulsory by law in Iceland in 1907); but
on two occasions he had travelled abroad. These energetic persons became widely read, especially in Icelandic
literature, and wrote extensively under difficult circumstances:--in
fact all the modern authors represented in the present book may be
said to have been prolific as writers. Guethmundur Friethjonsson was
equally versatile as a writer of short stories and poems. He has a
rich command of imagery and diction, and his style, at times a
little pompous, is often powerful though slightly archaic in
flavour. The ancient heroic literature doubtless fostered his manly
ideas, which, however, sprang from his own experience in life. One
must, he felt, be hard on oneself, and on one's guard against the
vanity of newfangled ideas and against the enervating effect of
civilization. It is in the nature of things that with this farmer
and father of a family of twelve, assiduity, prudence, and self-
discipline should be among the highest virtues. This is notably
apparent in The Old Hay (Gamla heyieth), which he wrote in 1909, and
which was published in Tolf soegur (Twelve stories) in 1915. Jon Trausti (pseudonym of Guethmundur Magnusson) is best known as
the author of novels and short stories on contemporary and
historical themes, but he also wrote plays and poems. He was endowed
with fertile creative powers and the ability to draw vivid sketches
of environment and character. At times, however, he lacks restraint,
especially in his longer novels. Still, his principal work, The
Mountain Cot (Heietharbylieth)--one of the longest cycles in
Icelandic fiction--is his greatest. The little outlying mountain cot
becomes a separate world in its own right, a coign of vantage
affording a clear view of the surrounding countryside where we get
profound insight into human nature. Like the bulk of his best work,
this novel has a foundation in his own experiences. In reading the
story by him included in this volume, the reader may find it helpful
to bear in mind Trausti's early life as a fisherman. What he
attempts to show us there is a kind of inner reality--an offset to
reality. When I was on the Frigate (Þegar eg var a fregatunni)
first published in Skirnir for 1910. Jon Trausti and Einar H. Kvaran--who between them form an
interesting contrast--were the most prolific novelists at the
beginning of the present century. By that time prose was becoming an
increasingly important part of Icelandic literature. It would be
more or less true to say that in the first thirty years of the
century it had gained an equal footing with poetry. For the last
thirty years, however, prose has taken first place, after poetry had
constituted the backbone of Icelandic literature for six hundred
years, or since the end of saga-writing. But there were several writers who felt that the small reading
public at home in Iceland gave them too little scope. So they
emigrated, mostly to Denmark, and in the early decades of the
century began to write in foreign languages, though the majority
continued simultaneously to write in the vernacular. Pioneers in
this field were the dramatist Johann Sigurjonsson (1880-1919), and
the novelist Gunnar Gunnarsson (b. 1889). Both of these wrote in
Danish as well as in Icelandic. Early in the second decade of the
century three of this overseas group produced works that were
accorded immediate acclaim, and which have since become classics,
being widely translated into foreign languages. These were Eyvind of
the Hills (Fjalla-Eyvindur) by Johann Sigurjonsson; The Borg Family
(Borgaraettin, in English Guest the One-eyed) by Gunnar Gunnarsson;
and Nonni, Erlebnisse eines jungen Islaenders, the first of the
famous children's books by the Jesuit monk Jon Sveinsson (Jon
Svensson, 1857-1944). With these works modern Icelandic literature
won for the first time a place for itself among the living
contemporary literatures of the world. Since then, Iceland's
contribution has been steady, not only in the works of those who
wrote in foreign languages, but equally--and during the last couple
of decades exclusively--in vernacular writing. In fact, with the
return to his native country of Gunnar Gunnarsson in 1939, the vogue
of writing in foreign languages virtually came to an end. On his arrival in Iceland Gunnarsson had settled in his native east-
country district though he afterwards moved to Reykjavik, where he
now lives. Indeed he possesses many of the best qualities of the
gentleman-farmer--firmness, tenacity of purpose, and a craving for
freedom in his domain,--combined with a writer's imaginative and
narrative powers and understanding of humanity. He often describes
human determination and man's struggle with destiny, especially in
his historical novels, which are set in most periods of Icelandic
history. More moving, perhaps, are his novels on contemporary
themes. The greatest among these is the cycle The Church on the
Mountain (Fjallkirkjan; of the five novels making up this sequence,
three have been translated into English under two titles, Ships in
the Sky and The Night and the Dream). This is one of the major works
of Icelandic literature--containing a fascinating world of fancy,
invention, and reality. It is the story of the development of a
writer who leaves home in order to seek the world. One of the best
known stories in all Icelandic literature is his masterly short
novel Advent or The good Shepherd (Aethventa).--Father and Sam
Feethgarnir) was first published in the periodical Eimreiethin in
1916. The present version, with slight changes, is that found in the
author's collected works, Rit XI, 1951. Most Icelandic writers have, of course, written in the vernacular
only, in spite of longer or shorter stay abroad. This applies to the
last two authors represented here, both of whom appeared on the
literary scene about 1920. Guethmundur G. Hagalin (b. 1898) comes from the sea-girt Western
Fiords, where he was a fisherman before attending secondary school. Later, he lectured on Iceland in Norway for a few years (1924-27),
and is now a superintendent of public libraries. His home is in the
neighbourhood of Reykjavik. In his novels, and more particularly in
his short stories, he is at his best in his portrayals of the simple
sturdy seamen and countryfolk of his native region, which are often
refreshingly arch in manner. Hagalin, who is a talented narrator,
frequently succeeds in catching the living speech and characteristic
mode of expression of his characters. The Fox Skin (Tofuskinnieth)
first appeared in 1923, in one of his collections of short stories
(Strandbuar).--He has also been successful as a recorder and editor
of the biographies of greatly different people, based on first-hand
accounts of their own lives. He is at present continuing with the
writing of his autobiography--a long and interesting work. Halldor Kiljan Laxness was born in 1902 in Reykjavik. Shortly
afterwards his parents established themselves on a farm in the
neighbourhood where he was brought up, and where he has now built
himself a home. He is a patriot and, at the same time, a
cosmopolitan who has probably travelled more extensively abroad than
any other of his fellow-countrymen. After becoming a Catholic at the
age of twenty, he spent a year in monasteries abroad, but had
already begun to waver in his Catholicism when he first visited
America, where he stayed from 1927 to 1930. During those years he
became more and more radical in his social beliefs. Already in his
first year there, he wrote the short story New Iceland (Nyja
Island), which was immediately published in Heimskringla, an
Icelandic weekly in Winnipeg. The story thus dates from an early
period, when his art was in process of great development. Indeed, the nineteen twenties saw important changes in our
literature. The last of the great nineteenth century poets were
vanishing from the literary scene, their places being taken by
others, whose poetry, though hardly as profound and lofty in
conception, was more lyrical and simple in manner, with greater
delicacy and refinement of form. Especially in the prose-writing of
the period, there were signs of flourishing growth. Gunnar
Gunnarsson wrote The Church on the Mountain, and Laxness was
becoming known. In the early thirties he appears as a fully mature
writer in Salka Valka, a political love story from a fishing
village, and Independent People (Sjalfstaett folk), a heroic novel
about the stubbornness and the lot of the Icelandic mountain farmer,
both of which have appeared in English translations. Laxness has
devoted less attention to the writing of plays and poetry than
novels and short stories. Two among his greatest works are the novel
sequences The Light of the World (Heimsljos)--about a poet-genius
who never reaches maturity--, and The Bell of Iceland
(Islandsklukkan), a historical novel describing a political,
cultural and human struggle. On the whole, the subject-matter of his
stories is extremely varied, equally as regards time, place and
human types. However, the greatest variety will probably be found in
his style, which he constantly adapts to suit the subject. Behind
all this lies a fertile creativeness which rarely leaves the reader
untouched. No matter where in the wide world his stories may be set,
they always stand in some relation to his people--though, at the
same time, he usually succeeds in endowing them with universal
values shared by common humanity. To achieve this has from early on
been Laxness' aim; thus the first printed version of New Iceland
contains the sub-heading: "An international proletarian story." When this introduction was being written, a new novel by him, Heaven
Reclaimed (Paradisarheimt) was published (1960), which, like his
early short story, is set partly in America--this time among the
Icelandic Mormons of Utah. Here, the man who goes out across half
the world in quest of the millennium is in the end led back to his
origins. Laxness was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1955. Tke University of Iceland, Reykjavik. Steingrimur J. Þorsteinsson. ANONYMOUS

THE STORY OF AUDUNN AND THE BEAR

EARLY 13TH CENTURY

I


There was a man called Audunn; he came of a family of the Western
Firths, and was not well off. Audunn left Iceland from the Western
Firths with the assistance of Thorsteinn, a substantial farmer, and
of Thorir, a ship's captain, who had stayed with Thorsteinn during
the winter. Audunn had been on the same farm, working for Thorir,
and as his reward he got his passage to Norway under Thorir's care. Audunn had set aside the greater part of his property, such as it
was, for his mother, before he took ship, and it was determined that
this should support her for three years. Now they sailed to Norway and had a prosperous voyage, and Audunn
spent the following winter with the skipper Thorir, who had a farm
in Moerr. The summer after that, they sailed out to Greenland,
where they stayed for the winter. It is told that in Greenland, Audunn bought a white bear, a
magnificent beast, and paid for him all he had. Next summer they
returned to Norway, and their voyage was without mishap. Audunn
brought his bear with him, intending to go south to Denmark to visit
King Sveinn, and to present the beast to him. When he reached die
south of Norway and came to the place where the King was in
residence, Audunn went ashore, leading his bear, and hired lodgings. King Haraldr was soon told that a bear had been brought to the
place, a magnificent creature, belonging to an Icelander. The King
immediately sent men to fetch Audunn, and when he entered the King's
presence, Audunn saluted him as was proper. The King acknowledged
the salute suitably and then asked:

Is it true that you have a great treasure, a white bear? Audunn answered and said that he had got a bear of some sort. The King said: Will you sell him to us for the price you paid for
him? Audunn answered: I would not care to do that, my Lord. Will you then, said the King, have me pay twice the price? That
would be fairer if you gave all you had for him. I would not care to do that, my Lord, answered Audunn, but the King
said:

Will you give him to me then? No, my Lord, answered Audunn. The King asked: What do you mean to do with him then?--and Audunn
answered: I mean to go south to Denmark and give him to King Sveinn. Can it be that you are such a fool, said King Haraldr, that you have
not heard about the war between these two countries? Or do you think
your luck so good that you will be able to bring valuable
possessions to Denmark, while others cannot get there unmolested,
even though they have pressing business? Audunn answered: My Lord, that is for you to decide, but I shall
agree to nothing other than that which I had already planned. Then the King said: Why should we not have it like this, that you go
your own way, just as you choose, and then visit me on your way
back, and tell me how King Sveinn rewards you for the bear? It may
be that luck will go with you. I will promise you to do that, said Audunn. Audunn now followed the coast southward and eastward into the Vik,
and from there to Denmark, and by that time every penny of his money
had been spent, and he had to beg food for himself as well as for
the bear. He called on one of King Sveinn's stewards, a man named
Aki, and asked him for some provisions, both for himself and for his
bear.--I intend, said he, to give the bear to King Sveinn. Aki said that he would sell him some provisions if he liked, but
Audunn answered that he had nothing to pay for them,--but yet, said
he, I would like to carry out my plan, and to take the beast to the
King. Aki answered: I will supply such provisions as the two of you need
until you go before the King, but in exchange I will have half the
bear. You can look at it in this way: the beast will die on your
hands, since you need a lot of provisions and your money is spent,
and it will come to this, that you will have nothing out of the
bear. When Audunn considered this, it seemed to him that there was some
truth in what the steward had said, and they agreed on these terms:
he gave Aki half the bear, and the King was then to set a value on
the whole. Now they were both to visit the King, and so they did. They went
into his presence and stood before his table. The King wondered who
this man could be, whom he did not recognize, and then said to
Audunn: Who are you? Audunn answered: I am an Icelander, my Lord, and I came lately from
Greenland, and now from Norway, intending to bring you this white
bear. I gave all I had for him, but I have had a serious setback, so
now I only own half of the beast.--Then Audunn told the King what
had happened between him and the steward, Aki. The King asked: Is that true, what he says, Aki? True it is, said Aki. The King said: And did you think it proper, seeing that I had placed
you in a high position, to let and hinder a man who had taken it on
himself to bring me a precious gift, for which he had given all he
had? King Haraldr saw fit to let him go his way in peace, and he is
no friend of ours. Think, then, how far this was honest on your
part. It would be just to have you put to death, but I will not do
that now; you must rather leave this land at once, and never come
into my sight again. But to you, Audunn, I owe the same gratitude as
if you were giving me the whole of the bear, so now stay here with
me. Audunn accepted the invitation and stayed with King Sveinn for a
while. II


After some time had passed Audunn said to the King: I desire to go
away now, my Lord. The King answered rather coldly: What do you want to do then, since
you do not wish to stay with us? Audunn answered: I wish to go south on a pilgrimage. If you had not such a good end before you, said the King, I should
be vexed at your desire to go away. Now the King gave Audunn a large sum of silver, and he travelled
south with pilgrims bound for Rome. The King arranged for his
journey, asking him to visit him when he came

Audunn went on his way until he reached the city of Rome in the
south. When he had stayed there as long as he wished, he turned
back, and a severe illness attacked him, and he grew terribly
emaciated. All the money which the King had given him for his
pilgrimage was now spent, and so he took up his staff and begged his
food. By now his hair had fallen out and he looked in a bad way. He
got back to Denmark at Easter, and went to the place where the King
was stationed. He dared not let the King see him, but stayed in a
side-aisle of the church, intending to approach the King when he
went to church for Nones. But when Audunn beheld the King and his
courtiers splendidly arrayed, he did not dare to show himself. When the King went to drink in his hall, Audunn ate his meal out of
doors, as is the custom of Rome pilgrims, so long as they have not
laid aside their staff and scrip. In the evening, when the King went
to Vespers, Audunn intended to meet him, but shy as he was before,
he was much more so now that the courtiers were merry with drink. As
they were going back, the King noticed a man, and thought he could
see that he had not the confidence to come forward and meet him. But
as the courtiers walked in, the King turned back and said:

Let the man who wants to meet me come forward; I think there must be
someone who does. Then Audunn came forward and fell at the feet of the King, but the
King hardly recognized him. As soon as he knew who he was, he took
Audunn by the hand and welcomed him:--You have changed a lot since
we met last,--he said, and then he led Audunn into the hall after
him. When the courtiers saw Audunn they laughed at him, but the King
said:

There is no need for you to laugh at this man, for he has provided
better for his soul than you have. The King had a bath prepared for Audunn and then gave him clothes,
and now he stayed with the King. III


It is told that one day in the spring the King invited Audunn to
stay with him for good, and said he would make him his cup-bearer,
and do him great honour. Audunn answered: May God reward you, my Lord, for all the favours
you would show me, but my heart is set on sailing out to Iceland. The King said: This seems a strange choice to me,--but Audunn
answered: My Lord, I cannot bear to think that I should be enjoying
high honour here with you, while my mother is living the life of a
beggar out in Iceland. For by now, all that I contributed for her
subsistence before I left Iceland, has been used up. The King answered: That is well spoken and like a man, and good
fortune will go with you. This was the one reason for your departure
which would not have offended me. So stay with me until the ships
are made ready for sea.--And this Audunn did. One day towards the end of spring King Sveinn walked down to the
quay, where men were getting ships ready to sail to various lands,
to the Baltic lands and Germany, to Sweden and Norway. The King and
Audunn came to a fine vessel, and there were some men busy fitting
her out. The King asked:

How do you like this ship, Audunn? Audunn answered: I like her well, my Lord. The King said: I will give you this ship and reward you for the
white bear. Audunn thanked the King for his gift as well as he knew how. After a time, when the ship was quite ready to sail, King Sveinn
said to Audunn:

If you wish to go now, I shall not hinder you, but I have heard that
you are badly off for harbours in your country, and that there are
many shelterless coasts, dangerous to shipping. Now, supposing you
are wrecked, and lose your ship and your goods, there will be little
to show that you have visited King Sveinn and brought him a precious
gift. Then the King handed him a leather purse full of silver: You will
not be altogether penniless, said he, even if you wreck your ship,
so long as you can hold on to this. But yet it may be, said the
King, that you will lose this money, and then it will be of little
use to you that you have been to see King Sveinn and given him a
precious gift. Then the King drew a ring from his arm and gave it to Audunn,
saying: Even if it turns out so badly that you wreck your ship and
lose your money, you will still not be a pauper if you reach land,
for many men have gold about them in a shipwreck, and if you keep
this ring there will be something to show that you have been to see
King Sveinn. But I will give you this advice, said the King, do not
give this ring away, unless you should feel yourself so much
indebted to some distinguished man--then give the ring to him, for
it is a fitting gift for a man of rank. And now farewell. IV


After this Audunn put to sea and made Norway, and had his
merchandise brought ashore, and that was a more laborious task than
it had been last time he was in Norway. Then he went into the
presence of King Haraldr, wishing to fulfil the promise he had given
him before he went to Denmark. Audunn gave the King a friendly
greeting, which he accepted warmly. Sit down, said the King, and drink with us, and so Audunn did. Then
King Haraldr asked: What reward did King Sveinn give you for the
bear? Audunn answered: This, my Lord, that he accepted him from me. I would have given you that, said the King, but what else did he
give you? Audunn said: He gave me silver to make a pilgrimage to Rome, but
King Haraldr said:

King Sveinn gives many people silver for pilgrimages and for other
things, even if they do not bring him valuable gifts. What more did
he do for you? He offered to make me his cup-bearer and to give me great honours. That was a good offer, said the King, but he must have given you
still more. Audunn said: He gave me a merchantman with a cargo of wares most
profitable for the Norway trade. That was generous, said the King, but I would have rewarded you as
well as that. Did he give you anything else? Audunn said: He gave me a leather purse full of silver, and said
that I would still not be penniless if I kept it, even if my ship
were wrecked off Iceland. The King said: That was magnificent, and more than I should have
done. I would have thought my debt discharged if I had given you the
ship. Did he give you anything else? Certainly he gave me something else, my Lord, said Audunn; he gave
me this ring which I am wearing on my arm, and said that I might
chance to lose all my property, and yet not be destitute if I had
this ring. But he advised me not to part with it unless I were under
such an obligation to some noble man that I wished to give it to
him. And now I have come to the right man, for it was in your power
to take from me both my bear and my life, but you allowed me to go
to Denmark in peace when others could not go there. The King received the gift graciously and gave Audunn fine presents
in exchange before they parted. Audunn laid out his merchandise on
his voyage to Iceland, and sailed out that same summer, and people
thought him the luckiest of men. From this man Audunn was descended Thorsteinn Gyduson. [Footnote:
Thorsteinn Gyduson was drowned in the year 1190. Unless
interpolated, the allusion to him shows that the story was written
after that date.] EINAR H. KVARAN

A DRY SPELL


It had rained for a fortnight--not all the time heavily, but a fog
had sullenly hung about the mountain tops, clinging to the
atmosphere and rendering the whole of existence a dull gray colour. Every little while it would discharge a fine drizzle of rain or a
heavy shower down upon the hay and everything else on earth, so that
only the stones would occasionally be dry--but the grass never. We were tired of the store--indeed, I should like to know who would
have enjoyed it. It dated back to the beginning of the last century,
a tarred, coal-black, ramshackle hut. The windows were low and
small, the windowpanes diminutive. The ceiling was low. Everything
was arranged in such a way as to exclude the possibility of lofty
flights of thought or vision. Just now, not a living soul looked in--not even those thriftless
fellows who lived by chance jobs in the village and met in daily
conclave at the store. We had often cursed their lengthy visits, but
now that they had hired themselves out during the haymaking, we
suddenly realized that they had often been entertaining. They had
made many amusing remarks and brought us news of the neighbourhood. And now we cursed them for their absence. We sat there and smoked, staring vacantly at the half-empty shelves,
and all but shivering in the damp room. There was no heater in the
store at any season, and the one in the office, if used, emitted
spurts of smoke through every aperture except the chimney. It had
not been cleaned since sometime during winter, and we were not
ambitious enough for such an undertaking in the middle of the
summer. We tried to transfer our thoughts from the store to the world
outside. We made clever comments to the effect that the farmers were
now getting plenty of moisture for the hay-fields, and that it would
be a pity if rain should set in now, right at the beginning of the
haying season. We had nothing further to say on the subject, but
this we repeated from day to day. In short, we were depressed and at
odds with things in general. Until the dry spell. One morning, about nine o'clock, the bank of fog began to move. First, there appeared an opening about the size of your hand, and
through it the eastern sky showed a bright blue. Then another
opening, and through it shone the sun. We knew what this was called, and we said to each other: Merely a
'morning promise'--implying, nothing reliable. But it was more. The
fog began to show thinner and move faster along the mountain ridge
opposite. Then it gathered in a deep pass and lay there heaped up
like newly carded, snowy wool. On either side, the mountains loomed
a lovely blue, and in their triumph ignored the fog almost
completely. When we ventured a look through the doorway of the
store, there was nothing to be seen overhead save the clear, blue
sky and the sunshine. On the opposite shore of the fjord, the people looked to us like the
cairns out on the moorlands, only these tiny cairns moved in single
file about the hay-fields. I seemed to smell the sweet hay in the
homefields, but of course this was only my imagination. I also
fancied I could hear the maids laughing, especially one of them. I
would willingly have sacrificed a good deal to be over there helping
her dry the hay. But of this subject no more; I did not intend to
write a love story--at least, not in the ordinary sense of the word. The dry spell lasted. We, the clerks, took turns at staying out of
doors as much as possible, and 'drinking deeply of the golden fount
of sunshine'. In the afternoon of the third day, I dropped in at the doctor's. I
felt somewhat weary with walking--and idleness--and looked forward
to the doctor's couch and conversation. A cigar? asked the doctor. Yes, a cigar, I answered. I have smoked only six today. Beer or whisky and water? queried the doctor. A small whisky, I replied. I lit my cigar, inhaling deeply of its fragrance--then exhaling
through mouth and nostrils. I sighed with contentment; the cigar was
excellent. Then we began to drink the whisky and water at our leisure. I
reclined against the head of the couch, stretched out my feet, was
conscious of a luxurious sensation--and sent my thoughts for a
moment across the fjord, where they preferred to remain. The doctor was in high spirits. He talked about the Japanese and
Russians, the most recently discovered rays, and the latest
disclosures on how is felt to die. My favourite pastime is to listen to others speaking. I never seem
able to think of any topics worthy of conversation myself, but I am
almost inclined to say that my ability to listen amounts to an art. I can remain silent with an air of absorbing interest, and once in a
while offer brief comment, not to set forth an opinion or display
any knowledge--for I have none to spare--but merely to suggest new
channels to the speaker and introduce variety, that he may not tire
of hearing himself speak. I felt extremely comfortable on the couch. I thought it particularly
entertaining to hear the doctor tell how it felt to die. There is
always something pleasantly exciting about death--when it is
reasonably far away from you. It seemed so beautifully far away from
the perfume of the tobacco-smoke, the flavour of whisky, and the
restfulness of the couch, and when my mind wandered to her across
the fjord--as wander it would in spite of my studied attention--then
death seemed so far off shore that I could scarcely follow the
description of how it felt to others to die. In the midst of this dreamy contentment and deluge of information
from the doctor, the door was somewhat hastily thrown open. I was
looking the other way and thought it must be one of the doctor's
children. But it was old man Thordur from the Bend. I knew him well. He was over fifty, tall and large-limbed, with a
hoary shock of hair and a snub nose. I knew he had a host of
children--I had been at his door once, and they had run, pattered,
waddled, crept, and rolled through the doorway to gape at me. It had
seemed as hopeless to try to count them as a large flock of sheep. I
knew there was no income except what the old man and woman--and
possibly the elder children--managed to earn from day to day. My
employer in Copenhagen had strictly forbidden us to give credit to
such--and of course he now owed us more than he would ever be able
to pay. He does not even knock--the old ruffian, I said to myself. From his appearance, something was wrong. His face was unnaturally
purplish, his eyes strangely shiny--yet dull withal. It even seemed
to me that his legs shook under him. Can it be that the old devil is tipsy--at the height of the haying
season--and dry weather at that? I mentally queried. The doctor evidently could not recall who he was. Good-day to you, my man, he said, and what matter have you in hand? I merely came to get those four crowns. Which four crowns? asked the doctor. Thordur raised his voice: The four crowns you owe me. It was now evident that it was difficult for him to remain standing. I felt assured that the old rascal had been drinking like a fish. I
was surprised. I had never heard he was inclined that way. He lived
out there on the hillside a short distance above the village. I
began to wonder where he had been able to obtain so much liquor--
certainly not from us at the store. What is your name? asked the doctor. My name? Don't you know my name? Don't you know me?--Thordur--
Thordur of the Bend. I should best of all like to get the money at
once. Yes, that's so--you are Thordur of the Bend, said the doctor. And
you are up? But listen, my good man, I owe you nothing. You owe me a
small sum--but that does not matter in the least. I care nothing about that, but I should best of all like to get the
money at once, repeated Thordur. May I feel your hand for a minute? said the doctor. Thordur extended his hand, but it seemed to me that he did not know
it. He looked off into space, as if thinking of other things--or
rather as if he had no thoughts whatever. I saw the doctor's fingers
on his wrist. You are a sick man, he said. Sick?--Yes--of course I am sick. Am I then to pay you four crowns? I
haven't got them now. It makes no difference about those four crowns, but why did you get
up like this? Have you forgotten that I ordered you to remain in bed
when I saw you the other day? In bed?--How the devil am I to remain in bed? Tell me that! You must not get up in this condition. Why, you are delirious! What a fool you are--don't you know that there is a dry spell. Yes, I AM aware of the dry spell.--It was evidently not quite clear
to him what that had to do with the case.--Have a chair, and we will
talk it over. A chair? No!--Who, then, should dry the hay in the homefield? I had
some of it cut when I was taken down--why do you contradict me? And
the youngsters have made some attempts at it--but who is to see
about drying it?--Not Gudrun--she can't do everything. The
youngsters?--what do they know about drying hay?--Who, then, is to
do it?--Are YOU going to do it? Something will turn up for you, said the doctor, somewhat at a loss. Something will turn up? Nothing has ever turned up for ME. Cold shivers passed through me. His remark rang true: I knew that
nothing had ever turned up for him. I felt faint at looking into
such an abyss of hopelessness. Instantly I saw that the truth of
this delirious statement concerned me more than all the wisdom of
the ages. Do I get those four crowns you owe me?--Thordur asked. He was now
trembling so that his teeth chattered. The doctor produced four crowns from his purse and handed them to
him. Thordur laid them on the table and staggered towards the door.-
-You are leaving your crowns behind, man, said the doctor. I haven't got them now, said Thordur, without looking back and still
making his way towards the door.--But I'll pay them as soon as I
can. Isn't there a vacant bed upstairs at the store? inquired the doctor. Yes, I answered. We will walk with you down to the store, Thordur. Walk with me?--Be damned!--I am off for the hay-field. We followed him outside and watched him start out. After a short
distance he tumbled down. We got him upstairs in the store. A few days later he could have told us, if anyone had been able to
communicate with him, whether they are right or wrong, those latest
theories on how it feels to die. --But who dries the hay in his homefield now? Guethmundur Friethjonsson

THE OLD HAY


During the latter part of the reign of King Christian the Ninth,
there lived at Holl in the Tunga District a farmer named Brandur. By
the time the events narrated here transpired, Brandur had grown
prosperous and very old--old in years and old in ways. The
neighbours thought he must have money hidden away somewhere. But no
one knew anything definitely, for Brandur had always been reserved
and uncommunicative, and permitted no prying in his house or on his
possessions. There was, however, one thing every settler in those
parts knew: Brandur had accumulated large stores of various kinds. Anyone passing along the highway could see that. Brandur usually had some hay remaining in lofts and yards when
spring came, and, besides, there was the immense stack that stood on
a knoll out in the homefield before the house. It had been there for
many years and was well protected against wind and weather by a
covering of sod. Brandur had replenished the hay, a little at a
time, by using up that from one end only and filling in with fresh
hay the following summer. Brandur was hospitable to such guests as had business with him, and
refused to accept payment for food or lodging; but very few people
ever came to see him, and these were mostly old friends with whom he
had financial dealings. Brandur was willing to make loans against
promissory notes and the payment of interest. There were not many to
whom he would entrust his money, however, and he never lost a penny. Whenever these callers came, he would bring out the brandy bottle. The buildings at Holl were all in a tumble-down state; the furniture
was no better. There wasn't a chair in the whole house; even the
baethstofa had only a dirt floor, and it was entirely unsheathed on
the inside except for a few planks nailed on the wall from the bed
up as far as the rafters. The clock was the sole manufactured
article in the room. But friends of the old man knew that underneath
his bed he kept a fairly large carved wooden chest, bearing the
inscription anno 1670. The chest was heavy and was always kept
locked. Only the nearest of kin had ever seen its contents. Brandur was not considered obliging; it was very difficult to get to
see him. Yet he was willing to sell food at any time for cash; hay,
too, as long as there was still some remaining in his lofts. He
would also sell hay against promises of lambs, especially wethers,
once it was certain that the cold of winter was past. But his old
haystack he refused to touch for anyone. In this way Brandur stumbled down the pathway of life until he lost
his sight. Even then, he was still sound in mind and body. While his
vision remained unimpaired, it had been his habit to walk out to the
old haystack every day and stroll around it slowly, examining it
carefully from top to bottom and patting it with his hands. This
habit he kept up as long as the weather permitted him to be
outdoors, and he did not give it up even after his sight was gone. He would still take his daily walk out to the haystack on the knoll,
drag himself slowly around it, groping with his hands to feel it, as
if he wished to make sure that it still stood there, firm as a rock
and untouched. He would stretch out his hands and touch its face and
count the strips of turf to himself in a whisper. Brandur still tilled the land, though he kept but little help and
was living chiefly on the fruits of his former labours. He had fine
winter pastures, and good meadows quite near the house, from which
the hay could easily be brought in. The old man steadfastly refused
to adopt modern farming methods; he had never levelled off the
hummocks, nor drained or irrigated the land. But he did hire a few
harvest hands in the middle of the season, paying them in butter,
tallow, and the flesh of sheep bellies. The wages he paid were never
high, yet he always paid whatever had been agreed upon. Old Brandur had been blessed with only one child, a daughter named
Gudrun. who had married a farmer in the district. Since his
daughter's marriage, Brandur kept a housekeeper and one farm hand, a
young man whom Brandur had reared and who, it was rumoured, was his
natural son. But that has nothing to do with the story. When Brandur had reached a ripe old age, there came a winter with
much frost and snow. Time and again, some of the snow and ice would
thaw, but then a hard frost would come, glazing everything in an icy
coating. This went on until late in April. By that time, almost
every farmer in the district had used up his hay; every one of them
was at the end of his store, and nowhere was there a blade of grass
to feed the live-stock, for the land still lay frozen under its
blanket of hard-packed snow and ice. When things had come to this
pass, a general district meeting was called to discuss the situation
and decide what should be done. Brandur's son-in-law Jon was made
chairman of the meeting. During the discussion it was brought to light that many of the
flocks would die of hunger unless 'God Almighty vouchsafed a turn in
the weather very soon', or Old Brandur could be induced to part with
his old hay. That stack would help, if properly divided among those
who were in greatest need. The quantity of hay it contained was
estimated, and the general opinion expressed that, if it were
divided, the flocks of every farmer in the district could be fed for
at least two weeks, even if they could not in that time be put out
to pasture. Jon being chairman of the District Council, as well as Brandur's
son-in-law, it fell to his lot to go to the old man and ask for the
hay. So it came about that, on his way home from the meeting, Jon stopped
at Holl. The day was cold and clear, the afternoon sun shining down
upon the snow-covered landscape. The icy blanket turned back the
rays of warmth as if it would have nothing to do with the sun. But
wherever rocks and gravelly banks protruded, the ice appeared to be
peeled off, for in those spots the sun's rays had melted it, though
only at mid-day and on the south. All streams and waterfalls
slumbered in silence under the snowy blanket. A chill silence
reigned over the whole valley. Not a bird was to be seen, not even a
snow bunting, only two ravens which kept flying from farmhouse to
farmhouse, and even their cawing had a hungry note. When Jon rode up to the house at Holl, he found Brandur out by the
haystack. The old man was carefully groping his way around the
stack, feeling it on all sides and counting the strips of turf in so
loud a voice that Jon could hear him: O-n-e, t-w-o, three. Jon dismounted and, going over to Brandur, saluted him with a kiss. How are you? God bless you, said Brandur. And who may this be? Jon of Bakki, replied the visitor.--Gudrun sends greetings. Ah, yes. And how is my Gunna? Is she well? She was well when I left home this morning. Now I am on my way back
from the meeting that was held to discuss the desperate situation--
you must have heard about it. Yes, certainly. I've heard about it. I should say so! One can't get
away from talk of hay shortage and hard times. That is quite true. Any other news? Nothing worth mentioning, answered Jon. Nothing but the general hard
times and hay shortage. Every farmer at the end of his tether, or
almost there, no one with as much as a wisp of hay to spare, and
only a few likely to make out till Crouchmas without aid. Too bad! said Brandur. Too bad! And he blew out his breath, as
though suffocating from strong smoke or bad air. For a while there was silence, as if each mistrusted the other and
wondered what was in the air. Brandur stood there with one hand
resting on the haystack, while he thrust the other into his trousers
pocket, or underneath the flap of his trousers. He always wore the
old-fashioned trousers with a flap, in fact had never possessed any
other kind. Meanwhile, holding the reins, Jon stood there gazing at
the hay and making a mental estimate of it. Then he turned to his
father-in-law and spoke:

The purpose of my visit to you, my dear Brandur, is to ask that you
let us have this hay--this fine old hay that you have here. The
District Council will, of course, pay you; the parish will guarantee
payment. We have discussed that matter fully. When Jon ceased speaking, Brandur blew the air from his mouth in
great puffs, as though deeply stabbed by a sharp pain in the heart. For a while he held his peace. Then he spoke:

Not another word! Not another word! What's this I hear? My hay for
the district? My hay to supply all the farmers in the district? Do
you think for one moment that this little haystack is enough to feed
all the flocks in the whole district? Do you think this tiny haycock
will be enough for a whole parish? I think not! But we have calculated it, protested Jon. We have estimated that the
hay in this stack will be enough to feed the flocks in the district
for about two weeks, if a little grain is used with it, and if the
hay is distributed equally among the farmers who need it most. There
may be enough for three weeks, should it turn to be as much as or
more than I expect. By that time, we surely hope, the season will be
so far advanced that the weather will have changed for the better. So! You have already estimated the amount of hay in my stack! said
Brandur. You have already divided this miserable haycock among
yourselves, divided it down to the very last straw. And you have
weighed it almost to a gram. Then why speak to me about it? Why not
take it just as it is and scatter it to the four winds? Why not?--
The voice of the old man shook with anger. No, said Jon. We will not do that. We want to ask your permission
first. We had no intention of doing otherwise; we intended to ask
you for the hay. And we did not mean to vex you, but rather to
honour you in this manner. Is it not an honour to be asked to save a
whole district from ruin? Oh, so all this is being done to honour me! said the old man,
roaring with laughter. Perhaps you believe me to be in my second
childhood. Not at all! Old Brandur can still see beyond the tip of
his nose. The cold-heartedness shown by the old man's laughter at the distress
of his fellowmen roused Jon's ire. He could see nothing laughable
about the desperate situation in the district. Are you then going to refuse to let us have the hay, refuse to sell
it at full price, with the Parish Council guaranteeing payment? he
asked in a tone that was angry, yet under perfect control?--Is that
your final answer? Yes, responded Brandur. That is my final answer. I will not let the
tiny mouthful of hay I have here go while there is still life in my
body, even though you mean to insure payment, and even though you
actually do guarantee payment. After all, who among you will be in a
position to guarantee payment if all the flocks die? The cold
weather may not let up until the first of June or even later. In
that case the sheep will all die. It won't go very far, this tiny
haycock, not for so many. It will not, I tell you. But what are you going to do with the hay? If everyone else loses
his flocks, everyone but you, what enjoyment will there be in owning
it? And what benefit? asked Jon. That does not concern me! replied the old man. That concerns them. It was they who decided the size of the flocks they undertook to
feed this winter, not I. Besides, they could have cut as much hay as
I did, even more, for they still have their eyesight. Their failure
is due to their own laziness and bad judgment. That's what ails
them! Ruins them! But you won't be able to take this great big haystack with you into
the life eternal, said Jon. The time is coming when you will have to
part with it. Then it will be used as the needs require. And what
good will it do you? What are you going to do with it? I am going to keep it, answered Brandur. I intend to keep it right
here on the knoll, keep it in case the haying should be poor next
summer. There may be a poor growth of grass and a small hay crop;
there may be a volcanic eruption and the ashes may poison the grass,
as they have done in former years. Now, do you understand me? So saying, Brandur tottered off towards the house to indicate that
the conversation was at an end. His countenance was as cold as the
sky in the evening after the sun has set, and the hard lines in it
resembled the streaks in the ice on rocks and ledges where the sun's
rays had shone that day and laid bare the frozen ground. Brandur entered the house, while Jon mounted again. They scarcely
said a word of farewell, so angry were they both. Jon's horse set off at a brisk pace, eager to reach home, and
galloped swiftly over the hard, frozen ground. After the sun had
gone down, the wind rose and a searing cold settled over the valley,
whitening Jon's moustache where his breath passed over it. Jon's anger grew as he sped along. Naturally hightempered, he had
lately had many reasons for anger since he took over his official
duties. The people in his district were like people the world over:
they blamed the Board constantly, accusing it of stupidity and
favouritism. Yet most of them paid their taxes reluctantly and only
when long overdue. Sometimes they were almost a year in arrears. Jon reviewed the matter of the hay in his mind, also the other
vexations of the past. He was sick and tired of all the trouble. And
now the life of the whole district hung on a thin thread, the fate
of which depended upon the whims of the weather. Jon's nose and
cheekbones smarted from the cold; his shoes were frozen stiff, and
pinched his feet, and his throat burned with the heat of anger
rising from his breast. Jon was rather quiet when he reached home that evening, although he
did tell his wife of his attempt to deal with her father. Yes, said Gudrun, papa sets great store by that hay. He cannot bear
to part with it at any price. That is his nature. Tomorrow you must go, Jon told her, and try to win the old man over
in some way. I'd hate to be obliged to take the hay from him by
force, but that will be necessary if everything else fails. The following day Gudrun went to see her father. The weather still
remained cold. When Gudrun dismounted before the house at Holl,
there was no one outside to greet her or announce her arrival, and
so she entered, going straight into the baethstofa. There she found
her father sitting on his bed, knitting a seaman's mitten, crooning
an old ditty the while:

     Far from out the wilderness
      Comes raging the cold wind;
      And the bonds of heaven's king
      It doth still tighter bind. Gudrun leaned over her father and kissed him. Is that you, Gunna dear? he asked. Yes papa, she said, at the same time slipping a flask of brandy into
the bosom of his shirt. This greatly pleased the old man. Gunna dear, he said, you always bring me something to cheer me up. Not many nowadays take the trouble to cheer the old man. No indeed. Any news? It's so long since you have been to see me, a year or
more. No news everyone hasn't heard: hard times, shortage of hay, and
worry everywhere. That is only to be expected. It's been a hard
winter, the stock stall-fed for so long, at least sixteen weeks, on
some farms twenty. Quite true, said Brandur. It's been a cold winter, and the end is
not yet. The cold weather may not break up before the first of June,
or even Midsummer Day. The summer will be cold, the hay crop small,
and the cold weather will probably set in again by the end of
August, then another cold hard winter, and ... He meant to go on, foretelling yet worse things to come, but Gudrun
broke in: Enough of that, father. Things can't be as bad as that It
would be altogether too much. I hope for a change for the better
with the new moon next week, and mark you, the new moon rises in the
southwest and on a Monday; if I remember right, you always thought a
new moon coming on a Monday brought good weather. I did, conceded Brandur. When I was a young man, a new moon coming
on a Monday was generally the very best kind of moon. But like
everything else, that has changed with the times. Now a Monday new
moon is the worst of all, no matter in what quarter of the heavens
it appears, if the weather is like this--raging sad carrying on so;
that is true. But things are in a pitiful state, said Gudrun, what with the hay
shortage, almost everyone is badly off, and not a single farmer with
a scrap of hay to spare, except you, papa. Yes, I! answered Brandur. I, a poor, blind, decrepit old man! But
what of you? Jon has enough hay, hasn't he? How is that? Doesn't he
have enough? Yes, we do have enough for ourselves, admitted Gudrun. But we can't
hold onto it. Jon lends it to those in need until it is all gone and
there is none left for us. He thinks of others as well as of
himself. What nonsense! What sense is there in acting like that? Every man
for himself, said the old man. That's right. But for us that is not enough. Jon is in a position
where he must think of others; he has to think of all the farmers in
the district--and small thanks he gets for his pains. He is so
upset, almost always on tenterhooks. He didn't sleep a wink last
night--was almost beside himself. He takes it so hard. So Jon couldn't sleep a wink last night! repeated Brandur. Why be so
upset? Why lie awake nights worrying about this? That doesn't help
matters any. It isn't his fault that they are all on the brink of
ruin. Quite true, answered Gudrun. He is not to blame for that, and lying
awake nights doesn't help matters, but that is Jon's disposition. He's tired to death of all the work for the Council and the
everlasting fault-finding. He has had to neglect his own farm since
he took up these public duties--and nothing for his time and
trouble. Now this is too much. He is dead tired of it all, and so am
I. In fact, I know it was worry about all this that kept Jon awake
last night. We have been thinking of getting away from it all when
spring comes and going to America. Do you side with him in this? asked Brandur, grasping his daughter
by the arm. Do you, too, agree to his giving away the hay you need
for your own flocks, giving it away until you haven't enough for
yourselves? Do you, too, want to go to America, away from your
father who now has one foot in the grave? Yes, I do, Gudrun replied. As a matter of fact, the plan was
originally mine. If our flocks die, there will be no alternative;
but if our sheep live and those of the neighbours die, our life will
not be worth living because of the poverty and want round about us. Yes, papa, it was I suggested our going. I could see no other way
out. On hearing this, Brandur's mood softened somewhat. I expected to be
allowed to pass my last days with you and your children, he said. I
cannot go on living in this fashion any longer. Pass your last days with us! exclaimed Gudrun. Have you, then,
thought of leaving Holl? Have you planned to come and live with us? You've never said a word of this to me. I have no intention of leaving Holl. That I have never meant to do. But that is not necessary. I thought you might perhaps be willing to
move over here and live with me. I could then let you have what
miserable little property I have left, Gunna, my dear. And what about the hay, papa? Will you turn the hay over to us, the
hay in the old stack? Everything depends on that. The hay! The hay! the old man said. Still harping on the hay--the
hay which doesn't amount to anything and cannot be of any real help. It's sheer nonsense to think that the hay in that stack is enough to
feed the flocks of a whole district. There is no use talking about
it I will not throw that tiny mouthful to all the four winds. It
will do no good if divided among so many, but it is a comfort to me,
to me alone. No, I will not part with it as long as there is a spark
of life in me. That I will not, my love. Brandur turned pale and the lines in his face became hard and rigid. Looking at him, Gudrun knew from experience that he was not to be
shaken in his determination when in this mood. His face was like a
sky over the wilderness streaked with threatening storm clouds. Gudrun gave up. The tears rushed to her eyes, as she twined her arms
around her father's neck and said: Goodbye, papa. Forgive me if I
have angered you. I shall not come here again. The old man felt the teardrops on his face, the heavy woman's tears,
hot with anger and sorrow. Gudrun dashed out of the room and mounted. Brandur was left alone in
the darkness at mid-day. Yet in his mind's eye he could see the
haystack out on the knoll. He rose and went out to feel it. It was
still there. Gudrun had not ridden away with it. Brandur could hear
the horseshoes crunching the hard, frozen ground as Gudrun rode off. He stood motionless for a long time, listening to the hoof beats. Then he went into the house. Brandur felt restless. He paced the floor awhile, stopped for a
moment to raise to his lips the flask his daughter had brought him,
and drained it at one gulp. All that day he walked the floor,
fighting with himself until night fell. Then he sent his foster-son with a message to his daughter. Jon, he
said, had his permission to haul the hay away the very next day, but
it was all to be removed in one day; there was not to be a scrap of
hay or a lump of sod left by evening. But the weather changes quickly, says an old Icelandic adage. By
morning, the weather had turned its spindle and the wind shifted to
the south. Jon sent no message to anyone, nor did he proclaim that
the old hay was available. He first wished to see what the thaw
would amount to. By the following day, the whole valley was
impassable because of slush and water, and the patches of earth
appearing through the snowy blanket grew larger almost hourly. Meanwhile, Brandur roamed through the house all day long, asking if
anyone had come.--Aren't they going to take away these miserable hay
scraps? About time they came and got them!--He seemed eager that the
hay be removed at once. That day he did not take his usual walk out to the stack to feel the
hay. In fact, after that no one ever saw him show attachment to the
old hay. His love of it seemed to have died the moment he granted
his son-in-law permission to take it away. That spring Brandur gave up housekeeping and of his own volition
turned over the farm to his daughter and son-in-law. With them he
lived to enjoy many years of good health. Never again did he take
his daily walk out to the haystack to feel the hay. But he was able
to take his sip of brandy to his dying day and repeat to himself the
word of God--hymns and verses from the Bible. Now he has passed on to eternity. But his memory lives like a stone-
-a large, moss-covered stone by the wayside. Jon TRAUSTI

WHEN I WAS ON THE FRIGATE


I was stormbound in the fishing village. I had come there by
steamer, but now the steamer was gone and I was left behind there, a
stranger, at a loss what to do. My idea was to continue my journey overland, and my route lay for
the most part through the mountainous country on the other side of
the fjord. I hadn't managed to hire horses or a guide, and it was no
easy matter to find one's own way in such stormy weather when the
rivers were running in full flood. This was in the spring-time,
round about the beginning of May. I was staying at the home of the local doctor, who had given me
shelter and who was now trying to help me in every way he could. He
was in my room with me, and we were both sitting there, smoking
cigars and chatting together. I had given up all hope of continuing
my journey that day and was making myself comfortable on the
doctor's sofa. But when we least expected it, we heard the sound of
heavy sea-boots clumping along the corridor, and there was a knock
at the door. Come in, said the doctor. The door opened slowly, and a young man in
seamen's clothes stood in the doorway. I was asked to tell you that old Hrolfur from Weir will take that
chap over there across in his boat, if he likes, said the man,
addressing himself to the doctor. We both stood up, the doctor and I, and walked towards the door. That possibility hadn't occurred to either of us. Is old Hrolfur going fishing then? asked the doctor. Yes, he's going out to the islands and staying there about a week. It won't make any difference to him to slip ashore at Muladalir, if
it would be any help. That's fine, said the doctor, turning to me. It's worth thinking
over, unless you really need to go round the end of the fjord. It'll
save you at least a day on your journey, and it'll be easier to get
horses and a man in Muladalir than it is here. This was all so unexpected that I didn't quite know what to say. I
looked at the doctor and the stranger in turn, and my first thought
was that the doctor was trying to get rid of me. Then it occurred to
me what a fine thing it would be to avoid having to cross all those
rivers which flow into the head of the fjord. Finally I decided that
the doctor had no ulterior motive and that his advice was prompted
by sheer goodwill. Is old Hrolfur all right at the moment? the doctor asked the man in
the doorway. Yes, of course he is, said the man. All right? I said, looking at them questioningly. I thought that was
a funny thing to ask. The doctor smiled. He's just a bit queer--up here, he said, pointing to his forehead. The thought of having to set out on a long sea journey with a man
who was half crazy made me shudder. I am certain, too, that the
doctor could see what I was thinking, for he smiled good-naturedly. Is it safe to go with him then? I asked. Oh yes, quite safe. He's not mad, far from it. He's just a bit
queer--he's got 'bats in the belfry', as men say. He gets these
attacks when he's at home in the dark winter days and has nothing to
occupy him. But there's little sign of it in the summer. And he's a
first-class seaman. Yes, a first-class seaman who never fails, said the man in the
doorway. It's quite safe to go on board with him now. You can take
my word for that. Are you going with him? asked the doctor. Yes, there's a crew of three with him. There'll be four of us in the
boat altogether. I looked at the man in the doorway--he was a young man of about
twenty, promising and assured. I liked the look of him, very much. Secretly I began to be ashamed of not daring to cross the fjord with
three men such as he, even though the skipper was 'a bit queer in
the head'. Are you going to-day? said the doctor. Don't you think it's blowing
a bit hard? I don't think old Hrolfur'll let that bother him, said the man and
smiled. Can you use your sails? Yes, I think so--there's a fair wind. It was decided that I should go with them. I went to get ready as
quickly as possible, and my luggage, saddle and bridle, were carried
down to the boat. The doctor walked to the jetty with us. There, in the shelter of the breakwater, was old Hrolfur's boat, its
mast already stepped, with the sail wrapped round it. It was a four-
oared boat, rather bigger than usual, tarred all over except for the
top plank, which was painted light blue. In the boat were the
various bits of equipment needed for shark-fishing, including a
thick wooden beam to which were attached four hooks of wrought iron,
a keg of shark-bait which stank vilely, and barrels for the shark's
liver. There were shark knives under the thwarts and huge gaffs
hooked under the rib-boards. The crew had put the boxes containing
their food and provisions in the prow. In the stern could be seen the back of a man bending down. He was
arranging stones in the well of the boat. He was dressed in overalls
made of skin, which reached up to his armpits and which were
fastened by pieces of thin rope crossing over his shoulders. Further
forward there was a second man, and a third was up on the jetty. Good day to you, Hrolfur, said the doctor. Good day to you, grunted Hrolfur as he straightened himself up and
spat a stream of yellowish-brown liquid from his mouth. Hand me that
stone over there. These last words were addressed not to the doctor or me, but to the
man on the jetty. Hrolfur vouchsafed me one quick, unfriendly
glance, but apart from that scarcely seemed to notice me. The look
in those sharp, haunting eyes went through me like a knife. Never
before had anyone looked at me with a glance so piercing and so full
of misgiving. He was a small man, and lively, though ageing fast. The face was
thin, rather wrinkled, dark and weather-beaten, with light untidy
wisps of hair round the mouth. I was immediately struck by a curious
twitching in his features, perhaps a relic of former bouts of
drinking. Otherwise his expression was harsh and melancholy. His
hands were red, swollen and calloused as if by years of rowing. Don't you think it's blowing rather hard, Hrolfur? asked the doctor
after a long silence. Oh, so-so, answered Hrolfur, without looking up. Again there was silence. It was as if Hrolfur had neither time nor
inclination for gossiping, even though it was the district medical
officer talking to him. The doctor looked at me and smiled. I was meant to understand that
this was exactly what he had expected. After another interval the doctor said: You are going to do this
traveller a favour then, Hrolfur? Oh, well, the boat won't mind taking him. In other words, I was to be nothing but so much ballast. Don't you think it's going to be tricky landing there in Mular
Creek? Hrolfur straightened up, putting his hand to his back. Oh, no, damn it, he said. There's an offshore wind and the sea's not
bad, and anyway we'll probably get there with the incoming tide. It isn't going to take you out of your way? I asked. We won't argue about that. We'll get there all the same. We often
give ourselves a rest in the old creek when we have to row. Immediately afterwards I said good-bye to the doctor and slid down
into the boat. The man on the jetty cast off, threw the rope down
into the boat and jumped in after it. One of the crew thrust the handle of an oar against the breakwater
and pushed off. Then they rowed for a short spell to get into the
wind, whilst old Hrolfur fixed the rudder. The sail filled out; the boat heeled gently over and ran in a long
curve. The islets at the harbour mouth rushed past us. We were
making straight for the open bay. On the horizon before us the mountainous cliffs, dark blue with a
thick, ragged patch of mist at the top, towered steeply over the
waves. In between, the sea stretched out, seemingly for miles. Hrolfur was at the rudder. He sat back in the stern on a crossbeam
flush with the gunwale, his feet braced against the ribs on either
side and in his hands the rudder lines, one on each side, close to
his thighs. I was up with the crew near the mast. We all knew from experience
that Icelandic boats sailed better when well-loaded forward. All
four of us were lying down on the windward side, but to leeward the
foam still bubbled up over the rowlocks. If you think we're not going fast enough, lads, you'd better start
rowing--but no extra pay, said old Hrolfur, grinning. We all took his joke well, and I felt that it brought me nearer to
the old man; up to then I'd been just a little scared of him. A joke
is always like an outstretched hand. For a long time we hardly spoke. In front of the mast we lay in
silence, whilst old Hrolfur was at the stern with the whole length
of the boat between us. The crew did all they could to make me comfortable. I lay on some
soft sacking just in front of the thwart and kept my head under the
gunwale for protection. The spray from the sea went right over me
and splashed down into the boat on the far side. The boy who had come for me to the doctor's settled himself down in
the bows in front of me. His name was Eric Ericsson, and the more I
saw of him the more I liked him. The second member of the crew sat crosswise over the thwart with his
back to the mast. He too was young, his beard just beginning to
grow, red-faced, quiet and rather indolent-looking. He seemed
completely indifferent, even though showers of spray blew, one after
another, straight into his face. The third member of the crew lay down across the boat behind the
thwart; he put a folded oilskin jacket under his head and fell
asleep. For a long time, almost an hour, I lay in silence, thinking only of
what I saw and heard around me. There was more than enough to keep
me awake. I noticed how the sail billowed out, full of wind, pulling hard at
the clew-line, which was made fast to the gunwhale beside Hrolfur. The fore-sail resembled a beautifully curved sheet of steel, stiff
and unyielding. Both sails were snow-white, semi-transparent and
supple in movement, like the ivory sails on the model ships in
Rosenborg Palace. The mast seemed to bend slightly and the stays
were as taut as fiddle-strings. The boat quivered like a leaf. The
waves pounded hard against the thin strakes of the boat's side. I
could feel them on my cheek, though their dampness never penetrated;
but in between these hammer blows their little pats were wonderfully
friendly. Every now and then I could see the white frothing of the
wave-crests above the gunwale, and sometimes under the sail the
horizon was visible but, more often, there was nothing to be seen
but the broad back of a wave, on which, for a time, the boat tossed
before sinking down once more. The roll was scarcely noticeable, for
the boat kept at the same angle all the time and cleft her way
through the waves. The motion was comfortable and soothing to the
mind; quite unlike the violent lunging of bigger ships. Gradually the conversation came to life again. It was Eric who
proved to be the most talkative, though the man on the thwart also
threw in a word here and there. We began to talk about old Hrolfur. We spoke in a low voice so that he shouldn't hear what we said. There was, indeed, little danger of his doing so--the distance was
too great and the storm was bound to carry our words away; but men
always lower their voices when they speak of those they can see,
even though they are speaking well of them. My eyes scarcely left old Hrolfur, and as the men told me more, my
picture of him became clearer and clearer. He sat there silent, holding on to the steering ropes and staring
straight ahead, not deigning us a single glance. The crew's story was roughly this. He was born and bred in the village, and he had never left it. The
croft which he lived in was just opposite the weir in the river
which flowed through the village, and was named after it. He went to sea whenever possible; fished for shark in the spring and
for cod and haddock in the other seasons. He never felt so happy as
when he was on the sea; and if he couldn't go to sea, he sat alone
at home in the croft mending his gear. He never went down to the
harbour for work like the other fishermen and never worked on the
land. Humming away and talking to himself he fiddled about in his
shed, around his boat-house or his croft, his hands all grubby with
tar and grease. If addressed, he was abrupt and curt in his answers,
sometimes even abusive. Hardly anyone dared go near him. Yet everyone liked him really. Everyone who got to know him said
that he improved on acquaintance. His eccentricity increased as he
grew older, but particularly after he had lost his son. His son was already grown-up and had been a most promising young
fellow. He was thought to be the most daring of all the skippers in
the village and always went furthest out to sea; he was also the
most successful fisherman of them all. But one day a sudden storm
had caught them far out to sea, well outside the mouth of the fjord. Rowing hard, in the teeth of wind and tide, they managed to reach
the cliffs, but by that time they were quite exhausted. Their idea
had been to land at Mular Creek, but unfortunately their boat
overturned as they tried to enter. Hrolfur's son and one other on
board had been drowned, though the rest were saved. After the disaster Hrolfur ignored everybody for a long time. It
wasn't that he wept or lost heart. Perhaps he had done so for the
first few days, but not afterwards. He just kept to himself. He took
not the slightest notice of his wife and his other children, just as
if they were no longer his concern. It was as though he felt he'd
lost everything. He lived all alone with his sorrow and talked of it
to no one. Nobody tried to question him; no one dared try to comfort
him. Then, one winter, he started talking to himself. Day and night, for a long time, he talked to himself, talked as
though two or more men were chatting together, changing his tone of
voice and acting in every way as though he were taking part in a
lively and interesting conversation. There was nothing silly in what
he said, although the subject matter was often difficult to follow. He would always answer if anyone spoke to him, slowly to be sure,
but always sensibly and agreeably. Often, before he could answer, it
was as though he had to wake up as from a sleep, and yet his work
never suffered from these bouts of absentmindedness. He never talked about his son. The conversations he held with
himself were mostly concerned with various adventures he thought had
befallen him; some were exaggerated, others pure invention. Sometimes he would talk of things he was going to do in the future,
or things he would have done or ought to have in the past, but never
about the present. It wasn't long before the rumour spread that old Hrolfur was crazy,
and for a long time hardly anyone dared to go to sea with him. Now, that's all a thing of the past, said Eric and smiled. Nowadays
there are always more who would like to go with him than he can
take. And does he catch plenty of fish? Yes, he rarely fails. Isn't he quite well-off then? I don't know. At any rate he's not dependent on anyone else, and
he's the sole owner of his boat and tackle. He's rolling in money, the old devil, said the man at the mast,
wiping the spray from his face with his hand. Then they began to tell me about Mular Island and the life they
would lead there in the coming week. The island was a barren rock beyond the cliffs, and, in the autumn
storms, was almost covered by the waves. The first thing they'd have
to do, when they arrived, was to rebuild their refuge from the year
before, roof it over with bits of driftwood and cover them with
seaweed. That was to be their shelter at night, no matter what the
weather. Nature had provided a landing-place, so that they'd no
trouble with that, though the spot was so treacherous that one of
them would have to stand watch over the boat every night. Each evening they would row off from the island with their lines to
some well-known fishing bank, for it was after midnight that the
shark was most eager to take the bait. Savouring in his nostrils the
smell of horse flesh soaked in rum and of rotten seal blubber, he
would rush on the scent and greedily swallow whatever was offered. When he realised the sad truth that a huge hook with a strong barb
was hidden inside this tempting dish and that it was no easy matter
to disgorge the tasty morsel, he would try to gnaw through the shaft
of the hook with his teeth. Very occasionally he might succeed, but
usually his efforts failed. Attached to the hook was a length of
strong iron chain; and sometimes, though defeated by the hook, he
would manage to snip through the chain. 