



Produced by Geoffrey Cowling









WHILE THE BILLY BOILS

By Henry Lawson


[Transcriber's note: In 'A Day on a Selection' a speech is attributed to
"Tom"--in first edition as well as recent ones--which clearly belongs to
"Corney" alias "neighbour". This has been noted in loc.] CONTENTS


First Series


An Old Mate of Your Father's

Settling on the Land

Enter Mitchell

Stiffner and Jim (Thirdly, Bill)

When the Sun Went Down

The Man who Forgot

Hungerford

A Camp-fire Yarn

His Country--After All

A Day on a Selection

That There Dog of Mine

Going Blind

Arvie Aspinall's Alarm Clock

Stragglers

The Union Buries its Dead

On the Edge of a Plain

In a Dry Season

He's Come Back

Another of Mitchell's Plans

Steelman

Drifted Back

Remailed

Mitchell Doesn't Believe in the Sack

Shooting the Moon

His Father's Mate

An Echo from the Old Bark School

The Shearing of the Cook's Dog

"Dossing Out" and "Camping"

Across the Straits

Some Day

Brummy Usen



Second Series


The Drover's Wife

Steelman's Pupil

An Unfinished Love Story

Board and Residence

His Colonial Oath

A Visit of Condolence

In a Wet Season

"Rats"

Mitchell: A Character Sketch

The Bush Undertaker

Our Pipes

Coming Across

The Story of Malachi

Two Dogs and a Fence

Jones's Alley

Bogg of Geebung

She Wouldn't Speak

The Geological Spieler

Macquarie's Mate

Baldy Thompson

For Auld Lang Syne





FIRST SERIES




AN OLD MATE OF YOUR FATHER'S


You remember when we hurried home from the old bush school how we were
sometimes startled by a bearded apparition, who smiled kindly down on
us, and whom our mother introduced, as we raked off our hats, as "An
old mate of your father's on the diggings, Johnny." And he would pat
our heads and say we were fine boys, or girls--as the case may have
been--and that we had our father's nose but our mother's eyes, or the
other way about; and say that the baby was the dead spit of its mother,
and then added, for father's benefit: "But yet he's like you, Tom." It
did seem strange to the children to hear him address the old man by his
Christian name---considering that the mother always referred to him as
"Father." She called the old mate Mr So-and-so, and father called him
Bill, or something to that effect. Occasionally the old mate would come dressed in the latest city fashion,
and at other times in a new suit of reach-me-downs, and yet again he
would turn up in clean white moleskins, washed tweed coat, Crimean
shirt, blucher boots, soft felt hat, with a fresh-looking speckled
handkerchief round his neck. But his face was mostly round and brown
and jolly, his hands were always horny, and his beard grey. Sometimes
he might have seemed strange and uncouth to us at first, but the old
man never appeared the least surprised at anything he said or did--they
understood each other so well--and we would soon take to this relic of
our father's past, who would have fruit or lollies for us--strange that
he always remembered them--and would surreptitiously slip "shilluns"
into our dirty little hands, and tell us stories about the old days,
"when me an' yer father was on the diggin's, an' you wasn't thought of,
my boy." Sometimes the old mate would stay over Sunday, and in the forenoon or
after dinner he and father would take a walk amongst the deserted shafts
of Sapling Gully or along Quartz Ridge, and criticize old ground, and
talk of past diggers' mistakes, and second bottoms, and feelers, and
dips, and leads--also outcrops--and absently pick up pieces of quartz
and slate, rub them on their sleeves, look at them in an abstracted
manner, and drop them again; and they would talk of some old lead they
had worked on: "Hogan's party was here on one side of us, Macintosh was
here on the other, Mac was getting good gold and so was Hogan, and now,
why the blanky blank weren't we on gold?" And the mate would always
agree that there was "gold in them ridges and gullies yet, if a man only
had the money behind him to git at it." And then perhaps the guv'nor
would show him a spot where he intended to put down a shaft some
day--the old man was always thinking of putting down a shaft. And these
two old fifty-niners would mooch round and sit on their heels on the
sunny mullock heaps and break clay lumps between their hands, and lay
plans for the putting down of shafts, and smoke, till an urchin was sent
to "look for his father and Mr So-and-so, and tell 'em to come to their
dinner." And again--mostly in the fresh of the morning--they would hang about the
fences on the selection and review the live stock: five dusty skeletons
of cows, a hollow-sided calf or two, and one shocking piece of equine
scenery--which, by the way, the old mate always praised. But the
selector's heart was not in farming nor on selections--it was far away
with the last new rush in Western Australia or Queensland, or perhaps
buried in the worked-out ground of Tambaroora, Married Man's Creek, or
Araluen; and by-and-by the memory of some half-forgotten reef or lead
or Last Chance, Nil Desperandum, or Brown Snake claim would take their
thoughts far back and away from the dusty patch of sods and struggling
sprouts called the crop, or the few discouraged, half-dead slips which
comprised the orchard. Then their conversation would be pointed with
many Golden Points, Bakery Hill, Deep Creeks, Maitland Bars, Specimen
Flats, and Chinamen's Gullies. And so they'd yarn till the youngster
came to tell them that "Mother sez the breakfus is gettin' cold," and
then the old mate would rouse himself and stretch and say, "Well, we
mustn't keep the missus waitin', Tom!" And, after tea, they would sit on a log of the wood-heap, or the edge
of the veranda--that is, in warm weather--and yarn about Ballarat and
Bendigo--of the days when we spoke of being on a place oftener than at
it: _on_ Ballarat, _on_ Gulgong, _on_ Lambing Flat, on _Creswick_--and
they would use the definite article before the names, as: "on The Turon;
The Lachlan; The Home Rule; The Canadian Lead." Then again they'd
yarn of old mates, such as Tom Brook, Jack Henright, and poor Martin
Ratcliffe--who was killed in his golden hole--and of other men whom
they didn't seem to have known much about, and who went by the names of
"Adelaide Adolphus," "Corney George," and other names which might have
been more or less applicable. And sometimes they'd get talking, low and mysterious like, about "Th'
Eureka Stockade;" and if we didn't understand and asked questions, "what
was the Eureka Stockade?" or "what did they do it for?" father'd say:
"Now, run away, sonny, and don't bother; me and Mr So-and-so want to
talk." Father had the mark of a hole on his leg, which he said he got
through a gun accident when a boy, and a scar on his side, that we saw
when he was in swimming with us; he said he got that in an accident in a
quartz-crushing machine. Mr So-and-so had a big scar on the side of his
forehead that was caused by a pick accidentally slipping out of a loop
in the rope, and falling down a shaft where he was working. But how was
it they talked low, and their eyes brightened up, and they didn't look
at each other, but away over sunset, and had to get up and walk about,
and take a stroll in the cool of the evening when they talked about
Eureka? And, again they'd talk lower and more mysterious like, and perhaps
mother would be passing the wood-heap and catch a word, and asked:

"Who was she, Tom?" And Tom--father--would say:

"Oh, you didn't know her, Mary; she belonged to a family Bill knew at
home." And Bill would look solemn till mother had gone, and then they would
smile a quiet smile, and stretch and say, "Ah, well!" and start
something else. They had yarns for the fireside, too, some of those old mates of our
father's, and one of them would often tell how a girl--a queen of the
diggings--was married, and had her wedding-ring made out of the gold
of that field; and how the diggers weighed their gold with the new
wedding-ring--for luck--by hanging the ring on the hook of the scales
and attaching their chamois-leather gold bags to it (whereupon she
boasted that four hundred ounces of the precious metal passed through
her wedding-ring); and how they lowered the young bride, blindfolded,
down a golden hole in a big bucket, and got her to point out the drive
from which the gold came that her ring was made out of. The point of
this story seems to have been lost--or else we forget it--but it was
characteristic. Had the girl been lowered down a duffer, and asked to
point out the way to the gold, and had she done so successfully, there
would have been some sense in it. And they would talk of King, and Maggie Oliver, and G. V. Brooke, and
others, and remember how the diggers went five miles out to meet the
coach that brought the girl actress, and took the horses out and brought
her in in triumph, and worshipped her, and sent her off in glory, and
threw nuggets into her lap. And how she stood upon the box-seat and tore
her sailor hat to pieces, and threw the fragments amongst the crowd; and
how the diggers fought for the bits and thrust them inside their shirt
bosoms; and how she broke down and cried, and could in her turn have
worshipped those men--loved them, every one. They were boys all, and
gentlemen all. There were college men, artists, poets, musicians,
journalists--Bohemians all. Men from all the lands and one. They
understood art--and poverty was dead. And perhaps the old mate would say slyly, but with a sad, quiet smile:

"Have you got that bit of straw yet, Tom?" Those old mates had each three pasts behind them. The two they told each
other when they became mates, and the one they had shared. And when the visitor had gone by the coach we noticed that the old man
would smoke a lot, and think as much, and take great interest in the
fire, and be a trifle irritable perhaps. Those old mates of our father's are getting few and far between, and
only happen along once in a way to keep the old man's memory fresh, as
it were. We met one to-day, and had a yarn with him, and afterwards we
got thinking, and somehow began to wonder whether those ancient friends
of ours were, or were not, better and kinder to their mates than we of
the rising generation are to our fathers; and the doubt is painfully on
the wrong side. SETTLING ON THE LAND


The worst bore in Australia just now is the man who raves about getting
the people on the land, and button-holes you in the street with a little
scheme of his own. He generally does not know what he is talking about. There is in Sydney a man named Tom Hopkins who settled on the land once,
and sometimes you can get him to talk about it. He did very well at his
trade in the city, years ago, until he began to think that he could do
better up-country. Then he arranged with his sweetheart to be true to
him and wait whilst he went west and made a home. She drops out of the
story at this point. He selected on a run at Dry Hole Creek, and for months awaited the
arrival of the government surveyors to fix his boundaries; but they
didn't come, and, as he had no reason to believe they would turn up
within the next ten years, he grubbed and fenced at a venture, and
started farming operations. Does the reader know what grubbing means? Tom does. He found the
biggest, ugliest, and most useless trees on his particular piece of
ground; also the greatest number of adamantine stumps. He started
without experience, or with very little, but with plenty of advice
from men who knew less about farming than he did. He found a soft
place between two roots on one side of the first tree, made a narrow,
irregular hole, and burrowed down till he reached a level where the
tap-root was somewhat less than four feet in diameter, and not quite as
hard as flint: then he found that he hadn't room to swing the axe, so he
heaved out another ton or two of earth--and rested. Next day he sank
a shaft on the other side of the gum; and after tea, over a pipe, it
struck him that it would be a good idea to burn the tree out, and so
use up the logs and lighter rubbish lying round. So he widened the
excavation, rolled in some logs, and set fire to them--with no better
result than to scorch the roots. Tom persevered. He put the trace harness on his horse, drew in all the
logs within half a mile, and piled them on the windward side of that
gum; and during the night the fire found a soft place, and the tree
burnt off about six feet above the surface, falling on a squatter's
boundary fence, and leaving the ugliest kind of stump to occupy the
selector's attention; which it did, for a week. He waited till the hole
cooled, and then he went to work with pick, shovel, and axe: and even
now he gets interested in drawings of machinery, such as are published
in the agricultural weeklies, for getting out stumps without graft. He
thought he would be able to get some posts and rails out of that
tree, but found reason to think that a cast-iron column would split
sooner--and straighter. He traced some of the surface roots to the other
side of the selection, and broke most of his trace-chains trying to
get them out by horse-power--for they had other roots going down from
underneath. He cleared a patch in the course of time and for several
seasons he broke more ploughshares than he could pay for. Meanwhile the squatter was not idle. Tom's tent was robbed several
times, and his hut burnt down twice. Then he was charged with killing
some sheep and a steer on the run, and converting them to his own use,
but got off mainly because there was a difference of opinion between the
squatter and the other local J.P. concerning politics and religion. Tom ploughed and sowed wheat, but nothing came up to speak of--the
ground was too poor; so he carted stable manure six miles from the
nearest town, manured the land, sowed another crop, and prayed for
rain. It came. It raised a flood which washed the crop clean off the
selection, together with several acres of manure, and a considerable
portion of the original surface soil; and the water brought down enough
sand to make a beach, and spread it over the field to a depth of six
inches. The flood also took half a mile of fencing from along the
creek-bank, and landed it in a bend, three miles down, on a dummy
selection, where it was confiscated. Tom didn't give up--he was energetic. He cleared another piece of ground
on the siding, and sowed more wheat; it had the rust in it, or the
smut--and averaged three shillings per bushel. Then he sowed lucerne and
oats, and bought a few cows: he had an idea of starting a dairy. First,
the cows' eyes got bad, and he sought the advice of a German cocky, and
acted upon it; he blew powdered alum through paper tubes into the bad
eyes, and got some of it snorted and butted back into his own. He cured
the cows' eyes and got the sandy blight in his own, and for a week or
so be couldn't tell one end of a cow from the other, but sat in a dark
corner of the hut and groaned, and soaked his glued eyelashes in warm
water. Germany stuck to him and nursed him, and saw him through. Then the milkers got bad udders, and Tom took his life in his hands
whenever he milked them. He got them all right presently--and butter
fell to fourpence a pound. He and the aforesaid cocky made arrangements
to send their butter to a better market; and then the cows contracted
a disease which was known in those parts as "plooro permoanyer," but
generally referred to as "th' ploorer." Again Tom sought advice, acting upon which he slit the cows' ears, cut
their tails half off to bleed them, and poured pints of "pain killer"
into them through their nostrils; but they wouldn't make an effort,
except, perhaps, to rise and poke the selector when he tried to tempt
their appetites with slices of immature pumpkin. They died peacefully
and persistently, until all were gone save a certain dangerous, barren,
slab-sided luny bovine with white eyes and much agility in jumping
fences, who was known locally as Queen Elizabeth. Tom shot Queen Elizabeth, and turned his attention to agriculture again. Then his plough horses took bad with some thing the Teuton called "der
shtranguls." He submitted them to a course of treatment in accordance
with Jacob's advice--and they died. Even then Tom didn't give in--there was grit in that man. He borrowed a
broken-down dray-horse in return for its keep, coupled it with his own
old riding hack, and started to finish ploughing. The team wasn't a
success. Whenever the draught horse's knees gave way and he stumbled
forward, he jerked the lighter horse back into the plough, and something
would break. Then Tom would blaspheme till he was refreshed, mend up
things with wire and bits of clothes-line, fill his pockets with stones
to throw at the team, and start again. Finally he hired a dummy's child
to drive the horses. The brat did his best he tugged at the head of the
team, prodded it behind, heaved rocks at it, cut a sapling, got up his
enthusiasm, and wildly whacked the light horse whenever the other showed
signs of moving--but he never succeeded in starting both horses at one
and the same time. Moreover the youth was cheeky, and the selector's
temper had been soured: he cursed the boy along with the horses, the
plough, the selection, the squatter, and Australia. Yes, he cursed
Australia. The boy cursed back, was chastised, and immediately went home
and brought his father. Then the dummy's dog tackled the selector's dog and this precipitated
things. The dummy would have gone under had his wife not arrived on the
scene with the eldest son and the rest of the family. They all fell foul
of Tom. The woman was the worst. The selector's dog chawed the other and
came to his master's rescue just in time---or Tom Hopkins would never
have lived to become the inmate of a lunatic asylum. Next year there happened to be good grass on Tom's selection and nowhere
else, and he thought it wouldn't be a bad idea--to get a few poor
sheep, and fatten them up for market: sheep were selling for about
seven-and-sixpence a dozen at that time. Tom got a hundred or two, but
the squatter had a man stationed at one side of the selection with dogs
to set on the sheep directly they put their noses through the fence
(Tom's was not a sheep fence). The dogs chased the sheep across the
selection and into the run again on the other side, where another man
waited ready to pound them. Tom's dog did his best; but he fell sick while chawing up the fourth
capitalistic canine, and subsequently died. The dummies had robbed that
cur with poison before starting it across--that was the only way they
could get at Tom's dog. Tom thought that two might play at the game, and he tried; but his
nephew, who happened to be up from the city on a visit, was arrested
at the instigation of the squatter for alleged sheep-stealing, and
sentenced to two years' hard; during which time the selector himself got
six months for assaulting the squatter with intent to do him grievous
bodily harm-which, indeed, he more than attempted, if a broken nose, a
fractured jaw, and the loss of most of the squatters' teeth amounted to
anything. The squatter by this time had made peace with the other local
Justice, and had become his father-in-law. When Tom came out there was little left for him to live for; but he took
a job of fencing, got a few pounds together, and prepared to settle on
the land some more. He got a "missus" and a few cows during the next
year; the missus robbed him and ran away with the dummy, and the cows
died in the drought, or were impounded by the squatter while on their
way to water. Then Tom rented an orchard up the creek, and a hailstorm
destroyed all the fruit. Germany happened to be represented at the time,
Jacob having sought shelter at Tom's but on his way home from town. Tom
stood leaning against the door post with the hail beating on him through
it all. His eyes were very bright and very dry, and every breath was
a choking sob. Jacob let him stand there, and sat inside with a dreamy
expression on his hard face, thinking of childhood and fatherland,
perhaps. When it was over he led Tom to a stool and said, "You waits
there, Tom. I must go home for somedings. You sits there still and waits
twenty minutes;" then he got on his horse and rode off muttering to
himself; "Dot man moost gry, dot man moost gry." He was back inside of
twenty minutes with a bottle of wine and a cornet under his overcoat. He
poured the wine into two pint-pots, made Tom drink, drank himself, and
then took his cornet, stood up at the door, and played a German march
into the rain after the retreating storm. The hail had passed over his
vineyard and he was a ruined man too. Tom did "gry" and was all right. He was a bit disheartened, but he did another job of fencing, and was
just beginning to think about "puttin' in a few vines an' fruit-trees"
when the government surveyors--whom he'd forgotten all about--had a
resurrection and came and surveyed, and found that the real selection
was located amongst some barren ridges across the creek. Tom reckoned
it was lucky he didn't plant the orchard, and he set about shifting his
home and fences to the new site. But the squatter interfered at this
point, entered into possession of the farm and all on it, and took
action against the selector for trespass--laying the damages at L2500. Tom was admitted to the lunatic asylum at Parramatta next year, and the
squatter was sent there the following summer, having been ruined by the
drought, the rabbits, the banks, and a wool-ring. The two became very
friendly, and had many a sociable argument about the feasibility--or
otherwise--of blowing open the flood-gates of Heaven in a dry season
with dynamite. Tom was discharged a few years since. He knocks about certain suburbs
a good deal. He is seen in daylight seldom, and at night mostly in
connection with a dray and a lantern. He says his one great regret is
that he wasn't found to be of unsound mind before he went up-country. ENTER MITCHELL


The Western train had just arrived at Redfern railway station with a lot
of ordinary passengers and one swagman. He was short, and stout, and bow-legged, and freckled, and sandy. He had
red hair and small, twinkling, grey eyes, and--what often goes with such
things--the expression of a born comedian. He was dressed in a ragged,
well-washed print shirt, an old black waistcoat with a calico back, a
pair of cloudy moleskins patched at the knees and held up by a plaited
greenhide belt buckled loosely round his hips, a pair of well-worn,
fuzzy blucher boots, and a soft felt hat, green with age, and with no
brim worth mentioning, and no crown to speak of. He swung a swag on to
the platform, shouldered it, pulled out a billy and water-bag, and then
went to a dog-box in the brake van. Five minutes later he appeared on the edge of the cab platform, with an
anxious-looking cattle-dog crouching against his legs, and one end of
the chain in his hand. He eased down the swag against a post, turned
his face to the city, tilted his hat forward, and scratched the
well-developed back of his head with a little finger. He seemed
undecided what track to take. "Cab, Sir!" The swagman turned slowly and regarded cabby with a quiet grin. "Now, do I look as if I want a cab?" "Well, why not? No harm, anyway--I thought you might want a cab." Swaggy scratched his head, reflectively. "Well," he said, "you're the first man that has thought so these ten
years. What do I want with a cab?" "To go where you're going, of course." "Do I look knocked up?" "I didn't say you did." "And I didn't say you said I did.... Now, I've been on the track this
five years. I've tramped two thousan' miles since last Chris'mas, and I
don't see why I can't tramp the last mile. Do you think my old dog wants
a cab?" The dog shivered and whimpered; he seemed to want to get away from the
crowd. "But then, you see, you ain't going to carry that swag through the
streets, are you?" asked the cabman. "Why not? Who'll stop me! There ain't no law agin it, I b'lieve?" "But then, you see, it don't look well, you know." "Ah! I thought we'd get to it at last." The traveller up-ended his bluey against his knee, gave it an
affectionate pat, and then straightened himself up and looked fixedly at
the cabman. "Now, look here!" he said, sternly and impressively, "can you see
anything wrong with that old swag o' mine?" It was a stout, dumpy swag, with a red blanket outside, patched with
blue, and the edge of a blue blanket showing in the inner rings at the
end. The swag might have been newer; it might have been cleaner;
it might have been hooped with decent straps, instead of bits of
clothes-line and greenhide--but otherwise there was nothing the matter
with it, as swags go. "I've humped that old swag for years," continued the bushman; "I've
carried that old swag thousands of miles--as that old dog knows--an'
no one ever bothered about the look of it, or of me, or of my old dog,
neither; and do you think I'm going to be ashamed of that old swag,
for a cabby or anyone else? Do you think I'm going to study anybody's
feelings? No one ever studied mine! I'm in two minds to summon you for
using insulting language towards me!" He lifted the swag by the twisted towel which served for a
shoulder-strap, swung it into the cab, got in himself and hauled the dog
after him. "You can drive me somewhere where I can leave my swag and dog while I
get some decent clothes to see a tailor in," he said to the cabman. "My
old dog ain't used to cabs, you see." Then he added, reflectively: "I drove a cab myself, once, for five years
in Sydney." Stiffner and Jim

(Thirdly, Bill)


We were tramping down in Canterbury, Maoriland, at the time, swagging
it--me and Bill--looking for work on the new railway line. Well,
one afternoon, after a long, hot tramp, we comes to Stiffner's
Hotel--between Christchurch and that other place--I forget the name
of it--with throats on us like sunstruck bones, and not the price of a
stick of tobacco. We had to have a drink, anyway, so we chanced it. We walked right into
the bar, handed over our swags, put up four drinks, and tried to look as
if we'd just drawn our cheques and didn't care a curse for any man. We
looked solvent enough, as far as swagmen go. We were dirty and haggard
and ragged and tired-looking, and that was all the more reason why we
might have our cheques all right. This Stiffner was a hard customer. He'd been a spieler, fighting man,
bush parson, temperance preacher, and a policeman, and a commercial
traveller, and everything else that was damnable; he'd been a
journalist, and an editor; he'd been a lawyer, too. He was an ugly brute
to look at, and uglier to have a row with--about six-foot-six, wide in
proportion, and stronger than Donald Dinnie. He was meaner than a gold-field Chinaman, and sharper than a sewer rat:
he wouldn't give his own father a feed, nor lend him a sprat--unless
some safe person backed the old man's I.O.U. We knew that we needn't expect any mercy from Stiffner; but something
had to be done, so I said to Bill:

"Something's got to be done, Bill! What do you think of it?" Bill was mostly a quiet young chap, from Sydney, except when he got
drunk--which was seldom--and then he was a customer, from all round. He
was cracked on the subject of spielers. He held that the population of
the world was divided into two classes--one was spielers and the other
was the mugs. He reckoned that he wasn't a mug. At first I thought he
was a spieler, and afterwards I thought that he was a mug. He used to
say that a man had to do it these times; that he was honest once and
a fool, and was robbed and starved in consequences by his friends and
relations; but now he intended to take all that he could get. He said
that you either had to have or be had; that men were driven to be
sharps, and there was no help for it. Bill said:

"We'll have to sharpen our teeth, that's all, and chew somebody's lug." "How?" I asked. There was a lot of navvies at the pub, and I knew one or two by sight,
so Bill says:

"You know one or two of these mugs. Bite one of their ears. "So I took aside a chap that I knowed and bit his ear for ten bob, and
gave it to Bill to mind, for I thought it would be safer with him than
with me. "Hang on to that," I says, "and don't lose it for your natural life's
sake, or Stiffner'll stiffen us." We put up about nine bob's worth of drinks that night--me and Bill--and
Stiffner didn't squeal: he was too sharp. He shouted once or twice. By-and-by I left Bill and turned in, and in the morning when I woke up
there was Bill sitting alongside of me, and looking about as lively
as the fighting kangaroo in London in fog time. He had a black eye and
eighteen pence. He'd been taking down some of the mugs. "Well, what's to be done now?" I asked. "Stiffner can smash us both with
one hand, and if we don't pay up he'll pound our swags and cripple us. He's just the man to do it. He loves a fight even more than he hates
being had." "There's only one thing to be done, Jim," says Bill, in a tired,
disinterested tone that made me mad. "Well, what's than" I said. "Smoke!" "Smoke be damned," I snarled, losing my temper. "You know dashed well that our swags are in the bar, and we can't smoke
without them. "Well, then," says Bill, "I'll toss you to see who's to face the
landlord." "Well, I'll be blessed!" I says. "I'll see you further first. You have
got a front. You mugged that stuff away, and you'll have to get us out
of the mess." It made him wild to be called a mug, and we swore and growled at each
other for a while; but we daren't speak loud enough to have a fight, so
at last I agreed to toss up for it, and I lost. Bill started to give me some of his points, but I shut him up quick. "You've had your turn, and made a mess of it," I said. "For God's sake
give me a show. Now, I'll go into the bar and ask for the swags, and
carry them out on to the veranda, and then go back to settle up. You
keep him talking all the time. You dump the two swags together, and
smoke like sheol. That's all you've got to do." I went into the bar, got the swags front the missus, carried them out on
to the veranda, and then went back. Stiffner came in. "Good morning!" "Good morning, sir," says Stiffner. "It'll be a nice day, I think?" "Yes, I think so. I suppose you are going on?" "Yes, we'll have to make a move to-day." Then I hooked carelessly on to the counter with one elbow, and looked
dreamy-like out across the clearing, and presently I gave a sort of sigh
and said: "Ah, well! I think I'll have a beer." "Right you are! Where's your mate?" "Oh, he's round at the back. He'll be round directly; but he ain't
drinking this morning." Stiffner laughed that nasty empty laugh of his. He thought Bill was
whipping the cat. "What's yours, boss?" I said. "Thankee!... Here's luck!" "Here's luck!" The country was pretty open round there--the nearest timber was better
than a mile away, and I wanted to give Bill a good start across the flat
before the go-as-you-can commenced; so I talked for a while, and while
we were talking I thought I might as well go the whole hog--I might as
well die for a pound as a penny, if I had to die; and if I hadn't I'd
have the pound to the good, anyway, so to speak. Anyhow, the risk would
be about the same, or less, for I might have the spirit to run harder
the more I had to run for--the more spirits I had to run for, in fact,
as it turned out--so I says:

"I think I'll take one of them there flasks of whisky to last us on the
road." "Right y'are," says Stiffner. "What'll ye have--a small one or a big
one?" "Oh, a big one, I think--if I can get it into my pocket." "It'll be a tight squeeze," he said, and he laughed. "I'll try," I said. "Bet you two drinks I'll get it in." "Done!" he says. "The top inside coat-pocket, and no tearing." It was a big bottle, and all my pockets were small; but I got it into
the pocket he'd betted against. It was a tight squeeze, but I got it in. Then we both laughed, but his laugh was nastier than usual, because it
was meant to be pleasant, and he'd lost two drinks; and my laugh wasn't
easy--I was anxious as to which of us would laugh next. Just then I noticed something, and an idea struck me--about the most
up-to-date idea that ever struck me in my life. I noticed that Stiffner
was limping on his right foot this morning, so I said to him:

"What's up with your foot?" putting my hand in my pocket. "Oh, it's a
crimson nail in my boot," he said. "I thought I got the blanky thing out
this morning; but I didn't." There just happened to be an old bag of shoemaker's tools in the bar,
belonging to an old cobbler who was lying dead drunk on the veranda. So
I said, taking my hand out of my pocket again:

"Lend us the boot, and I'll fix it in a minute. That's my old trade." "Oh, so you're a shoemaker," he said. "I'd never have thought it." He laughs one of his useless laughs that wasn't wanted, and slips off
the boot--he hadn't laced it up--and hands it across the bar to me. It was an ugly brute--a great thick, iron-bound, boiler-plated navvy's
boot. It made me feel sore when I looked at it. I got the bag and pretended to fix the nail; but I didn't. "There's a couple of nails gone from the sole," I said. "I'll put 'em
in if I can find any hobnails, and it'll save the sole," and I rooted in
the bag and found a good long nail, and shoved it right through the sole
on the sly. He'd been a bit of a sprinter in his time, and I thought
it might be better for me in the near future if the spikes of his
running-shoes were inside. "There, you'll find that better, I fancy," I said, standing the boot on
the bar counter, but keeping my hand on it in an absent-minded kind of
way. Presently I yawned and stretched myself, and said in a careless
way:

"Ah, well! How's the slate?" He scratched the back of his head and
pretended to think. "Oh, well, we'll call it thirty bob." Perhaps he thought I'd slap down two quid. "Well," I says, "and what will you do supposing we don't pay you?" He looked blank for a moment. Then he fired up and gasped and choked
once or twice; and then he cooled down suddenly and laughed his nastiest
laugh--he was one of those men who always laugh when they're wild--and
said in a nasty, quiet tone:

"You thundering, jumped-up crawlers! If you don't (something) well part
up I'll take your swags and (something) well kick your gory pants so you
won't be able to sit down for a month--or stand up either!" "Well, the sooner you begin the better," I said; and I chucked the boot
into a corner and bolted. He jumped the bar counter, got his boot, and came after me. He paused
to slip the boot on--but he only made one step, and then gave a howl and
slung the boot off and rushed back. When I looked round again he'd got
a slipper on, and was coming--and gaining on me, too. I shifted scenery
pretty quick the next five minutes. But I was soon pumped. My heart
began to beat against the ceiling of my head, and my lungs all choked
up in my throat. When I guessed he was getting within kicking distance
I glanced round so's to dodge the kick. He let out; but I shied just in
time. He missed fire, and the slipper went about twenty feet up in the
air and fell in a waterhole. He was done then, for the ground was stubbly and stony. I seen Bill on
ahead pegging out for the horizon, and I took after him and reached for
the timber for all I was worth, for I'd seen Stiffner's missus coming
with a shovel--to bury the remains, I suppose; and those two were a good
match--Stiffner and his missus, I mean. Bill looked round once, and melted into the bush pretty soon after that. When I caught up he was about done; but I grabbed my swag and we pushed
on, for I told Bill that I'd seen Stiffner making for the stables when
I'd last looked round; and Bill thought that we'd better get lost in the
bush as soon as ever we could, and stay lost, too, for Stiffner was a
man that couldn't stand being had. The first thing that Bill said when we got safe into camp was: "I told
you that we'd pull through all right. You need never be frightened when
you're travelling with me. Just take my advice and leave things to me,
and we'll hang out all right. Now-." But I shut him up. He made me mad. "Why, you--! What the sheol did _you_ do?" "Do?" he says. "I got away with the swags, didn't I? Where'd they be now
if it wasn't for me?" Then I sat on him pretty hard for his pretensions, and paid him out for
all the patronage he'd worked off on me, and called him a mug straight,
and walked round him, so to speak, and blowed, and told him never to
pretend to me again that he was a battler. Then, when I thought I'd licked him into form, I cooled down and soaped
him up a bit; but I never thought that he had three climaxes and a
crisis in store for me. He took it all pretty cool; he let me have my fling, and gave me time to
get breath; then he leaned languidly over on his right side, shoved his
left hand down into his left trouserpocket, and brought up a boot-lace,
a box of matches, and nine-and-six. As soon as I got the focus of it I gasped:

"Where the deuce did you get that?" "I had it all along," he said, "but I seen at the pub that you had the
show to chew a lug, so I thought we'd save it--nine-and-sixpences ain't
picked up every day." Then he leaned over on his left, went down into the other pocket, and
came up with a piece of tobacco and half-a-sovereign. My eyes bulged out. "Where the blazes did you get that from?" I yelled. "That," he said, "was the half-quid you give me last night. Half-quids
ain't to be thrown away these times; and, besides, I had a down on
Stiffner, and meant to pay him out; I reckoned that if we wasn't sharp
enough to take him down we hadn't any business to be supposed to be
alive. Anyway, I guessed we'd do it; and so we did--and got a bottle of
whisky into the bargain." Then he leaned back, tired-like, against the log, and dredged his upper
left-hand waistcoat-pocket, and brought up a sovereign wrapped in a
pound note. Then he waited for me to speak; but I couldn't. I got my
mouth open, but couldn't get it shut again. "I got that out of the mugs last night, but I thought that we'd want it,
and might as well keep it. Quids ain't so easily picked up, nowadays;
and, besides, we need stuff more'n Stiffner does, and so--"

"And did he know you had the stuff?" I gasped. "Oh, yes, that's the fun of it. That's what made him so excited. He was
in the parlour all the time I was playing. But we might as well have a
drink! "We did. I wanted it." Bill turned in by-and-by, and looked like a sleeping innocent in the
moonlight. I sat up late, and smoked, and thought hard, and watched
Bill, and turned in, and thought till near daylight, and then went to
sleep, and had a nightmare about it. I dreamed I chased Stiffner forty
miles to buy his pub, and that Bill turned out to be his nephew. Bill divvied up all right, and gave me half a crown over, but I didn't
travel with him long after that. He was a decent young fellow as far as
chaps go, and a good mate as far as mates go; but he was too far ahead
for a peaceful, easy-going chap like me. It would have worn me out in a
year to keep up to him. P.S.--The name of this should have been:
'Bill and Stiffner (thirdly, Jim)'




WHEN THE SUN WENT DOWN


Jack Drew sat on the edge of the shaft, with his foot in the loop and
one hand on the rope, ready to descend. His elder brother, Tom, stood
at one end of the windlass and the third mate at the other. Jack paused
before swinging off, looked up at his brother, and impulsively held out
his hand:

"You ain't going to let the sun go down, are you, Tom?" But Tom kept both hands on the windlass-handle and said nothing. "Lower away!" They lowered him to the bottom, and Tom shouldered his pick in silence
and walked off to the tent. He found the tin plate, pint-pot, and things
set ready for him on the rough slab table under the bush shed. The tea
was made, the cabbage and potatoes strained and placed in a billy near
the fire. He found the fried bacon and steak between two plates in the
camp-oven. He sat down to the table but he could not eat. He felt mean. The inexperience and hasty temper of his brother had caused the quarrel
between them that morning; but then Jack admitted that, and apologized
when he first tried to make it up. Tom moved round uneasily and tried to smoke: he could not get Jack's
last appeal out of his ears--"You ain't going to let the sun go down,
Tom?" Tom found himself glancing at the sun. It was less than two hours from
sunset. He thought of the words of the old Hebrew--or Chinese--poet; he
wasn't religious, and the authorship didn't matter. The old poet's words
began to haunt him "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath--Let not the
sun go down upon your wrath." The line contains good, sound advice; for quick-tempered men are often
the most sensitive, and when they let the sun go down on the aforesaid
wrath that quality is likely to get them down and worry them during the
night. Tom started to go to the claim, but checked himself, and sat down
and tried to draw comfort from his pipe. He understood his brother
thoroughly, but his brother never understood him--that was where the
trouble was. Presently he got thinking how Jack would worry about the
quarrel and have no heart for his work. Perhaps he was fretting over it
now, all alone by himself, down at the end of the damp, dark drive. Tom
had a lot of the old woman about him, in spite of his unsociable ways
and brooding temper. He had almost made up his mind to go below again, on some excuse, when
his mate shouted from the top of the shaft:

"Tom! Tom! For Christ's sake come here!" Tom's heart gave a great thump, and he ran like a kangaroo to the shaft. All the diggers within hearing were soon on the spot. They saw at a
glance what had happened. It was madness to sink without timber in such
treacherous ground. _The sides of the shaft were closing in_. Tom sprang
forward and shouted through the crevice:

"To the face, Jack! To the face, for your life!" "The old Workings!" he cried, turning to the diggers. "Bring a fan and
tools. We'll dig him out." A few minutes later a fan was rigged over a deserted shaft close by,
where fortunately the windlass had been left for bailing purposes,
and men were down in the old drive. Tom knew that he and his mates had
driven very close to the old workings. He knelt in the damp clay before the face and worked like a madman; he
refused to take turn about, and only dropped the pick to seize a shovel
in his strong hands, and snatch back the loose clay from under his feet;
he reckoned that he had six or, perhaps, eight feet to drive, and he
knew that the air could not last long in the new drive--even if that
had not already fallen in and crushed his brother. Great drops of
perspiration stood out on Tom's forehead, and his breath began to come
in choking sobs, but he still struck strong, savage blows into the clay
before him, and the drive lengthened quickly. Once he paused a moment
to listen, and then distinctly heard a sound as of a tool or stone being
struck against the end of the new drive. Jack was safe! Tom dug on until the clay suddenly fell away from his pick and left a
hole, about the size of a plate, in the "face" before him. "Thank God!" said a hoarse, strained voice at the other side. "All right, Jack!" "Yes, old man; you are just in time; I've hardly got room to stand in,
and I'm nearly smothered." He was crouching against the "face" of the
new drive. Tom dropped his pick and fell back against the man behind him. "Oh, God! my back!" he cried. Suddenly he struggled to his knees, and then fell forward on his hand
and dragged himself close to the hole in the end of the drive. "Jack!" he gasped, "Jack!" "Right, old man; what's the matter?" "I've hurt my heart, Jack!--Put your hand--quick!... The sun's going
down." Jack's hand came out through the hole, Tom gripped it, and then fell
with his face in the damp clay. They half carried, half dragged him from the drive, for the roof was low
and they were obliged to stoop. They took him to the shaft and sent him
up, lashed to the rope. A few blows of the pick, and Jack scrambled from his prison and went
to the surface, and knelt on the grass by the body of his brother. The
diggers gathered round and took off their hats. And the sun went down. THE MAN WHO FORGOT


"Well, I dunno," said Tom Marshall--known as "The Oracle"--"I've heerd
o' sich cases before: they ain't commin, but--I've heerd o' sich
cases before," and he screwed up the left side of his face whilst he
reflectively scraped his capacious right ear with the large blade of a
pocket-knife. They were sitting at the western end of the rouseabouts' hut, enjoying
the breeze that came up when the sun went down, and smoking and yarning. The "case" in question was a wretchedly forlorn-looking specimen of the
swag-carrying clan whom a boundary-rider had found wandering about
the adjacent plain, and had brought into the station. He was a small,
scraggy man, painfully fair, with a big, baby-like head, vacant watery
eyes, long thin hairy hands, that felt like pieces of damp seaweed, and
an apologetic cringe-and-look-up-at-you manner. He professed to have
forgotten who he was and all about himself. The Oracle was deeply interested in this case, as indeed he was in
anything else that "looked curious." He was a big, simple-minded
shearer, with more heart than brains, more experience than sense, and
more curiosity than either. It was a wonder that he had not profited,
even indirectly, by the last characteristic. His heart was filled with
a kind of reverential pity for anyone who was fortunate or unfortunate
enough to possess an "affliction;" and amongst his mates had been
counted a deaf man, a blind man, a poet, and a man who "had rats." Tom
had dropped across them individually, when they were down in the
world, and had befriended them, and studied them with great
interest--especially the poet; and they thought kindly of him, and were
grateful--except the individual with the rats, who reckoned Tom had an
axe to grind--that he, in fact, wanted to cut his (Rat's) liver out as a
bait for Darling cod--and so renounced the mateship. It was natural, then, for The Oracle to take the present case under his
wing. He used his influence with the boss to get the Mystery on "picking
up," and studied him in spare time, and did his best to assist the poor
hushed memory, which nothing the men could say or do seemed able to push
further back than the day on which the stranger "kind o' woke up" on
the plain, and found a swag beside him. The swag had been prospected
and fossicked for a clue, but yielded none. The chaps were sceptical at
first, and inclined to make fun of the Mystery; but Tom interfered, and
intimated that if they were skunks enough to chyack or try on any of
their "funny business" with a "pore afflicted chap," he (Tom) would
be obliged to "perform." Most of the men there had witnessed Tom's
performance, and no one seemed ambitious to take a leading part in it. They preferred to be in the audience. "Yes," reflected The Oracle, "it's a curious case, and I dare say some
of them big doctors, like Morell Mackenzie, would be glad to give a
thousand or two to get holt on a case like this." "Done," cried Mitchell, the goat of the shed. "I'll go halves!--or stay,
let's form a syndicate and work the Mystery." Some of the rouseabouts laughed, but the joke fell as flat with Tom as
any other joke. "The worst of it is," said the Mystery himself, in the whine that was
natural to him, and with a timid side look up at Tom--"the worst of it
is I might be a lord or duke, and don't know anything about it. I might
be a rich man, with a lot of houses and money. I might be a lord." The chaps guffawed. "Wot'yer laughing at?" asked Mitchell. "I don't see anything
unreasonable about it; he might be a lord as far as looks go. I've seen
two." "Yes," reflected Tom, ignoring Mitchell, "there's something in that; but
then again, you see, you might be Jack the Ripper. Better let it slide,
mate; let the dead past bury its dead. Start fresh with a clean sheet." "But I don't even know my name, or whether I'm married or not," whined
the outcast. "I might have a good wife and little ones." "Better keep on forgetting, mate," Mitchell said, "and as for a name,
that's nothing. I don't know mine, and I've had eight. There's plenty
good names knocking round. I knew a man named Jim Smith that died. Take
his name, it just suits you, and he ain't likely to call round for it;
if he does, you can say you was born with it." So they called him Smith, and soon began to regard him as a harmless
lunatic and to take no notice of his eccentricities. Great interest was
taken in the case for a time, and even Mitchell put in his oar and
tried all sorts of ways to assist the Mystery in his weak, helpless,
and almost pitiful endeavours to recollect who he was. A similar case
happened to appear in the papers at this time, and the thing caught on
to such an extent that The Oracle was moved to impart some advice from
his store of wisdom. "I wouldn't think too much over it if I was you," said he to Mitchell,
"hundreds of sensible men went mad over that there Tichborne case who
didn't have anything to do with it, but just through thinking on it; and
you're ratty enough already, Jack. Let it alone and trust me to find out
who's Smith just as soon as ever we cut out." Meanwhile Smith ate, worked, and slept, and borrowed tobacco and forgot
to return it--which was made a note of. He talked freely about his case
when asked, but if he addressed anyone, it was with the air of the timid
but good young man, who is fully aware of the extent and power of this
world's wickedness, and stands somewhat in awe of it, but yet would
beg you to favour a humble worker in the vineyard by kindly accepting a
tract, and passing it on to friends after perusal. One Saturday morning, about a fortnight before cut out, The Oracle came
late to his stand, and apparently with something on his mind. Smith
hadn't turned up, and the next rouseabout was doing his work, to the
mutual dissatisfaction of all parties immediately concerned. "Did you see anything of Smith?" asked Mitchell of The Oracle. "Seems to
have forgot to get up this morning." Tom looked disheartened and disappointed. _"He's forgot again_," said
he, slowly and impressively. "Forgot what? We know he's blessed well forgot to come to graft." "He's forgot again," repeated Tom. "He woke up this morning and wanted
to know who he was and where he was." Comments. "Better give him best, Oracle," said Mitchell presently. "If he can't
find out who he is and where he is, the boss'll soon find it out for
him." "No," said Tom, "when I take a thing in hand I see it through." This was also characteristic of the boss-over-the-board, though in
another direction. He went down to the but and inquired for Smith. "Why ain't you at work?" "Who am I, sir? Where am I?" whined Smith. "Can you please tell me who I
am and where I am?" The boss drew a long breath and stared blankly at the Mystery; then he
erupted. "Now, look here!" he howled, "I don't know who the gory sheol you are,
except that you're a gory lunatic, and what's more, I don't care a damn. But I'll soon show you where you are! You can call up at the store and
get your cheque, and soon as you blessed well like; and then take a
walk, and don't forget to take your lovely swag with you." The matter was discussed at the dinner-table. The Oracle swore that it
was a cruel, mean way to treat a "pore afflicted chap," and cursed the
boss. Tom's admirers cursed in sympathy, and trouble seemed threatening,
when the voice of Mitchell was heard to rise in slow, deliberate tones
over the clatter of cutlery and tin plates. "I wonder," said the voice, "I wonder whether Smith forgot his cheque?" It was ascertained that Smith hadn't. There was some eating and thinking done. Soon Mitchell's voice was heard
again, directed at The Oracle. It said "Do you keep any vallabels about your bunk, Oracle?" Tom looked hard at Mitchell. "Why?" "Oh, nothin': only I think it wouldn't be a bad idea for you to look at
your bunk and see whether Smith forgot." The chaps grew awfully interested. They fixed their eyes on Tom, and he
looked with feeling from one face to another; then he pushed his plate
back, and slowly extracted his long legs from between the stool and the
table. He climbed to his bunk, and carefully reviewed the ingredients of
his swag. Smith hadn't forgot. When The Oracle's face came round again there was in it a strange
expression which a close study would have revealed to be more of anger
than of sorrow, but that was not all. It was an expression such as a man
might wear who is undergoing a terrible operation, without chloroform,
but is determined not to let a whimper escape him. Tom didn't swear, and
by that token they guessed how mad he was. 'Twas a rough shed, with
a free and lurid vocabulary, but had they all sworn in chorus, with
One-eyed Bogan as lead, it would not have done justice to Tom's
feelings--and they realized this. The Oracle took down his bridle from its peg, and started for the door
amid a respectful and sympathetic silence, which was only partly broken
once by the voice of Mitchell, which asked in an awed whisper:

"Going ter ketch yer horse, Tom?" The Oracle nodded, and passed on; he
spake no word--he was too full for words. Five minutes passed, and then the voice of Mitchell was heard again,
uninterrupted by the clatter of tinware. It said in impressive tones:

"It would not be a bad idea for some of you chaps that camp in the bunks
along there, to have a look at your things. Scotty's bunk is next to
Tom's." Scotty shot out of his place as if a snake had hold of his leg, starting
a plank in the table and upsetting three soup plates. He reached for his
bunk like a drowning man clutching at a plank, and tore out the bedding. Again, Smith hadn't forgot. Then followed a general overhaul, and it was found in most cases that
Smith had remembered. The pent-up reservoir of blasphemy burst forth. The Oracle came up with Smith that night at the nearest shanty, and
found that he had forgotten again, and in several instances, and was
forgetting some more under the influence of rum and of the flattering
interest taken in his case by a drunken Bachelor of Arts who happened to
be at the pub. Tom came in quietly from the rear, and crooked his finger
at the shanty-keeper. They went apart from the rest, and talked together
a while very earnestly. Then they secretly examined Smith's swag, the
core of which was composed of Tom's and his mate's valuables. Then The Oracle stirred up Smith's recollections and departed. Smith was about again in a couple of weeks. He was damaged somewhat
physically, but his memory was no longer impaired. HUNGERFORD


One of the hungriest cleared roads in New South Wales runs to within a
couple of miles of Hungerford, and stops there; then you strike through
the scrub to the town. There is no distant prospect of Hungerford--you
don't see the town till you are quite close to it, and then two or three
white-washed galvanized-iron roofs start out of the mulga. They say that a past Ministry commenced to clear the road from Bourke,
under the impression that Hungerford was an important place, and went
on, with the blindness peculiar to governments, till they got to within
two miles of the town. Then they ran short of rum and rations, and sent
a man on to get them, and make inquiries. The member never came back,
and two more were sent to find him--or Hungerford. Three days later
the two returned in an exhausted condition, and submitted a motion of
want-of-confidence, which was lost. Then the whole House went on and was
lost also. Strange to relate, that Government was never missed. However, we found Hungerford and camped there for a day. The town is
right on the Queensland border, and an interprovincial rabbit-proof
fence--with rabbits on both sides of it--runs across the main street. This fence is a standing joke with Australian rabbits--about the only
joke they have out there, except the memory of Pasteur and poison and
inoculation. It is amusing to go a little way out of town, about sunset,
and watch them crack Noah's Ark rabbit jokes about that fence, and
burrow under and play leap-frog over it till they get tired. One old
buck rabbit sat up and nearly laughed his ears off at a joke of his own
about that fence. He laughed so much that he couldn't get away when
I reached for him. I could hardly eat him for laughing. I never saw a
rabbit laugh before; but I've seen a 'possum do it. Hungerford consists of two houses and a humpy in New South Wales, and
five houses in Queensland. Characteristically enough, both the pubs are
in Queensland. We got a glass of sour yeast at one and paid sixpence for
it--we had asked for English ale. The post office is in New South Wales, and the police-barracks in
Bananaland. The police cannot do anything if there's a row going on
across the street in New South Wales, except to send to Brisbane and
have an extradition warrant applied for; and they don't do much if
there's a row in Queensland. Most of the rows are across the border,
where the pubs are. At least, I believe that's how it is, though the man who told me might
have been a liar. Another man said he was a liar, but then _he_ might
have been a liar himself--a third person said he was one. I heard that
there was a fight over it, but the man who told me about the fight might
not have been telling the truth. One part of the town swears at Brisbane when things go wrong, and the
other part curses Sydney. The country looks as though a great ash-heap had been spread out there,
and mulga scrub and firewood planted--and neglected. The country looks
just as bad for a hundred miles round Hungerford, and beyond that it
gets worse--a blasted, barren wilderness that doesn't even howl. If it
howled it would be a relief. I believe that Bourke and Wills found Hungerford, and it's a pity they
did; but, if I ever stand by the graves of the men who first travelled
through this country, when there were neither roads nor stations, nor
tanks, nor bores, nor pubs, I'll--I'll take my hat off. There were brave
men in the land in those days. It is said that the explorers gave the district its name chiefly because
of the hunger they found there, which has remained there ever since. I
don't know where the "ford" comes in--there's nothing to ford, except in
flood-time. Hungerthirst would have been better. The town is supposed
to be situated on the banks of a river called the Paroo, but we saw no
water there, except what passed for it in a tank. The goats and sheep
and dogs and the rest of the population drink there. It is dangerous to
take too much of that water in a raw state. Except in flood-time you couldn't find the bed of the river without the
aid of a spirit-level and a long straight-edge. There is a Custom-house
against the fence on the northern side. A pound of tea often costs
six shillings on that side, and you can get a common lead pencil for
fourpence at the rival store across the street in the mother province. Also, a small loaf of sour bread sells for a shilling at the humpy
aforementioned. Only about sixty per cent of the sugar will melt. We saw one of the storekeepers give a dead-beat swagman five shillings'
worth of rations to take him on into Queensland. The storekeepers often
do this, and put it down on the loss side of their books. I hope the
recording angel listens, and puts it down on the right side of his book. We camped on the Queensland side of the fence, and after tea had a yarn
with an old man who was minding a mixed flock of goats and sheep; and we
asked him whether he thought Queensland was better than New South Wales,
or the other way about. He scratched the back of his head, and thought a while, and hesitated
like a stranger who is going to do you a favour at some personal
inconvenience. At last, with the bored air of a man who has gone through the same
performance too often before, he stepped deliberately up to the fence
and spat over it into New South Wales. After which he got leisurely
through and spat back on Queensland. "That's what I think of the blanky colonies!" he said. He gave us time to become sufficiently impressed; then he said:

"And if I was at the Victorian and South Australian border I'd do the
same thing." He let that soak into our minds, and added: "And the same with West
Australia--and--and Tasmania." Then he went away. The last would have been a long spit--and he forgot Maoriland. We heard afterwards that his name was Clancy and he had that day been
offered a job droving at "twenty-five shillings a week and find your
own horse." Also find your own horse feed and tobacco and soap and other
luxuries, at station prices. Moreover, if you lost your own horse you
would have to find another, and if that died or went astray you would
have to find a third--or forfeit your pay and return on foot. The
boss drover agreed to provide flour and mutton--when such things were
procurable. Consequently, Clancy's unfavourable opinion of the colonies. My mate and I sat down on our swags against the fence to talk things
over. One of us was very deaf. Presently a black tracker went past and
looked at us, and returned to the pub. Then a trooper in Queensland
uniform came along and asked us what the trouble was about, and where
we came from and were going, and where we camped. We said we were
discussing private business, and he explained that he thought it was
a row, and came over to see. Then he left us, and later on we saw him
sitting with the rest of the population on a bench under the hotel
veranda. Next morning we rolled up our swags and left Hungerford to the
north-west. A CAMP-FIRE YARN


"This girl," said Mitchell, continuing a yarn to his mate, "was about
the ugliest girl I ever saw, except one, and I'll tell you about her
directly. The old man had a carpenter's shop fixed up in a shed at the
back of his house, and he used to work there pretty often, and sometimes
I'd come over and yarn with him. One day I was sitting on the end of
the bench, and the old man was working away, and Mary was standing there
too, all three of us yarning--she mostly came poking round where I was
if I happened to be on the premises--or at least I thought so--and
we got yarning about getting married, and the old cove said he'd get
married again if the old woman died. "'_You_ get married again!' said Mary. 'Why, father, you wouldn't get
anyone to marry you--who'd have you?' "'Well,' he said, 'I bet I'll get someone sooner than you, anyway. You don't seem to be able to get anyone, and it's pretty near time you
thought of settlin' down and gettin' married. I wish _someone_ would
have you.' "He hit her pretty hard there, but it served her right. She got as good
as she gave. She looked at me and went all colours, and then she went
back to her washtub. "She was mighty quiet at tea-time--she seemed hurt a lot, and I began to
feel sorry I'd laughed at the old man's joke, for she was really a good,
hard-working girl, and you couldn't help liking her. "So after tea I went out to her in the kitchen, where she was washing
up, to try and cheer her up a bit. She'd scarcely speak at first, except
to say 'Yes' or 'No', and kept her face turned away from me; and I could
see that she'd been crying. I began to feel sorry for her and mad at the
old man, and I started to comfort her. But I didn't go the right way to
work about it. I told her that she mustn't take any notice of the old
cove, as he didn't mean half he said. But she seemed to take it harder
than ever, and at last I got so sorry for her that I told her that _I'd_
have her if she'd have me." "And what did she say?" asked Mitchell's mate, after a pause. "She said she wouldn't have me at any price!" The mate laughed, and Mitchell grinned his quiet grin. "Well, this set me thinking," he continued. "I always knew I was a
dashed ugly cove, and I began to wonder whether any girl would really
have me; and I kept on it till at last I made up my mind to find out and
settle the matter for good--or bad. "There was another farmer's daughter living close by, and I met her
pretty often coming home from work, and sometimes I had a yarn with her. She was plain, and no mistake: Mary was a Venus alongside of her. She
had feet like a Lascar, and hands about ten sizes too large for her,
and a face like that camel--only red; she walked like a camel, too. She
looked like a ladder with a dress on, and she didn't know a great A from
a corner cupboard. "Well, one evening I met her at the sliprails, and presently I asked
her, for a joke, if she'd marry me. Mind you, I never wanted to marry
_her_; I was only curious to know whether any girl would have me. "She turned away her face and seemed to hesitate, and I was just turning
away and beginning to think I was a dashed hopeless case, when all of a
sudden she fell up against me and said she'd be my wife.... And it wasn't
her fault that she wasn't." "What did she do?" "Do! What didn't she do? Next day she went down to our place when I
was at work, and hugged and kissed mother and the girls all round, and
cried, and told mother that she'd try and be a dutiful daughter to her. Good Lord! You should have seen the old woman and the girls when I came
home. "Then she let everyone know that Bridget Page was engaged to Jack
Mitchell, and told her friends that she went down on her knees every
night and thanked the Lord for getting the love of a good man. Didn't
the fellows chyack me, though! My sisters were raving mad about it, for
their chums kept asking them how they liked their new sister, and when
it was going to come off, and who'd be bridesmaids and best man, and
whether they weren't surprised at their brother Jack's choice; and then
I'd gammon at home that it was all true. "At last the place got too hot for me. I got sick of dodging that girl. I sent a mate of mine to tell her that it was all a joke, and that I was
already married in secret; but she didn't see it, then I cleared, and
got a job in Newcastle, but had to leave there when my mates sent me the
office that she was coming. I wouldn't wonder but what she is humping
her swag after me now. In fact, I thought you was her in disguise when
I set eyes on you first.... You needn't get mad about it; I don't mean to
say that you're quite as ugly as she was, because I never saw a man that
was--or a woman either. Anyway, I'll never ask a woman to marry me again
unless I'm ready to marry her." Then Mitchell's mate told a yarn. "I knew a case once something like the one you were telling me about;
the landlady of a hash-house where I was stopping in Albany told me. There was a young carpenter staying there, who'd run away from Sydney
from an old maid who wanted to marry him. He'd cleared from the church
door, I believe. He was scarcely more'n a boy--about nineteen--and a
soft kind of a fellow, something like you, only good-looking--that is,
he was passable. Well, as soon as the woman found out where he'd gone,
she came after him. She turned up at the boarding-house one Saturday
morning when Bobbie was at work; and the first thing she did was to rent
a double room from the landlady and buy some cups and saucers to start
housekeeping with. When Bobbie came home he just gave her one look and
gave up the game. "'Get your dinner, Bobbie,' she said, after she'd slobbered over him a
bit, 'and then get dressed and come with me and get married!' "She was about three times his age, and had a face like that picture of
a lady over Sappho Smith's letters in the Sydney _Bulletin_. "Well, Bobbie went with her like a--like a lamb; never gave a kick or
tried to clear." "Hold on," said Mitchell, "did you ever shear lambs?" "Never mind. Let me finish the yarn. Bobbie was married; but she
wouldn't let him out of her sight all that afternoon, and he had to put
up with her before them all. About bedtime he sneaked out and started
along the passage to his room that he shared with two or three mates. But she'd her eye on him. "'Bobbie, Bobbie!' she says, 'Where are you going?' "'I'm going to bed,' said Bobbie. 'Good night!' "'Bobbie, Bobbie,' she says, sharply. 'That isn't our room; _this_ is
our room, Bobbie. Come back at once! What do you mean, Bobbie? _Do you
hear me, Bobbie?_'

"So Bobbie came back, and went in with the scarecrow. Next morning she
was first at the breakfast table, in a dressing-gown and curl papers. And when they were all sitting down Bobbie sneaked in, looking awfully
sheepish, and sidled for his chair at the other end of the table. But
she'd her eyes on him. "'Bobbie, Bobbie!' she said, 'Come and kiss me, Bobbie!'" And he had to
do it in front of them all. "But I believe she made him a good wife." HIS COUNTRY-AFTER ALL


The Blenheim coach was descending into the valley of the Avetere
River--pronounced Aveterry--from the saddle of Taylor's Pass. Across
the river to the right, the grey slopes and flats stretched away to
the distant sea from a range of tussock hills. There was no native bush
there; but there were several groves of imported timber standing wide
apart---sentinel-like--seeming lonely and striking in their isolation. "Grand country, New Zealand, eh?" said a stout man with a brown face,
grey beard, and grey eyes, who sat between the driver and another
passenger on the box. "You don't call this grand country!" exclaimed the other passenger, who
claimed to be, and looked like, a commercial traveller, and might have
been a professional spieler--quite possibly both. "Why, it's about the
poorest country in New Zealand! You ought to see some of the country in
the North Island--Wairarapa and Napier districts, round about Pahiatua. I call this damn poor country." "Well, I reckon you wouldn't, if you'd ever been in Australia--back in
New South Wales. The people here don't seem to know what a grand country
they've got. You say this is the worst, eh? Well, this would make an
Australian cockatoo's mouth water-the worst of New Zealand would." "I always thought Australia was all good country," mused the driver--a
flax-stick. "I always thought--"

"Good country!" exclaimed the man with the grey beard, in a tone of
disgust. "Why, it's only a mongrel desert, except some bits round the
coast. The worst dried-up and God-forsaken country I was ever in." There was a silence, thoughtful on the driver's part, and aggressive on
that of the stranger. "I always thought," said the driver, reflectively, after the pause--"I
always thought Australia was a good country," and he placed his foot on
the brake. They let him think. The coach descended the natural terraces above the
river bank, and pulled up at the pub. "So you're a native of Australia?" said the bagman to the grey-beard, as
the coach went on again. "Well, I suppose I am. Anyway, I was born there. That's the main thing
I've got against the darned country." "How long did you stay there?" "Till I got away," said the stranger. Then, after a think, he added, "I
went away first when I was thirty-five--went to the islands. I swore I'd
never go back to Australia again; but I did. I thought I had a kind of
affection for old Sydney. I knocked about the blasted country for five
or six years, and then I cleared out to 'Frisco. I swore I'd never go
back again, and I never will." "But surely you'll take a run over and have a look at old Sydney and
those places, before you go back to America, after getting so near?" "What the blazes do I want to have a look at the blamed country for?" snapped the stranger, who had refreshed considerably. "I've got nothing
to thank Australia for--except getting out of it. It's the best country
to get out of that I was ever in." "Oh, well, I only thought you might have had some friends over there,"
interposed the traveller in an injured tone. "Friends! That's another reason. I wouldn't go back there for all the
friends and relations since Adam. I had more than quite enough of it
while I was there. The worst and hardest years of my life were spent
in Australia. I might have starved there, and did do it half my time. I
worked harder and got less in my own country in five years than I ever
did in any other in fifteen"--he was getting mixed--"and I've been in
a few since then. No, Australia is the worst country that ever the Lord
had the sense to forget. I mean to stick to the country that stuck to
me, when I was starved out of my own dear native land--and that country
is the United States of America. What's Australia? A big, thirsty,
hungry wilderness, with one or two cities for the convenience of foreign
speculators, and a few collections of humpies, called towns--also for
the convenience of foreign speculators; and populated mostly by mongrel
sheep, and partly by fools, who live like European slaves in the towns,
and like dingoes in the bush--who drivel about 'democracy,' and yet
haven't any more spunk than to graft for a few Cockney dudes that
razzle-dazzle most of the time in Paris. Why, the Australians haven't
even got the grit to claim enough of their own money to throw a few dams
across their watercourses, and so make some of the interior fit to live
in. America's bad enough, but it was never so small as that.... Bah! The
curse of Australia is sheep, and the Australian war cry is Baa!" "Well, you're the first man I ever heard talk as you've been doing about
his own country," said the bagman, getting tired and impatient of being
sat on all the time. "'Lives there a man with a soul so dead, who never
said--to--to himself'... I forget the darned thing." He tried to remember it. The man whose soul was dead cleared his throat
for action, and the driver--for whom the bagman had shouted twice as
against the stranger's once--took the opportunity to observe that he
always thought a man ought to stick up for his own country. The stranger ignored him and opened fire on the bagman. He proceeded to
prove that that was all rot--that patriotism was the greatest curse on
earth; that it had been the cause of all war; that it was the false,
ignorant sentiment which moved men to slave, starve, and fight for the
comfort of their sluggish masters; that it was the enemy of universal
brotherhood, the mother of hatred, murder, and slavery, and that the
world would never be any better until the deadly poison, called the
sentiment of patriotism, had been "educated" out of the stomachs of the
people. "Patriotism!" he exclaimed scornfully. "My country! The darned
fools; the country never belonged to them, but to the speculators,
the absentees, land-boomers, swindlers, gangs of thieves--the men the
patriotic fools starve and fight for--their masters. Ba-a!" The opposition collapsed. The coach had climbed the terraces on the south side of the river, and
was bowling along on a level stretch of road across the elevated flat. "What trees are those?" asked the stranger, breaking the aggressive
silence which followed his unpatriotic argument, and pointing to a grove
ahead by the roadside. "They look as if they've been planted there. There ain't been a forest here surely?" "Oh, they're some trees the Government imported," said the bagman, whose
knowledge on the subject was limited. "Our own bush won't grow in this
soil." "But it looks as if anything else would--"

Here the stranger sniffed once by accident, and then several times with
interest. It was a warm morning after rain. He fixed his eyes on those trees. They didn't look like Australian gums; they tapered to the tops, the
branches were pretty regular, and the boughs hung in shipshape fashion. There was not the Australian heat to twist the branches and turn the
leaves. "Why!" exclaimed the stranger, still staring and sniffing hard. "Why,
dang me if they ain't (sniff) Australian gums!" "Yes," said the driver, flicking his horses, "they are." "Blanky (sniff) blanky old Australian gums!" exclaimed the
ex-Australian, with strange enthusiasm. "They're not old," said the driver; "they're only young trees. But they
say they don't grow like that in Australia--'count of the difference in
the climate. I always thought--"

But the other did not appear to hear him; he kept staring hard at the
trees they were passing. They had been planted in rows and cross-rows,
and were coming on grandly. There was a rabbit trapper's camp amongst those trees; he had made a
fire to boil his billy with gum-leaves and twigs, and it was the scent
of that fire which interested the exile's nose, and brought a wave of
memories with it. "Good day, mate!" he shouted suddenly to the rabbit trapper, and to the
astonishment of his fellow passengers. "Good day, mate!" The answer came back like an echo--it seemed to
him--from the past. Presently he caught sight of a few trees which had evidently been
planted before the others--as an experiment, perhaps--and, somehow,
one of them had grown after its own erratic native fashion--gnarled and
twisted and ragged, and could not be mistaken for anything else but an
Australian gum. "A thunderin' old blue-gum!" ejaculated the traveller, regarding the
tree with great interest. He screwed his neck to get a last glimpse, and then sat silently smoking
and gazing straight ahead, as if the past lay before him--and it _was_
before him. "Ah, well!" he said, in explanation of a long meditative silence on
his part; "ah, well--them saplings--the smell of them gum-leaves set me
thinking." And he thought some more. "Well, for my part," said a tourist in the coach, presently, in a
condescending tone, "I can't see much in Australia. The bally colonies
are--"

"Oh, that be damned!" snarled the Australian-born--they had finished the
second flask of whisky. "What do you Britishers know about Australia? She's as good as England, anyway." "Well, I suppose you'll go straight back to the States as soon as you've
done your business in Christchurch," said the bagman, when near their
journey's end they had become confidential. "Well, I dunno. I reckon I'll just take a run over to Australia first. There's an old mate of mine in business in Sydney, and I'd like to have
a yarn with him." A DAY ON A SELECTION


The scene is a small New South Wales western selection, the holder
whereof is native-English. His wife is native-Irish. Time, Sunday, about
8 a.m. A used-up looking woman comes from the slab-and-bark house, turns
her face towards the hillside, and shrieks:

"T-o-o-m_may_!" No response, and presently she draws a long breath and screams again:

"_Tom_m-a-a-y!" A faint echo comes from far up the siding where Tommy's presence is
vaguely indicated by half a dozen cows moving slowly--very slowly--down
towards the cow-yard. The woman retires. Ten minutes later she comes out again and screams:

"_Tom_my! "Y-e-e-a-a-s-s!" very passionately and shrilly. "Ain't you goin' to bring those cows down to-day?" "Y-e-e-a-a-s-s-s!--carn't yer see I'm comin'?" A boy is seen to run wildly along the siding and hurl a missile at a
feeding cow; the cow runs forward a short distance through the trees,
and then stops to graze again while the boy stirs up another milker. An hour goes by. The rising Australian generation is represented by a thin, lanky youth
of about fifteen. He is milking. The cow-yard is next the house, and is
mostly ankle-deep in slush. The boy drives a dusty, discouraged-looking
cow into the bail, and pins her head there; then he gets tackle on to
her right hind leg, hauls it back, and makes it fast to the fence. There are eleven cows, but not one of them can be milked out of the
bail--chiefly because their teats are sore. The selector does not
know what makes the teats sore, but he has an unquestioning faith in a
certain ointment, recommended to him by a man who knows less about
cows than he does himself, which he causes to be applied at irregular
intervals--leaving the mode of application to the discretion of his son. Meanwhile the teats remain sore. Having made the cow fast, the youngster cautiously takes hold of the
least sore teat, yanks it suddenly, and dodges the cow's hock. When he
gets enough milk to dip his dirty hands in, he moistens the teats, and
things go on more smoothly. Now and then he relieves the monotony of
his occupation by squirting at the eye of a calf which is dozing in the
adjacent pen. Other times he milks into his mouth. Every time the cow
kicks, a burr or a grass-seed or a bit of something else falls into the
milk, and the boy drowns these things with a well-directed stream--on
the principle that what's out of sight is out of mind. Sometimes the boy sticks his head into the cow's side, hangs on by a
teat, and dozes, while the bucket, mechanically gripped between his
knees, sinks lower and lower till it rests on the ground. Likely as
not he'll doze on until his mother's shrill voice startles him with an
inquiry as to whether he intends to get that milking done to-day; other
times he is roused by the plunging of the cow, or knocked over by a calf
which has broken through a defective panel in the pen. In the latter
case the youth gets tackle on to the calf, detaches its head from the
teat with the heel of his boot, and makes it fast somewhere. Sometimes
the cow breaks or loosens the leg-rope and gets her leg into the bucket
and then the youth clings desperately to the pail and hopes she'll get
her hoof out again without spilling the milk. Sometimes she does, more
often she doesn't--it depends on the strength of the boy and the pail
and on the strategy of the former. Anyway, the boy will lam the cow down
with a jagged yard shovel, let her out, and bail up another. When he considers that he has finished milking he lets the cows out
with their calves and carries the milk down to the dairy, where he has
a heated argument with his mother, who--judging from the quantity of
milk--has reason to believe that he has slummed some of the milkers. This he indignantly denies, telling her she knows very well the cows are
going dry. The dairy is built of rotten box bark--though there is plenty of good
stringy-bark within easy distance--and the structure looks as if it
wants to lie down and is only prevented by three crooked props on the
leaning side; more props will soon be needed in the rear for the dairy
shows signs of going in that direction. The milk is set in dishes made
of kerosene-tins, cut in halves, which are placed on bark shelves fitted
round against the walls. The shelves are not level and the dishes are
brought to a comparatively horizontal position by means of chips and
bits of bark, inserted under the lower side. The milk is covered by
soiled sheets of old newspapers supported on sticks laid across the
dishes. This protection is necessary, because the box bark in the roof
has crumbled away and left fringed holes--also because the fowls roost
up there. Sometimes the paper sags, and the cream may have to be scraped
off an article on dairy farming. The selector's wife removes the newspapers, and reveals a thick, yellow
layer of rich cream, plentifully peppered with dust that has drifted in
somehow. She runs a forefinger round the edges of the cream to detach it
from the tin, wipes her finger in her mouth, and skims. If the milk and
cream are very thick she rolls the cream over like a pancake with her
fingers, and lifts it out in sections. The thick milk is poured into a
slop-bucket, for the pigs and calves, the dishes are "cleaned"--by the
aid of a dipper full of warm water and a rag--and the wife proceeds
to set the morning's milk. Tom holds up the doubtful-looking rag that
serves as a strainer while his mother pours in the milk. Sometimes the
boy's hands get tired and he lets some of the milk run over, and gets
into trouble; but it doesn't matter much, for the straining-cloth has
several sizable holes in the middle. The door of the dairy faces the dusty road and is off its hinges and has
to be propped up. The prop is missing this morning, and Tommy is accused
of having been seen chasing old Poley with it at an earlier hour. He
never seed the damn prop, never chased no cow with it, and wants to know
what's the use of always accusing him. He further complains that he's
always blamed for everything. The pole is not forthcoming, and so an old
dray is backed against the door to keep it in position. There is more
trouble about a cow that is lost, and hasn't been milked for two days. The boy takes the cows up to the paddock sliprails and lets the top rail
down: the lower rail fits rather tightly and some exertion is
required to free it, so he makes the animals jump that one. Then he
"poddies"-hand-feeds--the calves which have been weaned too early. He carries the skim-milk to the yard in a bucket made out of an
oil-drum--sometimes a kerosene-tin--seizes a calf by the nape of the
neck with his left hand, inserts the dirty forefinger of his right
into its mouth, and shoves its head down into the milk. The calf sucks,
thinking it has a teat, and pretty soon it butts violently--as calves do
to remind their mothers to let down the milk--and the boy's wrist gets
barked against the jagged edge of the bucket. He welts that calf in the
jaw, kicks it in the stomach, tries to smother it with its nose in the
milk, and finally dismisses it with the assistance of the calf rope and
a shovel, and gets another. His hand feels sticky and the cleaned finger
makes it look as if he wore a filthy, greasy glove with the forefinger
torn off. The selector himself is standing against a fence talking to a neighbour. His arms rest on the top rail of the fence, his chin rests on his hands,
his pipe rests between his fingers, and his eyes rest on a white
cow that is chewing her cud on the opposite side of the fence. The
neighbour's arms rest on the top rail also, his chin rests on his hands,
his pipe rests between his fingers, and his eyes rest on the cow. They
are talking about that cow. They have been talking about her for three
hours. She is chewing her cud. Her nose is well up and forward, and her
eyes are shut. She lets her lower jaw fall a little, moves it to one
side, lifts it again, and brings it back into position with a springing
kind of jerk that has almost a visible recoil. Then her jaws stay
perfectly still for a moment, and you would think she had stopped
chewing. But she hasn't. Now and again a soft, easy, smooth-going
swallow passes visibly along her clean, white throat and disappears. She
chews again, and by and by she loses consciousness and forgets to chew. She never opens her eyes. She is young and in good condition; she has
had enough to eat, the sun is just properly warm for her, and--well, if
an animal can be really happy, she ought to be. Presently the two men drag themselves away from the fence, fill their
pipes, and go to have a look at some rows of forked sticks, apparently
stuck in the ground for some purpose. The selector calls these sticks
fruit-trees, and he calls the place "the orchard." They fool round these
wretched sticks until dinnertime, when the neighbour says he must be
getting home. "Stay and have some dinner! Man alive! Stay and have some
dinner!" says the selector; and so the friend stays. It is a broiling hot day in summer, and the dinner consists of hot
roast meat, hot baked potatoes, hot cabbage, hot pumpkin, hot peas, and
burning-hot plum-pudding. The family drinks on an average four cups of
tea each per meal. The wife takes her place at the head of the
table with a broom to keep the fowls out, and at short intervals she
interrupts the conversation with such exclamations as "Shoo! shoo!" "Tommy, can't you see that fowl? Drive it out!" The fowls evidently pass
a lot of their time in the house. They mark the circle described by the
broom, and take care to keep two or three inches beyond it. Every now
and then you see a fowl on the dresser amongst the crockery, and there
is great concern to get it out before it breaks something. While dinner
is in progress two steers get into the wheat through a broken rail which
has been spliced with stringy-bark, and a calf or two break into
the vineyard. And yet this careless Australian selector, who is too
shiftless to put up a decent fence, or build a decent house and who
knows little or nothing about farming, would seem by his conversation
to have read up all the great social and political questions of the
day. Here are some fragments of conversation caught at the
dinner-table. Present--the selector, the missus, the neighbour,
Corney George--nicknamed "Henry George"--Tommy, Jacky, and the younger
children. The spaces represent interruptions by the fowls and children:

Corney George (continuing conversation): "But Henry George says, in
'Progress and Poverty,' he says--"

Missus (to the fowls): "Shoo! Shoo!" Corney: "He says--"

Tom: "Marther, jist speak to this Jack." Missus (to Jack): "If you can't behave yourself, leave the table." Tom [Corney, probably]: "He says in Progress and--"

Missus: "Shoo!" Neighbour: "I think 'Lookin' Backwards' is more--"

Missus: "Shoo! Shoo! Tom, can't you see that fowl?" Selector: "Now I think 'Caesar's Column' is more likely--Just look at--"

Missus: "Shoo! Shoo!" Selector: "Just look at the French Revolution." Corney: "Now, Henry George-"

Tom: "Marther! I seen a old-man kangaroo up on--"

Missus: "Shut up! Eat your dinner an' hold your tongue. Carn't you see
someone's speakin'?" Selector: "Just look at the French--"

Missus (to the fowls): "Shoo! Shoo!" (turning suddenly and unexpectedly
on Jacky): "Take your fingers out of the sugar!--Blast yer! that I
should say such a thing." Neighbour: "But 'Lookin' Backwards"'

Missus: "There you go, Tom! Didn't I say you'd spill that tea? Go away
from the table!" Selector: "I think 'Caesar's Column' is the only natural--"

Missus: "Shoo! Shoo!" She loses patience, gets up and fetches a young
rooster with the flat of the broom, sending him flying into the yard; he
falls with his head towards the door and starts in again. Later on the
conversation is about Deeming. Selector: "There's no doubt the man's mad--"

Missus: "Deeming! That Windsor wretch! Why, if I was in the law I'd have
him boiled alive! Don't tell me he didn't know what he was doing! Why,
I'd have him--"

Corney: "But, missus, you--"

Missus (to the fowls): "Shoo! Shoo!" THAT THERE DOG O' MINE


Macquarie the shearer had met with an accident. To tell the truth, he
had been in a drunken row at a wayside shanty, from which he had escaped
with three fractured ribs, a cracked head, and various minor abrasions. His dog, Tally, had been a sober but savage participator in the drunken
row, and had escaped with a broken leg. Macquarie afterwards shouldered
his swag and staggered and struggled along the track ten miles to the
Union Town hospital. Lord knows how he did it. He didn't exactly know
himself. Tally limped behind all the way, on three legs. The doctors examined the man's injuries and were surprised at his
endurance. Even doctors are surprised sometimes--though they don't
always show it. Of course they would take him in, but they objected to
Tally. Dogs were not allowed on the premises. "You will have to turn that dog out," they said to the shearer, as he
sat on the edge of a bed. Macquarie said nothing. "We cannot allow dogs about the place, my man," said the doctor in a
louder tone, thinking the man was deaf. "Tie him up in the yard then." "No. He must go out. Dogs are not permitted on the grounds." Macquarie rose slowly to his feet, shut his agony behind his set
teeth, painfully buttoned his shirt over his hairy chest, took up his
waistcoat, and staggered to the corner where the swag lay. "What are you going to do?" they asked. "You ain't going to let my dog stop?" "No. It's against the rules. There are no dogs allowed on premises." He stooped and lifted his swag, but the pain was too great, and he
leaned back against the wall. "Come, come now! man alive!" exclaimed the doctor, impatiently. "You
must be mad. You know you are not in a fit state to go out. Let the
wardsman help you to undress." "No!" said Macquarie. "No. If you won't take my dog in you don't take
me. He's got a broken leg and wants fixing up just--just as much as--as
I do. If I'm good enough to come in, he's good enough--and--and better." He paused awhile, breathing painfully, and then went on. "That--that there old dog of mine has follered me faithful and true,
these twelve long hard and hungry years. He's about--about the only
thing that ever cared whether I lived or fell and rotted on the cursed
track." He rested again; then he continued: "That--that there dog was pupped
on the track," he said, with a sad sort of a smile. "I carried him for
months in a billy, and afterwards on my swag when he knocked up.... And
the old slut--his mother--she'd foller along quite contented--and sniff
the billy now and again--just to see if he was all right.... She follered
me for God knows how many years. She follered me till she was blind--and
for a year after. She follered me till she could crawl along through the
dust no longer, and--and then I killed her, because I couldn't leave her
behind alive!" He rested again. "And this here old dog," he continued, touching Tally's upturned nose
with his knotted fingers, "this here old dog has follered me for--for
ten years; through floods and droughts, through fair times and--and
hard--mostly hard; and kept me from going mad when I had no mate nor
money on the lonely track; and watched over me for weeks when I was
drunk--drugged and poisoned at the cursed shanties; and saved my life
more'n once, and got kicks and curses very often for thanks; and forgave
me for it all; and--and fought for me. He was the only living thing that
stood up for me against that crawling push of curs when they set onter
me at the shanty back yonder--and he left his mark on some of 'em too;
and--and so did I." He took another spell. Then he drew in his breath, shut his teeth hard, shouldered his swag,
stepped into the doorway, and faced round again. The dog limped out of the corner and looked up anxiously. "That there dog," said Macquarie to the hospital staff in general, "is a
better dog than I'm a man--or you too, it seems--and a better Christian. He's been a better mate to me than I ever was to any man--or any man
to me. He's watched over me; kep' me from getting robbed many a time;
fought for me; saved my life and took drunken kicks and curses for
thanks--and forgave me. He's been a true, straight, honest, and faithful
mate to me--and I ain't going to desert him now. I ain't going to kick
him out in the road with a broken leg. I--Oh, my God! my back!" He groaned and lurched forward, but they caught him, slipped off the
swag, and laid him on a bed. Half an hour later the shearer was comfortably fixed up. "Where's my dog!" he asked, when he came to himself. "Oh, the dog's all right," said the nurse, rather impatiently. "Don't
bother. The doctor's setting his leg out in the yard." GOING BLIND


I met him in the Full-and-Plenty Dining Rooms. It was a cheap place in
the city, with good beds upstairs let at one shilling per night--"Board
and residence for respectable single men, fifteen shillings per week." I was a respectable single man then. I boarded and resided there. I
boarded at a greasy little table in the greasy little corner under the
fluffy little staircase in the hot and greasy little dining-room or
restaurant downstairs. They called it dining-rooms, but it was only one
room, and them wasn't half enough room in it to work your elbows when
the seven little tables and forty-nine chairs were occupied. There was
not room for an ordinary-sized steward to pass up and down between the
tables; but our waiter was not an ordinary-sized man--he was a living
skeleton in miniature. We handed the soup, and the "roast beef one," and
"roast lamb one," "corn beef and cabbage one," "veal and stuffing one,"
and the "veal and pickled pork," one--or two, or three, as the case
might be--and the tea and coffee, and the various kinds of puddings--we
handed them over each other, and dodged the drops as well as we could. The very hot and very greasy little kitchen was adjacent, and it
contained the bathroom and other conveniences, behind screens of
whitewashed boards. I resided upstairs in a room where there were five beds and one
wash-stand; one candle-stick, with a very short bit of soft yellow
candle in it; the back of a hair-brush, with about a dozen bristles in
it; and half a comb--the big-tooth end--with nine and a half teeth at
irregular distances apart. He was a typical bushman, not one of those tall, straight, wiry, brown
men of the West, but from the old Selection Districts, where many
drovers came from, and of the old bush school; one of those slight
active little fellows whom we used to see in cabbage-tree hats, Crimean
shirts, strapped trousers, and elastic-side boots--"larstins," they
called them. They could dance well; sing indifferently, and mostly
through their noses, the old bush songs; play the concertina horribly;
and ride like--like--well, they _could_ ride. He seemed as if he had forgotten to grow old and die out with this old
colonial school to which he belonged. They _had_ careless and forgetful
ways about them. His name was Jack Gunther, he said, and he'd come to
Sydney to try to get something done to his eyes. He had a portmanteau,
a carpet bag, some things in a three-bushel bag, and a tin bog. I sat
beside him on his bed, and struck up an acquaintance, and he told me
all about it. First he asked me would I mind shifting round to the other
side, as he was rather deaf in that ear. He'd been kicked by a horse, he
said, and had been a little dull o' hearing on that side ever since. He was as good as blind. "I can see the people near me," he said, "but
I can't make out their faces. I can just make out the pavement and the
houses close at hand, and all the rest is a sort of white blur." He
looked up: "That ceiling is a kind of white, ain't it? And this,"
tapping the wall and putting his nose close to it, "is a sort of green,
ain't it?" The ceiling might have been whiter. The prevalent tints of
the wall-paper had originally been blue and red, but it was mostly green
enough now--a damp, rotten green; but I was ready to swear that the
ceiling was snow and that the walls were as green as grass if it would
have made him feel more comfortable. His sight began to get bad about
six years before, he said; he didn't take much notice of it at first,
and then he saw a quack, who made his eyes worse. He had already the
manner of the blind--the touch of every finger, and even the gentleness
in his speech. He had a boy down with him--a "sorter cousin of his," and
the boy saw him round. "I'll have to be sending that youngster back,"
he said, "I think I'll send him home next week. He'll be picking up and
learning too much down here." I happened to know the district he came from, and we would sit by the
hour and talk about the country, and chaps by the name of this and chaps
by the name of that--drovers mostly, whom we had met or had heard of. He asked me if I'd ever heard of a chap by the name of Joe Scott--a big
sandy-complexioned chap, who might be droving; he was his brother, or,
at least, his half-brother, but he hadn't heard of him for years;
he'd last heard of him at Blackall, in Queensland; he might have gone
overland to Western Australia with Tyson's cattle to the new country. We talked about grubbing and fencing and digging and droving and
shearing--all about the bush--and it all came back to me as we talked. 