



Produced by Jim Tinsley <jtinsley@pobox.com>





POEMS

by EMILY DICKINSON




Edited by two of her friends

MABEL LOOMIS TODD and T.W. HIGGINSON




PREFACE. The verses of Emily Dickinson belong emphatically to what Emerson
long since called "the Poetry of the Portfolio,"--something produced
absolutely without the thought of publication, and solely by way of
expression of the writer's own mind. Such verse must inevitably
forfeit whatever advantage lies in the discipline of public criticism
and the enforced conformity to accepted ways. On the other hand, it
may often gain something through the habit of freedom and the
unconventional utterance of daring thoughts. In the case of the
present author, there was absolutely no choice in the matter; she
must write thus, or not at all. A recluse by temperament and habit,
literally spending years without setting her foot beyond the
doorstep, and many more years during which her walks were strictly
limited to her father's grounds, she habitually concealed her mind,
like her person, from all but a very few friends; and it was with
great difficulty that she was persuaded to print, during her
lifetime, three or four poems. Yet she wrote verses in great
abundance; and though brought curiously indifferent to all
conventional rules, had yet a rigorous literary standard of her own,
and often altered a word many times to suit an ear which had its own
tenacious fastidiousness. Miss Dickinson was born in Amherst, Mass., Dec. 10, 1830, and died
there May 15, 1886. Her father, Hon. Edward Dickinson, was the
leading lawyer of Amherst, and was treasurer of the well-known
college there situated. It was his custom once a year to hold a large
reception at his house, attended by all the families connected with
the institution and by the leading people of the town. On these
occasions his daughter Emily emerged from her wonted retirement and
did her part as gracious hostess; nor would any one have known from
her manner, I have been told, that this was not a daily occurrence. The annual occasion once past, she withdrew again into her seclusion,
and except for a very few friends was as invisible to the world as if
she had dwelt in a nunnery. For myself, although I had corresponded
with her for many years, I saw her but twice face to face, and
brought away the impression of something as unique and remote as
Undine or Mignon or Thekla. This selection from her poems is published to meet the desire of her
personal friends, and especially of her surviving sister. It is
believed that the thoughtful reader will find in these pages a
quality more suggestive of the poetry of William Blake than of
anything to be elsewhere found,--flashes of wholly original and
profound insight into nature and life; words and phrases exhibiting
an extraordinary vividness of descriptive and imaginative power, yet
often set in a seemingly whimsical or even rugged frame. They are
here published as they were written, with very few and superficial
changes; although it is fair to say that the titles have been
assigned, almost invariably, by the editors. In many cases these
verses will seem to the reader like poetry torn up by the roots, with
rain and dew and earth still clinging to them, giving a freshness and
a fragrance not otherwise to be conveyed. In other cases, as in the
few poems of shipwreck or of mental conflict, we can only wonder at
the gift of vivid imagination by which this recluse woman can
delineate, by a few touches, the very crises of physical or mental
struggle. And sometimes again we catch glimpses of a lyric strain,
sustained perhaps but for a line or two at a time, and making the
reader regret its sudden cessation. But the main quality of these
poems is that of extraordinary grasp and insight, uttered with an
uneven vigor sometimes exasperating, seemingly wayward, but really
unsought and inevitable. After all, when a thought takes one's
breath away, a lesson on grammar seems an impertinence. As Ruskin
wrote in his earlier and better days, "No weight nor mass nor beauty
of execution can outweigh one grain or fragment of thought." ---Thomas Wentworth Higginson







TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

As is well documented, Emily Dickinson's poems were edited in these
early editions by her friends, better to fit the conventions of the
times. In particular, her dashes, often small enough to appear
as dots, became commas and semi-colons. In the second series of poems published, a facsimile of her
handwritten poem which her editors titled "Renunciation" is given,
and I here transcribe that manuscript as faithfully as I can,
showing _underlined_ words thus. There came a day - at Summer's full -
Entirely for me -
I thought that such were for the Saints -
Where Resurrections - be -

The sun - as common - went abroad -
The flowers - accustomed - blew,
As if no soul - that solstice passed -
Which maketh all things - new -

The time was scarce profaned - by speech -
The falling of a word
Was needless - as at Sacrament -
The _Wardrobe_ - of our Lord! Each was to each - the sealed church -
Permitted to commune -  _this_ time -
Lest we too awkward show
At Supper of "the Lamb." The hours slid fast - as hours will -
Clutched tight - by greedy hands -
So - faces on two Decks look back -
Bound to _opposing_ lands. And so, when all the time had leaked,
Without external sound,
Each bound the other's Crucifix -
We gave no other bond -

Sufficient troth - that we shall _rise_,
Deposed - at length the Grave -
To that new marriage -
_Justified_ - through Calvaries - of Love! From the handwriting, it is not always clear which are dashes,
which are commas and which are periods, nor it is entirely
clear which initial letters are capitalized. However, this transcription may be compared with the edited
version in the main text to get a flavor of the changes made
in these early editions. ---JT










    This is my letter to the world,
       That never wrote to me, --
    The simple news that Nature told,
       With tender majesty. Her message is committed
       To hands I cannot see;
    For love of her, sweet countrymen,
       Judge tenderly of me! I. LIFE. I. SUCCESS. [Published in "A Masque of Poets"
at the request of "H.H.," the author's
fellow-townswoman and friend.] Success is counted sweetest
By those who ne'er succeed. To comprehend a nectar
Requires sorest need. Not one of all the purple host
Who took the flag to-day
Can tell the definition,
So clear, of victory,

As he, defeated, dying,
On whose forbidden ear
The distant strains of triumph
Break, agonized and clear! II. Our share of night to bear,
Our share of morning,
Our blank in bliss to fill,
Our blank in scorning. Here a star, and there a star,
Some lose their way. Here a mist, and there a mist,
Afterwards -- day! III. ROUGE ET NOIR. Soul, wilt thou toss again? By just such a hazard
Hundreds have lost, indeed,
But tens have won an all. Angels' breathless ballot
Lingers to record thee;
Imps in eager caucus
Raffle for my soul. IV. ROUGE GAGNE. 'T is so much joy! 'T is so much joy! If I should fail, what poverty! And yet, as poor as I
Have ventured all upon a throw;
Have gained! Yes! Hesitated so
This side the victory! Life is but life, and death but death! Bliss is but bliss, and breath but breath! And if, indeed, I fail,
At least to know the worst is sweet. Defeat means nothing but defeat,
No drearier can prevail! And if I gain, -- oh, gun at sea,
Oh, bells that in the steeples be,
At first repeat it slow! For heaven is a different thing
Conjectured, and waked sudden in,
And might o'erwhelm me so! V.

Glee! The great storm is over! Four have recovered the land;
Forty gone down together
Into the boiling sand. Ring, for the scant salvation! Toll, for the bonnie souls, --
Neighbor and friend and bridegroom,
Spinning upon the shoals! How they will tell the shipwreck
When winter shakes the door,
Till the children ask, "But the forty? Did they come back no more?" Then a silence suffuses the story,
And a softness the teller's eye;
And the children no further question,
And only the waves reply. VI. If I can stop one heart from breaking,
I shall not live in vain;
If I can ease one life the aching,
Or cool one pain,
Or help one fainting robin
Unto his nest again,
I shall not live in vain. VII. ALMOST! Within my reach! I could have touched! I might have chanced that way! Soft sauntered through the village,
Sauntered as soft away! So unsuspected violets
Within the fields lie low,
Too late for striving fingers
That passed, an hour ago. VIII. A wounded deer leaps highest,
I've heard the hunter tell;
'T is but the ecstasy of death,
And then the brake is still. The smitten rock that gushes,
The trampled steel that springs;
A cheek is always redder
Just where the hectic stings! Mirth is the mail of anguish,
In which it cautions arm,
Lest anybody spy the blood
And "You're hurt" exclaim! IX. The heart asks pleasure first,
And then, excuse from pain;
And then, those little anodynes
That deaden suffering;

And then, to go to sleep;
And then, if it should be
The will of its Inquisitor,
The liberty to die. X. IN A LIBRARY. A precious, mouldering pleasure 't is
To meet an antique book,
In just the dress his century wore;
A privilege, I think,

His venerable hand to take,
And warming in our own,
A passage back, or two, to make
To times when he was young. His quaint opinions to inspect,
His knowledge to unfold
On what concerns our mutual mind,
The literature of old;

What interested scholars most,
What competitions ran
When Plato was a certainty. And Sophocles a man;

When Sappho was a living girl,
And Beatrice wore
The gown that Dante deified. Facts, centuries before,

He traverses familiar,
As one should come to town
And tell you all your dreams were true;
He lived where dreams were sown. His presence is enchantment,
You beg him not to go;
Old volumes shake their vellum heads
And tantalize, just so. XI. Much madness is divinest sense
To a discerning eye;
Much sense the starkest madness. 'T is the majority
In this, as all, prevails. Assent, and you are sane;
Demur, -- you're straightway dangerous,
And handled with a chain. XII. I asked no other thing,
No other was denied. I offered Being for it;
The mighty merchant smiled. Brazil? He twirled a button,
Without a glance my way:
"But, madam, is there nothing else
That we can show to-day?" XIII. EXCLUSION. The soul selects her own society,
Then shuts the door;
On her divine majority
Obtrude no more. Unmoved, she notes the chariot's pausing
At her low gate;
Unmoved, an emperor is kneeling
Upon her mat. I've known her from an ample nation
Choose one;
Then close the valves of her attention
Like stone. XIV. THE SECRET. Some things that fly there be, --
Birds, hours, the bumble-bee:
Of these no elegy. Some things that stay there be, --
Grief, hills, eternity:
Nor this behooveth me. There are, that resting, rise. Can I expound the skies? How still the riddle lies! XV. THE LONELY HOUSE. I know some lonely houses off the road
A robber 'd like the look of, --
Wooden barred,
And windows hanging low,
Inviting to
A portico,
Where two could creep:
One hand the tools,
The other peep
To make sure all's asleep. Old-fashioned eyes,
Not easy to surprise! How orderly the kitchen 'd look by night,
With just a clock, --
But they could gag the tick,
And mice won't bark;
And so the walls don't tell,
None will. A pair of spectacles ajar just stir --
An almanac's aware. Was it the mat winked,
Or a nervous star? The moon slides down the stair
To see who's there. There's plunder, -- where? Tankard, or spoon,
Earring, or stone,
A watch, some ancient brooch
To match the grandmamma,
Staid sleeping there. Day rattles, too,
Stealth's slow;
The sun has got as far
As the third sycamore. Screams chanticleer,
"Who's there?" And echoes, trains away,
Sneer -- "Where?" While the old couple, just astir,
Fancy the sunrise left the door ajar! XVI. To fight aloud is very brave,
But gallanter, I know,
Who charge within the bosom,
The cavalry of woe. Who win, and nations do not see,
Who fall, and none observe,
Whose dying eyes no country
Regards with patriot love. We trust, in plumed procession,
For such the angels go,
Rank after rank, with even feet
And uniforms of snow. XVII. DAWN. When night is almost done,
And sunrise grows so near
That we can touch the spaces,
It 's time to smooth the hair

And get the dimples ready,
And wonder we could care
For that old faded midnight
That frightened but an hour. XVIII. THE BOOK OF MARTYRS. Read, sweet, how others strove,
Till we are stouter;
What they renounced,
Till we are less afraid;
How many times they bore
The faithful witness,
Till we are helped,
As if a kingdom cared! Read then of faith
That shone above the fagot;
Clear strains of hymn
The river could not drown;
Brave names of men
And celestial women,
Passed out of record
Into renown! XIX. THE MYSTERY OF PAIN. Pain has an element of blank;
It cannot recollect
When it began, or if there were
A day when it was not. It has no future but itself,
Its infinite realms contain
Its past, enlightened to perceive
New periods of pain. XX. I taste a liquor never brewed,
From tankards scooped in pearl;
Not all the vats upon the Rhine
Yield such an alcohol! Inebriate of air am I,
And debauchee of dew,
Reeling, through endless summer days,
From inns of molten blue. When landlords turn the drunken bee
Out of the foxglove's door,
When butterflies renounce their drams,
I shall but drink the more! Till seraphs swing their snowy hats,
And saints to windows run,
To see the little tippler
Leaning against the sun! XXI. A BOOK. He ate and drank the precious words,
His spirit grew robust;
He knew no more that he was poor,
Nor that his frame was dust. He danced along the dingy days,
And this bequest of wings
Was but a book. What liberty
A loosened spirit brings! XXII. I had no time to hate, because
The grave would hinder me,
And life was not so ample I
Could finish enmity. Nor had I time to love; but since
Some industry must be,
The little toil of love, I thought,
Was large enough for me. XXIII. UNRETURNING. 'T was such a little, little boat
That toddled down the bay! 'T was such a gallant, gallant sea
That beckoned it away! 'T was such a greedy, greedy wave
That licked it from the coast;
Nor ever guessed the stately sails
My little craft was lost! XXIV. Whether my bark went down at sea,
Whether she met with gales,
Whether to isles enchanted
She bent her docile sails;

By what mystic mooring
She is held to-day, --
This is the errand of the eye
Out upon the bay. XXV. Belshazzar had a letter, --
He never had but one;
Belshazzar's correspondent
Concluded and begun
In that immortal copy
The conscience of us all
Can read without its glasses
On revelation's wall. XXVI. The brain within its groove
Runs evenly and true;
But let a splinter swerve,
'T were easier for you
To put the water back
When floods have slit the hills,
And scooped a turnpike for themselves,
And blotted out the mills! II. LOVE. I. MINE. Mine by the right of the white election! Mine by the royal seal! Mine by the sign in the scarlet prison
Bars cannot conceal! Mine, here in vision and in veto! Mine, by the grave's repeal
Titled, confirmed, -- delirious charter! Mine, while the ages steal! II. BEQUEST. You left me, sweet, two legacies, --
A legacy of love
A Heavenly Father would content,
Had He the offer of;

You left me boundaries of pain
Capacious as the sea,
Between eternity and time,
Your consciousness and me. III. Alter? When the hills do. Falter? When the sun
Question if his glory
Be the perfect one. Surfeit? When the daffodil
Doth of the dew:
Even as herself, O friend! I will of you! IV. SUSPENSE. Elysium is as far as to
The very nearest room,
If in that room a friend await
Felicity or doom. What fortitude the soul contains,
That it can so endure
The accent of a coming foot,
The opening of a door! V.

SURRENDER. Doubt me, my dim companion! Why, God would be content
With but a fraction of the love
Poured thee without a stint. The whole of me, forever,
What more the woman can, --
Say quick, that I may dower thee
With last delight I own! It cannot be my spirit,
For that was thine before;
I ceded all of dust I knew, --
What opulence the more
Had I, a humble maiden,
Whose farthest of degree
Was that she might,
Some distant heaven,
Dwell timidly with thee! VI. If you were coming in the fall,
I'd brush the summer by
With half a smile and half a spurn,
As housewives do a fly. If I could see you in a year,
I'd wind the months in balls,
And put them each in separate drawers,
Until their time befalls. If only centuries delayed,
I'd count them on my hand,
Subtracting till my fingers dropped
Into Van Diemen's land. If certain, when this life was out,
That yours and mine should be,
I'd toss it yonder like a rind,
And taste eternity. But now, all ignorant of the length
Of time's uncertain wing,
It goads me, like the goblin bee,
That will not state its sting. VII. WITH A FLOWER. I hide myself within my flower,
That wearing on your breast,
You, unsuspecting, wear me too --
And angels know the rest. I hide myself within my flower,
That, fading from your vase,
You, unsuspecting, feel for me
Almost a loneliness. VIII. PROOF. That I did always love,
I bring thee proof:
That till I loved
I did not love enough. That I shall love alway,
I offer thee
That love is life,
And life hath immortality. This, dost thou doubt, sweet? Then have I
Nothing to show
But Calvary. IX. Have you got a brook in your little heart,
Where bashful flowers blow,
And blushing birds go down to drink,
And shadows tremble so? And nobody knows, so still it flows,
That any brook is there;
And yet your little draught of life
Is daily drunken there. Then look out for the little brook in March,
When the rivers overflow,
And the snows come hurrying from the hills,
And the bridges often go. And later, in August it may be,
When the meadows parching lie,
Beware, lest this little brook of life
Some burning noon go dry! X.

TRANSPLANTED. As if some little Arctic flower,
Upon the polar hem,
Went wandering down the latitudes,
Until it puzzled came
To continents of summer,
To firmaments of sun,
To strange, bright crowds of flowers,
And birds of foreign tongue! I say, as if this little flower
To Eden wandered in --
What then? Why, nothing, only,
Your inference therefrom! XI. THE OUTLET. My river runs to thee:
Blue sea, wilt welcome me? My river waits reply. Oh sea, look graciously! I'll fetch thee brooks
From spotted nooks, --

Say, sea,
Take me! XII. IN VAIN. I cannot live with you,
It would be life,
And life is over there
Behind the shelf

The sexton keeps the key to,
Putting up
Our life, his porcelain,
Like a cup

Discarded of the housewife,
Quaint or broken;
A newer Sevres pleases,
Old ones crack. I could not die with you,
For one must wait
To shut the other's gaze down, --
You could not. And I, could I stand by
And see you freeze,
Without my right of frost,
Death's privilege? Nor could I rise with you,
Because your face
Would put out Jesus',
That new grace

Glow plain and foreign
On my homesick eye,
Except that you, than he
Shone closer by. They'd judge us -- how? For you served Heaven, you know,
Or sought to;
I could not,

Because you saturated sight,
And I had no more eyes
For sordid excellence
As Paradise. And were you lost, I would be,
Though my name
Rang loudest
On the heavenly fame. And were you saved,
And I condemned to be
Where you were not,
That self were hell to me. So we must keep apart,
You there, I here,
With just the door ajar
That oceans are,
And prayer,
And that pale sustenance,
Despair! XIII. RENUNCIATION. There came a day at summer's full
Entirely for me;
I thought that such were for the saints,
Where revelations be. The sun, as common, went abroad,
The flowers, accustomed, blew,
As if no soul the solstice passed
That maketh all things new. The time was scarce profaned by speech;
The symbol of a word
Was needless, as at sacrament
The wardrobe of our Lord. Each was to each the sealed church,
Permitted to commune this time,
Lest we too awkward show
At supper of the Lamb. The hours slid fast, as hours will,
Clutched tight by greedy hands;
So faces on two decks look back,
Bound to opposing lands. And so, when all the time had failed,
Without external sound,
Each bound the other's crucifix,
We gave no other bond. Sufficient troth that we shall rise --
Deposed, at length, the grave --
To that new marriage, justified
Through Calvaries of Love! XIV. LOVE'S BAPTISM. I'm ceded, I've stopped being theirs;
The name they dropped upon my face
With water, in the country church,
Is finished using now,
And they can put it with my dolls,
My childhood, and the string of spools
I've finished threading too. Baptized before without the choice,
But this time consciously, of grace
Unto supremest name,
Called to my full, the crescent dropped,
Existence's whole arc filled up
With one small diadem. My second rank, too small the first,
Crowned, crowing on my father's breast,
A half unconscious queen;
But this time, adequate, erect,
With will to choose or to reject. And I choose -- just a throne. XV. RESURRECTION. 'T was a long parting, but the time
For interview had come;
Before the judgment-seat of God,
The last and second time

These fleshless lovers met,
A heaven in a gaze,
A heaven of heavens, the privilege
Of one another's eyes. No lifetime set on them,
Apparelled as the new
Unborn, except they had beheld,
Born everlasting now. Was bridal e'er like this? A paradise, the host,
And cherubim and seraphim
The most familiar guest. XVI. APOCALYPSE. I'm wife; I've finished that,
That other state;
I'm Czar, I'm woman now:
It's safer so. How odd the girl's life looks
Behind this soft eclipse! I think that earth seems so
To those in heaven now. This being comfort, then
That other kind was pain;
But why compare? I'm wife! stop there! XVII. THE WIFE. She rose to his requirement, dropped
The playthings of her life
To take the honorable work
Of woman and of wife. If aught she missed in her new day
Of amplitude, or awe,
Or first prospective, or the gold
In using wore away,

It lay unmentioned, as the sea
Develops pearl and weed,
But only to himself is known
The fathoms they abide. XVIII. APOTHEOSIS. Come slowly, Eden! Lips unused to thee,
Bashful, sip thy jasmines,
As the fainting bee,

Reaching late his flower,
Round her chamber hums,
Counts his nectars -- enters,
And is lost in balms! III. NATURE. I. New feet within my garden go,
New fingers stir the sod;
A troubadour upon the elm
Betrays the solitude. New children play upon the green,
New weary sleep below;
And still the pensive spring returns,
And still the punctual snow! II. MAY-FLOWER. Pink, small, and punctual,
Aromatic, low,
Covert in April,
Candid in May,

Dear to the moss,
Known by the knoll,
Next to the robin
In every human soul. Bold little beauty,
Bedecked with thee,
Nature forswears
Antiquity. III. WHY? The murmur of a bee
A witchcraft yieldeth me. If any ask me why,
'T were easier to die
Than tell. The red upon the hill
Taketh away my will;
If anybody sneer,
Take care, for God is here,
That's all. The breaking of the day
Addeth to my degree;
If any ask me how,
Artist, who drew me so,
Must tell! IV. Perhaps you'd like to buy a flower? But I could never sell. If you would like to borrow
Until the daffodil

Unties her yellow bonnet
Beneath the village door,
Until the bees, from clover rows
Their hock and sherry draw,

Why, I will lend until just then,
But not an hour more! V.

The pedigree of honey
Does not concern the bee;
A clover, any time, to him
Is aristocracy. VI. A SERVICE OF SONG. Some keep the Sabbath going to church;
I keep it staying at home,
With a bobolink for a chorister,
And an orchard for a dome. Some keep the Sabbath in surplice;
I just wear my wings,
And instead of tolling the bell for church,
Our little sexton sings. God preaches, -- a noted clergyman, --
And the sermon is never long;
So instead of getting to heaven at last,
I'm going all along! VII. The bee is not afraid of me,
I know the butterfly;
The pretty people in the woods
Receive me cordially. The brooks laugh louder when I come,
The breezes madder play. Wherefore, mine eyes, thy silver mists? Wherefore, O summer's day? VIII. SUMMER'S ARMIES. Some rainbow coming from the fair! Some vision of the world Cashmere
I confidently see! Or else a peacock's purple train,
Feather by feather, on the plain
Fritters itself away! The dreamy butterflies bestir,
Lethargic pools resume the whir
Of last year's sundered tune. From some old fortress on the sun
Baronial bees march, one by one,
In murmuring platoon! The robins stand as thick to-day
As flakes of snow stood yesterday,
On fence and roof and twig. The orchis binds her feather on
For her old lover, Don the Sun,
Revisiting the bog! Without commander, countless, still,
The regiment of wood and hill
In bright detachment stand. Behold! Whose multitudes are these? The children of whose turbaned seas,
Or what Circassian land? IX. THE GRASS. The grass so little has to do, --
A sphere of simple green,
With only butterflies to brood,
And bees to entertain,

And stir all day to pretty tunes
The breezes fetch along,
And hold the sunshine in its lap
And bow to everything;

And thread the dews all night, like pearls,
And make itself so fine, --
A duchess were too common
For such a noticing. And even when it dies, to pass
In odors so divine,
As lowly spices gone to sleep,
Or amulets of pine. And then to dwell in sovereign barns,
And dream the days away, --
The grass so little has to do,
I wish I were the hay! X. A little road not made of man,
Enabled of the eye,
Accessible to thill of bee,
Or cart of butterfly. If town it have, beyond itself,
'T is that I cannot say;
I only sigh, -- no vehicle
Bears me along that way. XI. SUMMER SHOWER. A drop fell on the apple tree,
Another on the roof;
A half a dozen kissed the eaves,
And made the gables laugh. A few went out to help the brook,
That went to help the sea. Myself conjectured, Were they pearls,
What necklaces could be! The dust replaced in hoisted roads,
The birds jocoser sung;
The sunshine threw his hat away,
The orchards spangles hung. The breezes brought dejected lutes,
And bathed them in the glee;
The East put out a single flag,
And signed the fete away. XII. PSALM OF THE DAY. A something in a summer's day,
As slow her flambeaux burn away,
Which solemnizes me. A something in a summer's noon, --
An azure depth, a wordless tune,
Transcending ecstasy. And still within a summer's night
A something so transporting bright,
I clap my hands to see;

Then veil my too inspecting face,
Lest such a subtle, shimmering grace
Flutter too far for me. The wizard-fingers never rest,
The purple brook within the breast
Still chafes its narrow bed;

Still rears the East her amber flag,
Guides still the sun along the crag
His caravan of red,

Like flowers that heard the tale of dews,
But never deemed the dripping prize
Awaited their low brows;

Or bees, that thought the summer's name
Some rumor of delirium
No summer could for them;

Or Arctic creature, dimly stirred
By tropic hint, -- some travelled bird
Imported to the wood;

Or wind's bright signal to the ear,
Making that homely and severe,
Contented, known, before

The heaven unexpected came,
To lives that thought their worshipping
A too presumptuous psalm. XIII. THE SEA OF SUNSET. This is the land the sunset washes,
These are the banks of the Yellow Sea;
Where it rose, or whither it rushes,
These are the western mystery! Night after night her purple traffic
Strews the landing with opal bales;
Merchantmen poise upon horizons,
Dip, and vanish with fairy sails. XIV. PURPLE CLOVER. There is a flower that bees prefer,
And butterflies desire;
To gain the purple democrat
The humming-birds aspire. And whatsoever insect pass,
A honey bears away
Proportioned to his several dearth
And her capacity. Her face is rounder than the moon,
And ruddier than the gown
Of orchis in the pasture,
Or rhododendron worn. She doth not wait for June;
Before the world is green
Her sturdy little countenance
Against the wind is seen,

Contending with the grass,
Near kinsman to herself,
For privilege of sod and sun,
Sweet litigants for life. And when the hills are full,
And newer fashions blow,
Doth not retract a single spice
For pang of jealousy. Her public is the noon,
Her providence the sun,
Her progress by the bee proclaimed
In sovereign, swerveless tune. The bravest of the host,
Surrendering the last,
Nor even of defeat aware
When cancelled by the frost. XV. THE BEE. Like trains of cars on tracks of plush
I hear the level bee:
A jar across the flowers goes,
Their velvet masonry

Withstands until the sweet assault
Their chivalry consumes,
While he, victorious, tilts away
To vanquish other blooms. His feet are shod with gauze,
His helmet is of gold;
His breast, a single onyx
With chrysoprase, inlaid. His labor is a chant,
His idleness a tune;
Oh, for a bee's experience
Of clovers and of noon! XVI. Presentiment is that long shadow on the lawn
Indicative that suns go down;
The notice to the startled grass
That darkness is about to pass. XVII. As children bid the guest good-night,
And then reluctant turn,
My flowers raise their pretty lips,
Then put their nightgowns on. As children caper when they wake,
Merry that it is morn,
My flowers from a hundred cribs
Will peep, and prance again. XVIII. Angels in the early morning
May be seen the dews among,
Stooping, plucking, smiling, flying:
Do the buds to them belong? Angels when the sun is hottest
May be seen the sands among,
Stooping, plucking, sighing, flying;
Parched the flowers they bear along. XIX. So bashful when I spied her,
So pretty, so ashamed! So hidden in her leaflets,
Lest anybody find;

So breathless till I passed her,
So helpless when I turned
And bore her, struggling, blushing,
Her simple haunts beyond! For whom I robbed the dingle,
For whom betrayed the dell,
Many will doubtless ask me,
But I shall never tell! XX. TWO WORLDS. It makes no difference abroad,
The seasons fit the same,
The mornings blossom into noons,
And split their pods of flame. Wild-flowers kindle in the woods,
The brooks brag all the day;
No blackbird bates his jargoning
For passing Calvary. Auto-da-fe and judgment
Are nothing to the bee;
His separation from his rose
To him seems misery. XXI. THE MOUNTAIN. The mountain sat upon the plain
In his eternal chair,
His observation omnifold,
His inquest everywhere. The seasons prayed around his knees,
Like children round a sire:
Grandfather of the days is he,
Of dawn the ancestor. XXII. A DAY. I'll tell you how the sun rose, --
A ribbon at a time. The steeples swam in amethyst,
The news like squirrels ran. The hills untied their bonnets,
The bobolinks begun. Then I said softly to myself,
"That must have been the sun!" *  *  *

But how he set, I know not. There seemed a purple stile
Which little yellow boys and girls
Were climbing all the while

Till when they reached the other side,
A dominie in gray
Put gently up the evening bars,
And led the flock away. XXIII. The butterfly's assumption-gown,
In chrysoprase apartments hung,
  This afternoon put on. How condescending to descend,
And be of buttercups the friend
  In a New England town! XXIV. THE WIND. Of all the sounds despatched abroad,
There's not a charge to me
Like that old measure in the boughs,
That phraseless melody

The wind does, working like a hand
Whose fingers brush the sky,
Then quiver down, with tufts of tune
Permitted gods and me. When winds go round and round in bands,
And thrum upon the door,
And birds take places overhead,
To bear them orchestra,

I crave him grace, of summer boughs,
If such an outcast be,
He never heard that fleshless chant
Rise solemn in the tree,

As if some caravan of sound
On deserts, in the sky,
Had broken rank,
Then knit, and passed
In seamless company. XXV. DEATH AND LIFE. Apparently with no surprise
To any happy flower,
The frost beheads it at its play
In accidental power. The blond assassin passes on,
The sun proceeds unmoved
To measure off another day
For an approving God. XXVI. 'T WAS later when the summer went
Than when the cricket came,
And yet we knew that gentle clock
Meant nought but going home. 'T was sooner when the cricket went
Than when the winter came,
Yet that pathetic pendulum
Keeps esoteric time. XXVII. INDIAN SUMMER. These are the days when birds come back,
A very few, a bird or two,
To take a backward look. These are the days when skies put on
The old, old sophistries of June, --
A blue and gold mistake. Oh, fraud that cannot cheat the bee,
Almost thy plausibility
Induces my belief,

Till ranks of seeds their witness bear,
And softly through the altered air
Hurries a timid leaf! Oh, sacrament of summer days,
Oh, last communion in the haze,
Permit a child to join,

Thy sacred emblems to partake,
Thy consecrated bread to break,
Taste thine immortal wine! XXVIII. AUTUMN. The morns are meeker than they were,
The nuts are getting brown;
The berry's cheek is plumper,
The rose is out of town. The maple wears a gayer scarf,
The field a scarlet gown. Lest I should be old-fashioned,
I'll put a trinket on. XXIX. BECLOUDED. The sky is low, the clouds are mean,
A travelling flake of snow
Across a barn or through a rut
Debates if it will go. A narrow wind complains all day
How some one treated him;
Nature, like us, is sometimes caught
Without her diadem. XXX. THE HEMLOCK. I think the hemlock likes to stand
Upon a marge of snow;
It suits his own austerity,
And satisfies an awe

That men must slake in wilderness,
Or in the desert cloy, --
An instinct for the hoar, the bald,
Lapland's necessity. The hemlock's nature thrives on cold;
The gnash of northern winds
Is sweetest nutriment to him,
His best Norwegian wines. To satin races he is nought;
But children on the Don
Beneath his tabernacles play,
And Dnieper wrestlers run. XXXI. There's a certain slant of light,
On winter afternoons,
That oppresses, like the weight
Of cathedral tunes. Heavenly hurt it gives us;
We can find no scar,
But internal difference
Where the meanings are. None may teach it anything,
' T is the seal, despair, --
An imperial affliction
Sent us of the air. When it comes, the landscape listens,
Shadows hold their breath;
When it goes, 't is like the distance
On the look of death. IV. TIME AND ETERNITY. I. One dignity delays for all,
One mitred afternoon. None can avoid this purple,
None evade this crown. Coach it insures, and footmen,
Chamber and state and throng;
Bells, also, in the village,
As we ride grand along. What dignified attendants,
What service when we pause! How loyally at parting
Their hundred hats they raise! How pomp surpassing ermine,
When simple you and I
Present our meek escutcheon,
And claim the rank to die! II. TOO LATE. Delayed till she had ceased to know,
Delayed till in its vest of snow
   Her loving bosom lay. An hour behind the fleeting breath,
Later by just an hour than death, --
   Oh, lagging yesterday! Could she have guessed that it would be;
Could but a crier of the glee
   Have climbed the distant hill;
Had not the bliss so slow a pace, --
Who knows but this surrendered face
   Were undefeated still? Oh, if there may departing be
Any forgot by victory
   In her imperial round,
Show them this meek apparelled thing,
That could not stop to be a king,
   Doubtful if it be crowned! III. ASTRA CASTRA. Departed to the judgment,
A mighty afternoon;
Great clouds like ushers leaning,
Creation looking on. The flesh surrendered, cancelled,
The bodiless begun;
Two worlds, like audiences, disperse
And leave the soul alone. IV. Safe in their alabaster chambers,
Untouched by morning and untouched by noon,
Sleep the meek members of the resurrection,
Rafter of satin, and roof of stone. Light laughs the breeze in her castle of sunshine;
Babbles the bee in a stolid ear;
Pipe the sweet birds in ignorant cadence, --
Ah, what sagacity perished here! Grand go the years in the crescent above them;
Worlds scoop their arcs, and firmaments row,
Diadems drop and Doges surrender,
Soundless as dots on a disk of snow. V.

On this long storm the rainbow rose,
On this late morn the sun;
The clouds, like listless elephants,
Horizons straggled down. The birds rose smiling in their nests,
The gales indeed were done;
Alas! how heedless were the eyes
On whom the summer shone! The quiet nonchalance of death
No daybreak can bestir;
The slow archangel's syllables
Must awaken her. VI. FROM THE CHRYSALIS. My cocoon tightens, colors tease,
I'm feeling for the air;
A dim capacity for wings
Degrades the dress I wear. A power of butterfly must be
The aptitude to fly,
Meadows of majesty concedes
And easy sweeps of sky. So I must baffle at the hint
And cipher at the sign,
And make much blunder, if at last
I take the clew divine. VII. SETTING SAIL. Exultation is the going
Of an inland soul to sea, --
Past the houses, past the headlands,
Into deep eternity! Bred as we, among the mountains,
Can the sailor understand
The divine intoxication
Of the first league out from land? VIII. Look back on time with kindly eyes,
He doubtless did his best;
How softly sinks his trembling sun
In human nature's west! IX. A train went through a burial gate,
A bird broke forth and sang,
And trilled, and quivered, and shook his throat
Till all the churchyard rang;

And then adjusted his little notes,
And bowed and sang again. Doubtless, he thought it meet of him
To say good-by to men. X.

I died for beauty, but was scarce
Adjusted in the tomb,
When one who died for truth was lain
In an adjoining room. He questioned softly why I failed? "For beauty," I replied. "And I for truth, -- the two are one;
We brethren are," he said. And so, as kinsmen met a night,
We talked between the rooms,
Until the moss had reached our lips,
And covered up our names. XI. "TROUBLED ABOUT MANY THINGS." How many times these low feet staggered,
Only the soldered mouth can tell;
Try! can you stir the awful rivet? Try! can you lift the hasps of steel? Stroke the cool forehead, hot so often,
Lift, if you can, the listless hair;
Handle the adamantine fingers
Never a thimble more shall wear. Buzz the dull flies on the chamber window;
Brave shines the sun through the freckled pane;
Fearless the cobweb swings from the ceiling --
Indolent housewife, in daisies lain! XII. REAL. I like a look of agony,
Because I know it 's true;
Men do not sham convulsion,
Nor simulate a throe. The eyes glaze once, and that is death. Impossible to feign
The beads upon the forehead
By homely anguish strung. XIII. THE FUNERAL. That short, potential stir
That each can make but once,
That bustle so illustrious
'T is almost consequence,

Is the eclat of death. Oh, thou unknown renown
That not a beggar would accept,
Had he the power to spurn! XIV. I went to thank her,
But she slept;
Her bed a funnelled stone,
With nosegays at the head and foot,
That travellers had thrown,

Who went to thank her;
But she slept. 'T was short to cross the sea
To look upon her like, alive,
But turning back 't was slow. XV. I've seen a dying eye
Run round and round a room
In search of something, as it seemed,
Then cloudier become;
And then, obscure with fog,
And then be soldered down,
Without disclosing what it be,
'T were blessed to have seen. XVI. REFUGE. The clouds their backs together laid,
The north begun to push,
The forests galloped till they fell,
The lightning skipped like mice;
The thunder crumbled like a stuff --
How good to be safe in tombs,
Where nature's temper cannot reach,
Nor vengeance ever comes! XVII. I never saw a moor,
I never saw the sea;
Yet know I how the heather looks,
And what a wave must be. I never spoke with God,
Nor visited in heaven;
Yet certain am I of the spot
As if the chart were given. XVIII. PLAYMATES. God permits industrious angels
Afternoons to play. I met one, -- forgot my school-mates,
All, for him, straightway. God calls home the angels promptly
At the setting sun;
I missed mine. How dreary marbles,
After playing Crown! XIX. To know just how he suffered would be dear;
To know if any human eyes were near
To whom he could intrust his wavering gaze,
Until it settled firm on Paradise. To know if he was patient, part content,
Was dying as he thought, or different;
Was it a pleasant day to die,
And did the sunshine face his way? What was his furthest mind, of home, or God,
Or what the distant say
At news that he ceased human nature
On such a day? And wishes, had he any? Just his sigh, accented,
Had been legible to me. And was he confident until
Ill fluttered out in everlasting well? And if he spoke, what name was best,
What first,
What one broke off with
At the drowsiest? Was he afraid, or tranquil? Might he know
How conscious consciousness could grow,
Till love that was, and love too blest to be,
Meet -- and the junction be Eternity? XX. The last night that she lived,
It was a common night,
Except the dying; this to us
Made nature different. We noticed smallest things, --
Things overlooked before,
By this great light upon our minds
Italicized, as 't were. That others could exist
While she must finish quite,
A jealousy for her arose
So nearly infinite. We waited while she passed;
It was a narrow time,
Too jostled were our souls to speak,
At length the notice came. She mentioned, and forgot;
Then lightly as a reed
Bent to the water, shivered scarce,
Consented, and was dead. And we, we placed the hair,
And drew the head erect;
And then an awful leisure was,
Our faith to regulate. XXI. THE FIRST LESSON. Not in this world to see his face
Sounds long, until I read the place
Where this is said to be
But just the primer to a life
Unopened, rare, upon the shelf,
Clasped yet to him and me. And yet, my primer suits me so
I would not choose a book to know
Than that, be sweeter wise;
Might some one else so learned be,
And leave me just my A B C,
Himself could have the skies. XXII. The bustle in a house
The morning after death
Is solemnest of industries
Enacted upon earth, --

The sweeping up the heart,
And putting love away
We shall not want to use again
Until eternity. XXIII. I reason, earth is short,
And anguish absolute,
And many hurt;
But what of that? I reason, we could die:
The best vitality
Cannot excel decay;
But what of that? I reason that in heaven
Somehow, it will be even,
Some new equation given;
But what of that? XXIV. Afraid? Of whom am I afraid? Not death; for who is he? The porter of my father's lodge
As much abasheth me. Of life? 'T were odd I fear a thing
That comprehendeth me
In one or more existences
At Deity's decree. Of resurrection? Is the east
Afraid to trust the morn
With her fastidious forehead? As soon impeach my crown! XXV. DYING. The sun kept setting, setting still;
No hue of afternoon
Upon the village I perceived, --
From house to house 't was noon. The dusk kept dropping, dropping still;
No dew upon the grass,
But only on my forehead stopped,
And wandered in my face. My feet kept drowsing, drowsing still,
My fingers were awake;
Yet why so little sound myself
Unto my seeming make? How well I knew the light before! I could not see it now. 'T is dying, I am doing; but
I'm not afraid to know. XXVI. Two swimmers wrestled on the spar
Until the morning sun,
When one turned smiling to the land. O God, the other one! The stray ships passing spied a face
Upon the waters borne,
With eyes in death still begging raised,
And hands beseeching thrown. XXVII. THE CHARIOT. Because I could not stop for Death,
He kindly stopped for me;
The carriage held but just ourselves
And Immortality. We slowly drove, he knew no haste,
And I had put away
My labor, and my leisure too,
For his civility. We passed the school where children played,
Their lessons scarcely done;
We passed the fields of gazing grain,
We passed the setting sun. We paused before a house that seemed
A swelling of the ground;
The roof was scarcely visible,
The cornice but a mound. Since then 't is centuries; but each
Feels shorter than the day
I first surmised the horses' heads
Were toward eternity. XXVIII. She went as quiet as the dew
From a familiar flower. Not like the dew did she return
At the accustomed hour! She dropt as softly as a star
From out my summer's eve;
Less skilful than Leverrier
It's sorer to believe! XXIX. RESURGAM. At last to be identified! At last, the lamps upon thy side,
The rest of life to see! Past midnight, past the morning star! Past sunrise! Ah! what leagues there are
Between our feet and day! XXX. Except to heaven, she is nought;
Except for angels, lone;
Except to some wide-wandering bee,
A flower superfluous blown;

Except for winds, provincial;
Except by butterflies,
Unnoticed as a single dew
That on the acre lies. The smallest housewife in the grass,
Yet take her from the lawn,
And somebody has lost the face
That made existence home! XXXI. Death is a dialogue between
The spirit and the dust. "Dissolve," says Death. The Spirit, "Sir,
I have another trust." Death doubts it, argues from the ground. The Spirit turns away,
Just laying off, for evidence,
An overcoat of clay. XXXII. It was too late for man,
But early yet for God;
Creation impotent to help,
But prayer remained our side. How excellent the heaven,
When earth cannot be had;
How hospitable, then, the face
Of our old neighbor, God! XXXIII. ALONG THE POTOMAC. When I was small, a woman died. To-day her only boy
Went up from the Potomac,
His face all victory,

To look at her; how slowly
The seasons must have turned
Till bullets clipt an angle,
And he passed quickly round! If pride shall be in Paradise
I never can decide;
Of their imperial conduct,
No person testified. But proud in apparition,
That woman and her boy
Pass back and forth before my brain,
As ever in the sky. XXXIV. The daisy follows soft the sun,
And when his golden walk is done,
   Sits shyly at his feet. He, waking, finds the flower near. "Wherefore, marauder, art thou here?" "Because, sir, love is sweet!" We are the flower, Thou the sun! Forgive us, if as days decline,
   We nearer steal to Thee, --
Enamoured of the parting west,
The peace, the flight, the amethyst,
   Night's possibility! XXXV. EMANCIPATION. No rack can torture me,
My soul's at liberty
Behind this mortal bone
There knits a bolder one

You cannot prick with saw,
Nor rend with scymitar. Two bodies therefore be;
Bind one, and one will flee. The eagle of his nest
No easier divest
And gain the sky,
Than mayest thou,

Except thyself may be
Thine enemy;
Captivity is consciousness,
So's liberty. XXXVI. LOST. I lost a world the other day. Has anybody found? You'll know it by the row of stars
Around its forehead bound. A rich man might not notice it;
Yet to my frugal eye
Of more esteem than ducats. Oh, find it, sir, for me! XXXVII. If I shouldn't be alive
When the robins come,
Give the one in red cravat
A memorial crumb. If I couldn't thank you,
Being just asleep,
You will know I'm trying
With my granite lip! XXXVIII. Sleep is supposed to be,
By souls of sanity,
The shutting of the eye. Sleep is the station grand
Down which on either hand
The hosts of witness stand! Morn is supposed to be,
By people of degree,
The breaking of the day. Morning has not occurred! That shall aurora be
East of eternity;

One with the banner gay,
One in the red array, --
That is the break of day. XXXIX. I shall know why, when time is over,
And I have ceased to wonder why;
Christ will explain each separate anguish
In the fair schoolroom of the sky. He will tell me what Peter promised,
And I, for wonder at his woe,
I shall forget the drop of anguish
That scalds me now, that scalds me now. XL. I never lost as much but twice,
And that was in the sod;
Twice have I stood a beggar
Before the door of God! Angels, twice descending,
Reimbursed my store. Burglar, banker, father,
I am poor once more! POEMS

by EMILY DICKINSON

Second Series




Edited by two of her friends

MABEL LOOMIS TODD and T.W. HIGGINSON




PREFACE

The eagerness with which the first volume of Emily Dickinson's
poems has been read shows very clearly that all our alleged modern
artificiality does not prevent a prompt appreciation of the
qualities of directness and simplicity in approaching the greatest
themes,--life and love and death. That "irresistible needle-touch,"
as one of her best critics has called it, piercing at once the very
core of a thought, has found a response as wide and sympathetic as
it has been unexpected even to those who knew best her compelling
power. This second volume, while open to the same criticism as to
form with its predecessor, shows also the same shining beauties. Although Emily Dickinson had been in the habit of sending
occasional poems to friends and correspondents, the full extent of
her writing was by no means imagined by them. Her friend "H.H." must at least have suspected it, for in a letter dated 5th
September, 1884, she wrote:--


MY DEAR FRIEND,-- What portfolios full of verses
you must have! It is a cruel wrong to your "day and
generation" that you will not give them light. If such a thing should happen as that I should outlive
you, I wish you would make me your literary legatee
and executor. Surely after you are what is called
"dead" you will be willing that the poor ghosts you
have left behind should be cheered and pleased by your
verses, will you not? You ought to be. I do not think
we have a right to withhold from the world a word or
a thought any more than a deed which might help a
single soul. . . . Truly yours,

                        HELEN JACKSON. The "portfolios" were found, shortly after Emily Dickinson's death,
by her sister and only surviving housemate. Most of the poems had
been carefully copied on sheets of note-paper, and tied in little
fascicules, each of six or eight sheets. While many of them bear
evidence of having been thrown off at white heat, still more had
received thoughtful revision. There is the frequent addition of
rather perplexing foot-notes, affording large choice of words and
phrases. And in the copies which she sent to friends, sometimes one
form, sometimes another, is found to have been used. Without
important exception, her friends have generously placed at the
disposal of the Editors any poems they had received from her; and
these have given the obvious advantage of comparison among several
renderings of the same verse. To what further rigorous pruning her verses would have been
subjected had she published them herself, we cannot know. They
should be regarded in many cases as merely the first strong and
suggestive sketches of an artist, intended to be embodied at some
time in the finished picture. Emily Dickinson appears to have written her first poems in the
winter of 1862. In a letter to oone of the present Editors the
April following, she says, "I made no verse, but one or two, until
this winter." The handwriting was at first somewhat like the delicate, running
Italian hand of our elder gentlewomen; but as she advanced in
breadth of thought, it grew bolder and more abrupt, until in her
latest years each letter stood distinct and separate from its
fellows. In most of her poems, particularly the later ones,
everything by way of punctuation was discarded, except numerous
dashes; and all important words began with capitals. The effect of
a page of her more recent manuscript is exceedingly quaint and
strong. The fac-simile given in the present volume is from one of
the earlier transition periods. Although there is nowhere a date,
the handwriting makes it possible to arrange the poems with general
chronologic accuracy. As a rule, the verses were without titles; but "A Country Burial,"
"A Thunder-Storm," "The Humming-Bird," and a few others were named
by their author, frequently at the end,--sometimes only in the
accompanying note, if sent to a friend. The variation of readings, with the fact that she often wrote in
pencil and not always clearly, have at times thrown a good deal of
responsibility upon her Editors. But all interference not
absolutely inevitable has been avoided. The very roughness of her
rendering is part of herself, and not lightly to be touched; for it
seems in many cases that she intentionally avoided the smoother and
more usual rhymes. Like impressionist pictures, or Wagner's rugged music, the very
absence of conventional form challenges attention. In Emily
Dickinson's exacting hands, the especial, intrinsic fitness of a
particular order of words might not be sacrificed to anything
virtually extrinsic; and her verses all show a strange cadence of
inner rhythmical music. Lines are always daringly constructed, and
the "thought-rhyme" appears frequently,--appealing, indeed, to an
unrecognized sense more elusive than hearing. Emily Dickinson scrutinized everything with clear-eyed frankness. Every subject was proper ground for legitimate study, even the
sombre facts of death and burial, and the unknown life beyond. She
touches these themes sometimes lightly, sometimes almost
humorously, more often with weird and peculiar power; but she is
never by any chance frivolous or trivial. And while, as one critic
has said, she may exhibit toward God "an Emersonian self-possession,"
it was because she looked upon all life with a candor as unprejudiced
as it is rare. She had tried society and the world, and found them lacking. She
was not an invalid, and she lived in seclusion from no
love-disappointment. Her life was the normal blossoming of a nature
introspective to a high degree, whose best thought could not exist
in pretence. Storm, wind, the wild March sky, sunsets and dawns; the birds and
bees, butterflies and flowers of her garden, with a few trusted
human friends, were sufficient companionship. The coming of the
first robin was a jubilee beyond crowning of monarch or birthday of
pope; the first red leaf hurrying through "the altered air," an
epoch. Immortality was close about her; and while never morbid or
melancholy, she lived in its presence. MABEL LOOMIS TODD. AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTS,
            August, I891. My nosegays are for captives;
       Dim, long-expectant eyes,
    Fingers denied the plucking,
       Patient till paradise,

    To such, if they should whisper
       Of morning and the moor,
    They bear no other errand,
       And I, no other prayer. I. LIFE. I.

I'm nobody! Who are you? Are you nobody, too? Then there 's a pair of us -- don't tell! They 'd banish us, you know. How dreary to be somebody! How public, like a frog
To tell your name the livelong day
To an admiring bog! II. I bring an unaccustomed wine
To lips long parching, next to mine,
And summon them to drink. Crackling with fever, they essay;
I turn my brimming eyes away,
And come next hour to look. The hands still hug the tardy glass;
The lips I would have cooled, alas! Are so superfluous cold,

I would as soon attempt to warm
The bosoms where the frost has lain
Ages beneath the mould. Some other thirsty there may be
To whom this would have pointed me
Had it remained to speak. And so I always bear the cup
If, haply, mine may be the drop
Some pilgrim thirst to slake, --

If, haply, any say to me,
"Unto the little, unto me,"
When I at last awake. III. The nearest dream recedes, unrealized. The heaven we chase
      Like the June bee
      Before the school-boy
      Invites the race;
      Stoops to an easy clover --
Dips -- evades -- teases -- deploys;
      Then to the royal clouds
      Lifts his light pinnace
      Heedless of the boy
Staring, bewildered, at the mocking sky. Homesick for steadfast honey,
      Ah! the bee flies not
That brews that rare variety. IV. We play at paste,
Till qualified for pearl,
Then drop the paste,
And deem ourself a fool. The shapes, though, were similar,
And our new hands
Learned gem-tactics
Practising sands. V.

I found the phrase to every thought
I ever had, but one;
And that defies me, -- as a hand
Did try to chalk the sun

To races nurtured in the dark; --
How would your own begin? Can blaze be done in cochineal,
Or noon in mazarin? VI. HOPE. Hope is the thing with feathers
That perches in the soul,
And sings the tune without the words,
And never stops at all,

And sweetest in the gale is heard;
And sore must be the storm
That could abash the little bird
That kept so many warm. I 've heard it in the chillest land,
And on the strangest sea;
Yet, never, in extremity,
It asked a crumb of me. VII. THE WHITE HEAT. Dare you see a soul at the white heat? Then crouch within the door. Red is the fire's common tint;
   But when the vivid ore

Has sated flame's conditions,
   Its quivering substance plays
Without a color but the light
   Of unanointed blaze. Least village boasts its blacksmith,
   Whose anvil's even din
Stands symbol for the finer forge
   That soundless tugs within,

Refining these impatient ores
   With hammer and with blaze,
Until the designated light
   Repudiate the forge. VIII. TRIUMPHANT. Who never lost, are unprepared
A coronet to find;
Who never thirsted, flagons
And cooling tamarind. Who never climbed the weary league --
Can such a foot explore
The purple territories
On Pizarro's shore? How many legions overcome? The emperor will say. How many colors taken
On Revolution Day? How many bullets bearest? The royal scar hast thou? Angels, write "Promoted"
On this soldier's brow! IX. THE TEST. I can wade grief,
Whole pools of it, --
I 'm used to that. But the least push of joy
Breaks up my feet,
And I tip -- drunken. Let no pebble smile,
'T was the new liquor, --
That was all! Power is only pain,
Stranded, through discipline,
Till weights will hang. Give balm to giants,
And they 'll wilt, like men. Give Himmaleh, --
They 'll carry him! X. ESCAPE. I never hear the word "escape"
Without a quicker blood,
A sudden expectation,
A flying attitude. I never hear of prisons broad
By soldiers battered down,
But I tug childish at my bars, --
Only to fail again! XI. COMPENSATION. For each ecstatic instant
We must an anguish pay
In keen and quivering ratio
To the ecstasy. For each beloved hour
Sharp pittances of years,
Bitter contested farthings
And coffers heaped with tears. XII. THE MARTYRS. Through the straight pass of suffering
The martyrs even trod,
Their feet upon temptation,
Their faces upon God. A stately, shriven company;
Convulsion playing round,
Harmless as streaks of meteor
Upon a planet's bound. Their faith the everlasting troth;
Their expectation fair;
The needle to the north degree
Wades so, through polar air. XIII. A PRAYER. I meant to have but modest needs,
Such as content, and heaven;
Within my income these could lie,
And life and I keep even. But since the last included both,
It would suffice my prayer
But just for one to stipulate,
And grace would grant the pair. And so, upon this wise I prayed, --
Great Spirit, give to me
A heaven not so large as yours,
But large enough for me. A smile suffused Jehovah's face;
The cherubim withdrew;
Grave saints stole out to look at me,
And showed their dimples, too. I left the place with all my might, --
My prayer away I threw;
The quiet ages picked it up,
And Judgment twinkled, too,

That one so honest be extant
As take the tale for true
That "Whatsoever you shall ask,
Itself be given you." But I, grown shrewder, scan the skies
With a suspicious air, --
As children, swindled for the first,
All swindlers be, infer. XIV. The thought beneath so slight a film
Is more distinctly seen, --
As laces just reveal the surge,
Or mists the Apennine. XV. The soul unto itself
Is an imperial friend, --
Or the most agonizing spy
An enemy could send. Secure against its own,
No treason it can fear;
Itself its sovereign, of itself
The soul should stand in awe. XVI. Surgeons must be very careful
When they take the knife! Underneath their fine incisions
Stirs the culprit, -- Life! XVII. THE RAILWAY TRAIN. I like to see it lap the miles,
And lick the valleys up,
And stop to feed itself at tanks;
And then, prodigious, step

Around a pile of mountains,
And, supercilious, peer
In shanties by the sides of roads;
And then a quarry pare

To fit its sides, and crawl between,
Complaining all the while
In horrid, hooting stanza;
Then chase itself down hill

And neigh like Boanerges;
Then, punctual as a star,
Stop -- docile and omnipotent --
At its own stable door. XVIII. THE SHOW. The show is not the show,
But they that go. Menagerie to me
My neighbor be. Fair play --
Both went to see. XIX. Delight becomes pictorial
When viewed through pain, --
More fair, because impossible
That any gain. The mountain at a given distance
In amber lies;
Approached, the amber flits a little, --
And that 's the skies! XX. A thought went up my mind to-day
That I have had before,
But did not finish, -- some way back,
I could not fix the year,

Nor where it went, nor why it came
The second time to me,
Nor definitely what it was,
Have I the art to say. But somewhere in my soul, I know
I 've met the thing before;
It just reminded me -- 't was all --
And came my way no more. XXI. Is Heaven a physician? They say that He can heal;
But medicine posthumous
   Is unavailable. Is Heaven an exchequer? They speak of what we owe;
But that negotiation
   I 'm not a party to. XXII. THE RETURN. Though I get home how late, how late! So I get home, 't will compensate. Better will be the ecstasy
That they have done expecting me,
When, night descending, dumb and dark,
They hear my unexpected knock. Transporting must the moment be,
Brewed from decades of agony! To think just how the fire will burn,
Just how long-cheated eyes will turn
To wonder what myself will say,
And what itself will say to me,
Beguiles the centuries of way! XXIII. A poor torn heart, a tattered heart,
That sat it down to rest,
Nor noticed that the ebbing day
Flowed silver to the west,
Nor noticed night did soft descend
Nor constellation burn,
Intent upon the vision
Of latitudes unknown. The angels, happening that way,
This dusty heart espied;
Tenderly took it up from toil
And carried it to God. There, -- sandals for the barefoot;
There, -- gathered from the gales,
Do the blue havens by the hand
Lead the wandering sails. XXIV. TOO MUCH. I should have been too glad, I see,
Too lifted for the scant degree
   Of life's penurious round;
My little circuit would have shamed
This new circumference, have blamed
   The homelier time behind. I should have been too saved, I see,
Too rescued; fear too dim to me
   That I could spell the prayer
I knew so perfect yesterday, --
That scalding one, "Sabachthani,"
   Recited fluent here. Earth would have been too much, I see,
And heaven not enough for me;
   I should have had the joy
Without the fear to justify, --
The palm without the Calvary;
   So, Saviour, crucify. Defeat whets victory, they say;
The reefs in old Gethsemane
   Endear the shore beyond. 'T is beggars banquets best define;
'T is thirsting vitalizes wine, --
   Faith faints to understand. XXV. SHIPWRECK. It tossed and tossed, --
A little brig I knew, --
O'ertook by blast,
It spun and spun,
And groped delirious, for morn. It slipped and slipped,
As one that drunken stepped;
Its white foot tripped,
Then dropped from sight. Ah, brig, good-night
To crew and you;
The ocean's heart too smooth, too blue,
To break for you. XXVI. Victory comes late,
And is held low to freezing lips
Too rapt with frost
To take it. How sweet it would have tasted,
Just a drop! Was God so economical? His table 's spread too high for us
Unless we dine on tip-toe. Crumbs fit such little mouths,
Cherries suit robins;
The eagle's golden breakfast
Strangles them. God keeps his oath to sparrows,
Who of little love
Know how to starve! XXVII. ENOUGH. God gave a loaf to every bird,
But just a crumb to me;
I dare not eat it, though I starve, --
My poignant luxury
To own it, touch it, prove the feat
That made the pellet mine, --
Too happy in my sparrow chance
For ampler coveting. It might be famine all around,
I could not miss an ear,
Such plenty smiles upon my board,
My garner shows so fair. I wonder how the rich may feel, --
An Indiaman -- an Earl? I deem that I with but a crumb
Am sovereign of them all. XXVIII. Experiment to me
Is every one I meet. If it contain a kernel? The figure of a nut

Presents upon a tree,
Equally plausibly;
But meat within is requisite,
To squirrels and to me. XXIX. MY COUNTRY'S WARDROBE. My country need not change her gown,
Her triple suit as sweet
As when 't was cut at Lexington,
And first pronounced "a fit." Great Britain disapproves "the stars;"
Disparagement discreet, --
There 's something in their attitude
That taunts her bayonet. XXX. Faith is a fine invention
For gentlemen who see;
But microscopes are prudent
In an emergency! XXXI. Except the heaven had come so near,
So seemed to choose my door,
The distance would not haunt me so;
I had not hoped before. But just to hear the grace depart
I never thought to see,
Afflicts me with a double loss;
'T is lost, and lost to me. XXXII. Portraits are to daily faces
As an evening west
To a fine, pedantic sunshine
In a satin vest. XXXIII. THE DUEL. I took my power in my hand. And went against the world;
'T was not so much as David had,
But I was twice as bold. I aimed my pebble, but myself
Was all the one that fell. Was it Goliath was too large,
Or only I too small? XXXIV. A shady friend for torrid days
Is easier to find
Than one of higher temperature
For frigid hour of mind. The vane a little to the east
Scares muslin souls away;
If broadcloth breasts are firmer
Than those of organdy,

Who is to blame? The weaver? Ah! the bewildering thread! The tapestries of paradise
So notelessly are made! XXXV. THE GOAL. Each life converges to some centre
Expressed or still;
Exists in every human nature
A goal,

Admitted scarcely to itself, it may be,
Too fair
For credibility's temerity
To dare. Adored with caution, as a brittle heaven,
To reach
Were hopeless as the rainbow's raiment
To touch,

Yet persevered toward, surer for the distance;
How high
Unto the saints' slow diligence
The sky! Ungained, it may be, by a life's low venture,
But then,
Eternity enables the endeavoring
Again. XXXVI. SIGHT. Before I got my eye put out,
I liked as well to see
As other creatures that have eyes,
And know no other way. But were it told to me, to-day,
That I might have the sky
For mine, I tell you that my heart
Would split, for size of me. The meadows mine, the mountains mine, --
All forests, stintless stars,
As much of noon as I could take
Between my finite eyes. The motions of the dipping birds,
The lightning's jointed road,
For mine to look at when I liked, --
The news would strike me dead! So safer, guess, with just my soul
Upon the window-pane
Where other creatures put their eyes,
Incautious of the sun. XXXVII. Talk with prudence to a beggar
Of 'Potosi' and the mines! Reverently to the hungry
Of your viands and your wines! Cautious, hint to any captive
You have passed enfranchised feet! Anecdotes of air in dungeons
Have sometimes proved deadly sweet! XXXVIII. THE PREACHER. He preached upon "breadth" till it argued him narrow, --
The broad are too broad to define;
And of "truth" until it proclaimed him a liar, --
The truth never flaunted a sign. Simplicity fled from his counterfeit presence
As gold the pyrites would shun. What confusion would cover the innocent Jesus
To meet so enabled a man! XXXIX. Good night! which put the candle out? A jealous zephyr, not a doubt. Ah! friend, you little knew
How long at that celestial wick
The angels labored diligent;
   Extinguished, now, for you! It might have been the lighthouse spark
Some sailor, rowing in the dark,
   Had importuned to see! It might have been the waning lamp
That lit the drummer from the camp
   To purer reveille! XL. When I hoped I feared,
Since I hoped I dared;
Everywhere alone
As a church remain;
Spectre cannot harm,
Serpent cannot charm;
He deposes doom,
Who hath suffered him. XLI. DEED. A deed knocks first at thought,
And then it knocks at will. That is the manufacturing spot,
And will at home and well. It then goes out an act,
Or is entombed so still
That only to the ear of God
Its doom is audible. XLII. TIME'S LESSON. Mine enemy is growing old, --
I have at last revenge. The palate of the hate departs;
If any would avenge, --

Let him be quick, the viand flits,
It is a faded meat. Anger as soon as fed is dead;
'T is starving makes it fat. XLIII. REMORSE. Remorse is memory awake,
Her companies astir, --
A presence of departed acts
At window and at door. It's past set down before the soul,
And lighted with a match,
Perusal to facilitate
Of its condensed despatch. Remorse is cureless, -- the disease
Not even God can heal;
For 't is his institution, --
The complement of hell. XLIV. THE SHELTER. The body grows outside, --
The more convenient way, --
That if the spirit like to hide,
Its temple stands alway

Ajar, secure, inviting;
It never did betray
The soul that asked its shelter
In timid honesty. XLV. Undue significance a starving man attaches
To food
Far off; he sighs, and therefore hopeless,
And therefore good. Partaken, it relieves indeed, but proves us
That spices fly
In the receipt. It was the distance
Was savory. XLVI. Heart not so heavy as mine,
Wending late home,
As it passed my window
Whistled itself a tune, --

A careless snatch, a ballad,
A ditty of the street;
Yet to my irritated ear
An anodyne so sweet,

It was as if a bobolink,
Sauntering this way,
Carolled and mused and carolled,
Then bubbled slow away. It was as if a chirping brook
Upon a toilsome way
Set bleeding feet to minuets
Without the knowing why. To-morrow, night will come again,
Weary, perhaps, and sore. Ah, bugle, by my window,
I pray you stroll once more! XLVII. I many times thought peace had come,
When peace was far away;
As wrecked men deem they sight the land
At centre of the sea,

And struggle slacker, but to prove,
As hopelessly as I,
How many the fictitious shores
Before the harbor lie. XLVIII. Unto my books so good to turn
Far ends of tired days;
It half endears the abstinence,
And pain is missed in praise. As flavors cheer retarded guests
With banquetings to be,
So spices stimulate the time
Till my small library. It may be wilderness without,
Far feet of failing men,
But holiday excludes the night,
And it is bells within. I thank these kinsmen of the shelf;
Their countenances bland
Enamour in prospective,
And satisfy, obtained. XLIX. This merit hath the worst, --
It cannot be again. When Fate hath taunted last
And thrown her furthest stone,

The maimed may pause and breathe,
And glance securely round. The deer invites no longer
Than it eludes the hound. L.

HUNGER. I had been hungry all the years;
My noon had come, to dine;
I, trembling, drew the table near,
And touched the curious wine. 'T was this on tables I had seen,
When turning, hungry, lone,
I looked in windows, for the wealth
I could not hope to own. I did not know the ample bread,
'T was so unlike the crumb
The birds and I had often shared
In Nature's dining-room. The plenty hurt me, 't was so new, --
Myself felt ill and odd,
As berry of a mountain bush
Transplanted to the road. Nor was I hungry; so I found
That hunger was a way
Of persons outside windows,
The entering takes away. LI. I gained it so,
      By climbing slow,
By catching at the twigs that grow
Between the bliss and me. It hung so high,
      As well the sky
      Attempt by strategy. I said I gained it, --
      This was all. Look, how I clutch it,
      Lest it fall,
And I a pauper go;
Unfitted by an instant's grace
For the contented beggar's face
I wore an hour ago. LII. To learn the transport by the pain,
As blind men learn the sun;
To die of thirst, suspecting
That brooks in meadows run;

To stay the homesick, homesick feet
Upon a foreign shore
Haunted by native lands, the while,
And blue, beloved air --

This is the sovereign anguish,
This, the signal woe! These are the patient laureates
Whose voices, trained below,

Ascend in ceaseless carol,
Inaudible, indeed,
To us, the duller scholars
Of the mysterious bard! LIII. RETURNING. I years had been from home,
And now, before the door,
I dared not open, lest a face
I never saw before

Stare vacant into mine
And ask my business there. My business, -- just a life I left,
Was such still dwelling there? I fumbled at my nerve,
I scanned the windows near;
The silence like an ocean rolled,
And broke against my ear. I laughed a wooden laugh
That I could fear a door,
Who danger and the dead had faced,
But never quaked before. I fitted to the latch
My hand, with trembling care,
Lest back the awful door should spring,
And leave me standing there. I moved my fingers off
As cautiously as glass,
And held my ears, and like a thief
Fled gasping from the house. LIV. PRAYER. Prayer is the little implement
Through which men reach
Where presence is denied them. They fling their speech

By means of it in God's ear;
If then He hear,
This sums the apparatus
Comprised in prayer. LV. I know that he exists
Somewhere, in silence. He has hid his rare life
From our gross eyes. 'T is an instant's play,
'T is a fond ambush,
Just to make bliss
Earn her own surprise! But should the play
Prove piercing earnest,
Should the glee glaze
In death's stiff stare,

Would not the fun
Look too expensive? Would not the jest
Have crawled too far? LVI. MELODIES UNHEARD. Musicians wrestle everywhere:
All day, among the crowded air,
  I hear the silver strife;
And -- waking long before the dawn --
Such transport breaks upon the town
  I think it that "new life!" It is not bird, it has no nest;
Nor band, in brass and scarlet dressed,
  Nor tambourine, nor man;
It is not hymn from pulpit read, --
The morning stars the treble led
  On time's first afternoon! Some say it is the spheres at play! Some say that bright majority
  Of vanished dames and men! Some think it service in the place
Where we, with late, celestial face,
  Please God, shall ascertain! LVII. CALLED BACK. Just lost when I was saved! Just felt the world go by! Just girt me for the onset with eternity,
When breath blew back,
And on the other side
I heard recede the disappointed tide! Therefore, as one returned, I feel,
Odd secrets of the line to tell! Some sailor, skirting foreign shores,
Some pale reporter from the awful doors
Before the seal! Next time, to stay! Next time, the things to see
By ear unheard,
Unscrutinized by eye. Next time, to tarry,
While the ages steal, --
Slow tramp the centuries,
And the cycles wheel. II. LOVE. I. CHOICE. Of all the souls that stand create
I have elected one. When sense from spirit files away,
And subterfuge is done;

When that which is and that which was
Apart, intrinsic, stand,
And this brief tragedy of flesh
Is shifted like a sand;

When figures show their royal front
And mists are carved away, --
Behold the atom I preferred
To all the lists of clay! II. I have no life but this,
To lead it here;
Nor any death, but lest
Dispelled from there;

Nor tie to earths to come,
Nor action new,
Except through this extent,
The realm of you. III. Your riches taught me poverty. Myself a millionnaire
In little wealths, -- as girls could boast, --
Till broad as Buenos Ayre,

You drifted your dominions
A different Peru;
And I esteemed all poverty,
For life's estate with you. Of mines I little know, myself,
But just the names of gems, --
The colors of the commonest;
And scarce of diadems

So much that, did I meet the queen,
Her glory I should know:
But this must be a different wealth,
To miss it beggars so. I 'm sure 't is India all day
To those who look on you
Without a stint, without a blame, --
Might I but be the Jew! I 'm sure it is Golconda,
Beyond my power to deem, --
To have a smile for mine each day,
How better than a gem! At least, it solaces to know
That there exists a gold,
Although I prove it just in time
Its distance to behold! It 's far, far treasure to surmise,
And estimate the pearl
That slipped my simple fingers through
While just a girl at school! IV. THE CONTRACT. I gave myself to him,
And took himself for pay. The solemn contract of a life
Was ratified this way. The wealth might disappoint,
Myself a poorer prove
Than this great purchaser suspect,
The daily own of Love

Depreciate the vision;
But, till the merchant buy,
Still fable, in the isles of spice,
The subtle cargoes lie. At least, 't is mutual risk, --
Some found it mutual gain;
Sweet debt of Life, -- each night to owe,
Insolvent, every noon. V.

THE LETTER. "GOING to him! Happy letter! Tell him --
Tell him the page I didn't write;
Tell him I only said the syntax,
And left the verb and the pronoun out. Tell him just how the fingers hurried,
Then how they waded, slow, slow, slow;
And then you wished you had eyes in your pages,
So you could see what moved them so. "Tell him it wasn't a practised writer,
You guessed, from the way the sentence toiled;
You could hear the bodice tug, behind you,
As if it held but the might of a child;
You almost pitied it, you, it worked so. Tell him -- No, you may quibble there,
For it would split his heart to know it,
And then you and I were silenter. "Tell him night finished before we finished,
And the old clock kept neighing 'day!' And you got sleepy and begged to be ended --
What could it hinder so, to say? Tell him just how she sealed you, cautious,
But if he ask where you are hid
Until to-morrow, -- happy letter! Gesture, coquette, and shake your head!" VI. 