TENNYSON***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



SELECTIONS FROM WORDSWORTH AND TENNYSON

Edited, with Introduction and Notes

by

PELHAM EDGAR, Ph.D. Professor of English, Victoria Coll., Univ. of Toronto

Toronto
The Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited

1917







PREFACE

The poems contained in this volume are those required for Junior
Matriculation, Ontario 1918. CONTENTS


Wordsworth

  Michael
  To the Daisy
  To the Cuckoo
  Nutting
  Influence of Natural Objects
  To the Rev. Dr. Wordsworth
  Elegiac Stanzas
  "It is Not to be Thought of"
  Written in London, September, 1802
  London, 1802
  "Dark and More Dark the Shades of Evening Fell"
  "Surprised by Joy--Impatient as the Wind"
  "Hail, Twilight, Sovereign of One Peaceful Hour"
  "I Thought of Thee, My Partner and My Guide"
  "Such Age, How Beautiful!" Tennyson

  Oenone
  The Epic
  Morte d'Arthur
  The Brook
  In Memoriam



Wordsworth

  Biographical Sketch
  Chronological Table
  Appreciations
  References on Life and Works
  Notes



Tennyson

  Biographical Sketch
  Chronological Table
  Appreciations
  References on Life and Works
  Notes




  WORDSWORTH


  MICHAEL

  A PASTORAL POEM

  If from the public way you turn your steps
  Up the tumultuous brook of Green-head Ghyll,
  You will suppose that with an upright path
  Your feet must struggle; in such bold ascent
  The pastoral mountains front you, face to face. But, courage! for around that boisterous brook
  The mountains have all opened out themselves,
  And made a hidden valley of their own. No habitation can be seen; but they
  Who journey thither find themselves alone                 10
  With a few sheep, with rocks and stones, and kites
  That overhead are sailing in the sky. It is in truth an utter solitude;
  Nor should I have made mention of this Dell
  But for one object which you might pass by,               15
  Might see and notice not. Beside the brook
  Appears a straggling heap of unhewn stones,
  And to that simple object appertains
  A story,--unenriched with strange events,
  Yet not unfit, I deem, for the fireside,                  20
  Or for the summer shade. It was the first
  Of those domestic tales that spake to me
  Of Shepherds, dwellers in the valleys, men
  Whom I already loved:--not verily
  For their own sakes, but for the fields and hills         25
  Where was their occupation and abode. And hence this Tale, while I was yet a Boy
  Careless of books, yet having felt the power
  Of Nature, by the gentle agency
  Of natural objects, led me on to feel                     30
  For passions that were not my own, and think
  (At random and imperfectly indeed)
  On man, the heart of man, and human life. Therefore, although it be a history
  Homely and rude, I will relate the same                   35
  For the delight of a few natural hearts;
  And, with yet fonder feeling, for the sake
  Of youthful Poets, who among these hills
  Will be my second self when I am gone. Upon the forest-side in Grasmere Vale                     40
  There dwelt a Shepherd, Michael was his name;
  An old man, stout of heart, and strong of limb. His bodily frame had been from youth to age
  Of an unusual strength: his mind was keen,
  Intense, and frugal, apt for all affairs,                 45
  And in his shepherd's calling he was prompt
  And watchful more than ordinary men. Hence had he learned the meaning of all winds,
  Of blasts of every tone; and oftentimes,
  When others heeded not, he heard the South                50
  Make subterraneous music, like the noise
  Of bagpipers on distant Highland hills. The Shepherd, at such warning, of his flock
  Bethought him, and he to himself would say,
  "The winds are now devising work for me!" 55
  And, truly, at all times, the storm, that drives
  The traveller to a shelter, summoned him
  Up to the mountains: he had been alone
  Amid the heart of many thousand mists,
  That came to him, and left him, on the heights. 60
  So lived he till his eightieth year was past. And grossly that man errs, who should suppose
  That the green valleys, and the streams and rocks,
  Were things indifferent to the Shepherd's thoughts. Fields, where with cheerful spirits he had breathed       65
  The common air; hills, which with vigorous step
  He had so often climbed; which had impressed
  So many incidents upon his mind
  Of hardship, skill or courage, joy or fear;
  Which, like a book, preserved the memory                  70
  Of the dumb animals whom he had saved,
  Had fed or sheltered, linking to such acts
  The certainty of honorable gain;
  Those fields, those hills--what could they less?--had laid
  Strong hold on his affections, were to him                75
  A pleasurable feeling of blind love,
  The pleasure which there is in life itself. His days had not been passed in singleness. His Helpmate was a comely matron, old--
  Though younger than himself full twenty years. 80
  She was a woman of a stirring life,
  Whose heart was in her house: two wheels she had
  Of antique form; this large, for spinning wool;
  That small, for flax; and if one wheel had rest,
  It was because the other was at work. 85
  The Pair had but one inmate in their house,
  An only Child, who had been born to them
  When Michael, telling o'er his years, began
  To deem that he was old,--in shepherd's phrase,
  With one foot in the grave. This only Son,               90
  With two brave sheep-dogs tried in many a storm,
  The one of an inestimable worth,
  Made all their household. I may truly say
  That they were as a proverb in the vale
  For endless industry. When day was gone,                 95
  And from their occupations out of doors
  The Son and Father were come home, even then
  Their labor did not cease; unless when all
  Turned to the cleanly supper board, and there,
  Each with a mess of pottage and skimmed milk,            100
  Sat round the basket piled with oaten cakes,
  And their plain home-made cheese. Yet when the meal
  Was ended, Luke (for so the Son was named)
  And his old Father both betook themselves
  To such convenient work as might employ                  105
  Their hands by the fireside; perhaps to card
  Wool for the Housewife's spindle, or repair
  Some injury done to sickle, flail, or scythe,
  Or other implement of house or field. Down from the ceiling, by the chimney's edge,            110
  That in our ancient uncouth country style
  With huge and black projection overbrowed
  Large space beneath, as duly as the light
  Of day grew dim the Housewife hung a lamp;
  An aged utensil, which had performed                     115
  Service beyond all others of its kind. Early at evening did it burn,--and late,
  Surviving comrade of uncounted hours,
  Which, going by from year to year, had found,
  And left the couple neither gay perhaps                  120
  Nor cheerful, yet with objects and with hopes,
  Living a life of eager industry. And now, when Luke had reached his eighteenth year,
  There by the light of this old lamp they sate,
  Father and Son, while far into the night                 125
  The Housewife plied her own peculiar work,
  Making the cottage through the silent hours
  Murmur as with the sound of summer flies. This light was famous in its neighborhood,
  And was a public symbol of the life                      130
  That thrifty Pair had lived. For, as it chanced;
  Their cottage on a plot of rising ground
  Stood single, with large prospect, north and south,
  High into Easedale, up to Dunmail-Raise,
  And westward to the village near the lake;               135
  And from this constant light, so regular,
  And so far seen, the House itself, by all
  Who dwelt within the limits of the vale,
  Both old and young, was named the EVENING STAR. Thus living on through such a length of years,           140
  The Shepherd, if he loved himself, must needs
  Have loved his Helpmate; but to Michael's heart
  This son of his old age was yet more dear--
  Less from instinctive tenderness, the same
  Fond spirit that blindly works in the blood of all--     145
  Than that a child, more than all other gifts
  That earth can offer to declining man,
  Brings hope with it, and forward-looking thoughts,
  And stirrings of inquietude, when they
  By tendency of nature needs must fail. 150
  Exceeding was the love he bare to him,
  His heart and his heart's joy! For oftentimes
  Old Michael, while he was a babe in arms,
  Had done him female service, not alone
  For pastime and delight, as is the use                   155
  Of fathers, but with patient mind enforced
  To acts of tenderness; and he had rocked
  His cradle, as with a woman's gentle hand. And in a later time, ere yet the Boy
  Had put on boy's attire, did Michael love,               160
  Albeit of a stern, unbending mind,
  To have the Young-one in his sight, when he
  Wrought in the field, or on his shepherd's stool
  Sat with a fettered sheep before him stretched
  Under the large old oak, that near his door              165
  Stood single, and, from matchless depth of shade,
  Chosen for the shearer's covert from the sun,
  Thence in our rustic dialect was called
  The CLIPPING TREE, a name which yet it bears. There, while they two were sitting in the shade,         170
  With others round them, earnest all and blithe,
  Would Michael exercise his heart with looks
  Of fond correction and reproof bestowed
  Upon the Child, if he disturbed the sheep
  By catching at their legs, or with his shouts            175
  Scared them while they lay still beneath the shears. And when by Heaven's good grace the Boy grew up
  A healthy Lad, and carried in his cheek
  Two steady roses that were five years old;
  Then Michael from a winter coppice cut                   180
  With his own hand a sapling, which he hooped
  With iron, making it throughout in all
  Due requisites a perfect shepherd's staff,
  And gave it to the Boy; wherewith equipped
  He as a watchman oftentimes was placed                   185
  At gate or gap, to stem or turn the flock;
  And, to his office prematurely called,
  There stood the urchin, as you will divine,
  Something between a hindrance and a help;
  And for this cause not always, I believe,                190
  Receiving from his Father hire of praise;
  Though naught was left undone which staff, or voice,
  Or looks, or threatening gestures, could perform,

  But soon as Luke, full ten years old, could stand
  Against the mountain blasts; and to the heights,         195
  Not fearing toil, nor length of weary ways,
  He with his Father daily went, and they
  Were as companions, why should I relate
  That objects which the Shepherd loved before
  Were dearer now? that from the Boy there came            200
  Feelings and emanations,--things which were
  Light to the sun and music to the wind;
  And that the old Man's heart seemed born again? Thus in his Father's sight the boy grew up:
  And now, when he had reached his eighteenth year,        205
  He was his comfort and his daily hope. While in this sort the simple household lived
  From day to day, to Michael's ear there came
  Distressful tidings. Long before the time
  Of which I speak, the Shepherd had been bound            210
  In surety for his brother's son, a man
  Of an industrious life, and ample means;
  But unforeseen misfortunes suddenly
  Had pressed upon him; and old Michael now
  Was summoned to discharge the forfeiture,                215
  A grievous penalty, but little less
  Than half his substance. This unlooked-for claim,
  At the first hearing, for a moment took
  More hope out of his life than he supposed
  That any old man ever could have lost. 220
  As soon as he had armed himself with strength
  To look his trouble in the face, it seemed
  The Shepherd's sole resource to sell at once
  A portion of his patrimonial fields. Such was his first resolve; he thought again,            225
  And his heart failed him. "Isabel," said he,
  Two evenings after he had heard the news,
  "I have been toiling more than seventy years,
  And in the open sunshine of God's love
  Have we all lived; yet if these fields of ours           230
  Should pass into a stranger's hand, I think
  That I could not lie quiet in my grave. Our lot is a hard lot; the sun himself
  Has scarcely been more diligent than I;
  And I have lived to be a fool at last                    235
  To my own family. An evil man
  That was, and made an evil choice, if he
  Were false to us; and if he were not false,
  There are ten thousand to whom loss like this
  Had been no sorrow. I forgive him;--but                 240
  'Twere better to be dumb than to talk thus. "When I began, my purpose was to speak
  Of remedies and of a cheerful hope. Our Luke shall leave us, Isabel; the land
  Shall not go from us, and it shall be free;              245
  He shall possess it, free as is the wind
  That passes over it. We have, thou know'st,
  Another kinsman; he will be our friend
  In this distress. He is a prosperous man,
  Thriving in trade; and Luke to him shall go,             250
  And with his kinsman's help and his own thrift
  He quickly will repair this loss, and then
  He may return to us. If here he stay,
  What can be done? Where every one is poor,
  What can be gained?" At this the old Man paused,                              255
  And Isabel sat silent, for her mind
  Was busy, looking back into past times. There's Richard Bateman, thought she to herself,
  He was a parish-boy,--at the church-door
  They made a gathering for him, shillings, pence,         260
  And half-pennies, wherewith the neighbors bought
  A basket, which they filled with pedlar's wares;
  And, with his basket on his arm, the lad
  Went up to London, found a master there,
  Who, out of many, chose the trusty boy                   265
  To go and overlook his merchandise
  Beyond the seas; where he grew wondrous rich,
  And left estates and moneys to the poor,
  And at his birthplace built a chapel, floored
  With marble, which he sent from foreign lands. 270
  These thoughts, and many others of like sort,
  Passed quickly through the mind of Isabel
  And her face brightened. The old Man was glad,
  And thus resumed: "Well, Isabel, this scheme,
  These two days, has been meat and drink to me. 275
  Far more than we have lost is left us yet. --We have enough--I wish indeed that I
  Were younger;--but this hope is a good hope. Make ready Luke's best garments, of the best
  Buy for him more, and let us send him forth              280
  To-morrow, or the next day, or to-night:
  --If he _could_ go, the Boy should go to-night." Here Michael ceased, and to the fields went forth
  With a light heart. The Housewife for five days
  Was restless morn and night, and all day long            285
  Wrought on with her best fingers to prepare
  Things needful for the journey of her son. But Isabel was glad when Sunday came
  To stop her in her work; for, when she lay
  By Michael's side, she through the last two nights       290
  Heard him, how he was troubled in his sleep:
  And when they rose at morning she could see
  That all his hopes were gone. That day at noon
  She said to Luke, while they two by themselves
  Were sitting at the door, "Thou must not go:             295
  We have no other Child but thee to lose,
  None to remember--do not go away,
  For if thou leave thy Father he will die." The Youth made answer with a jocund voice;
  And Isabel, when she had told her fears,                 300
  Recovered heart. That evening her best fare
  Did she bring forth, and all together sat
  Like happy people round a Christmas fire. With daylight Isabel resumed her work;
  And all the ensuing week the house appeared              305
  As cheerful as a grove in Spring: at length
  The expected letter from their kinsman came,
  With kind assurances that he would do
  His utmost for the welfare of the Boy;
  To which requests were added, that forthwith             310
  He might be sent to him. Ten times or more
  The letter was read over; Isabel
  Went forth to show it to the neighbors round;
  Nor was there at that time on English land
  A prouder heart than Luke's. When Isabel                315
  Had to her house returned, the old Man said,
  "He shall depart to-morrow." To this word
  The Housewife answered, talking much of things
  Which, if at such short notice he should go,
  Would surely be forgotten. But at length                320
  She gave consent, and Michael was at ease. Near the tumultuous brook of Green-head Ghyll,
  In that deep valley, Michael had designed
  To build a Sheep-fold; and, before he heard
  The tidings of his melancholy loss,                      325
  For this same purpose he had gathered up
  A heap of stones, which by the streamlet's edge
  Lay thrown together, ready for the work. With Luke that evening thitherward he walked;
  And soon as they had reached the place he stopped,       330
  And thus the old man spake to him:--"My Son,
  To-morrow thou wilt leave me; with full heart
  I look upon thee, for thou art the same
  That wert a promise to me ere thy birth
  And all thy life hast been my daily joy. 335
  I will relate to thee some little part
  Of our two histories; 'twill do thee good
  When thou art from me, even if I should touch
  On things thou canst not know of.------After thou
  First cam'st into the world--as oft befalls              340
  To newborn infants--thou didst sleep away
  Two days, and blessings from thy Father's tongue
  Then fell upon thee. Day by day passed on,
  And still I loved thee with increasing love. Never to living ear came sweeter sounds                  345
  Than when I heard thee by our own fireside
  First uttering, without words, a natural tune;
  While thou, a feeding babe, didst in thy joy
  Sing at thy Mother's breast. Month followed month,
  And in the open fields my life was passed,               350
  And on the mountains; else I think that thou
  Hadst been brought up upon thy Father's knees. But we were playmates, Luke; among these hills,
  As well thou knowest, in us the old and young
  Have played together, nor with me didst thou             355
  Lack any pleasure which a boy can know." Luke had a manly heart; but at these words
  He sobbed aloud. The old Man grasped his hand,
  And said, "Nay, do not take it so--I see
  That these are things of which I need not speak. 360
  --Even to the utmost I have been to thee
  A kind and a good Father; and herein
  I but repay a gift which I myself
  Received at others' hands; for, though now old
  Beyond the common life of man, I still                   365
  Remember them who loved me in my youth. Both of them sleep together; here they lived,
  As all their Forefathers had done; and, when
  At length their time was come, they were not loath
  To give their bodies to the family mould. 370
  I wished that thou should'st live the life they lived;
  But 'tis a long time to look back, my Son,
  And see so little gain from threescore years. These fields were burthened when they came to me;
  Till I was forty years of age, not more                  375
  Than half of my inheritance was mine. I toiled and toiled; God blessed me in my work,
  And till the three weeks past the land was free. --It looks as if it never could endure
  Another Master. Heaven forgive me, Luke,                380
  If I judge ill for thee, but it seems good
  That thou shouldst go." At this the old Man paused;
  Then, pointing to the stones near which they stood,
  Thus, after a short silence, he resumed:
  "This was a work for us; and now, my Son,                385
  It is a work for me. But, lay one stone,--
  Here, lay it for me, Luke, with thine own hands. Nay, Boy, be of good hope; we both may live
  To see a better day. At eighty-four
  I still am strong and hale;--do thou thy part;           390
  I will do mine.--I will begin again
  With many tasks that were resigned to thee;
  Up to the heights, and in among the storms,
  Will I without thee go again, and do
  All works which I was wont to do alone,                  395
  Before I knew thy face. Heaven bless thee, Boy! Thy heart these two weeks has been beating fast
  With many hopes; it should be so--yes, yes,--
  I knew that thou couldst never have a wish
  To leave me, Luke; thou hast been bound to me            400
  Only by links of love: when thou art gone
  What will be left to us!--But I forget
  My purposes. Lay now the corner-stone,
  As I requested; and hereafter, Luke,
  When thou art gone away, should evil men                 405
  Be thy companions, think of me, my Son,
  And of this moment; hither turn thy thoughts,
  And God will strengthen thee: amid all fear
  And all temptation, Luke, I pray that thou
  May'st bear in mind the life thy Fathers lived,          410
  Who, being innocent, did for that cause
  Bestir them in good deeds. Now, fare thee well--
  When thou return'st, thou in this place wilt see
  A work which is not here: a covenant
  'Twill be between us; but, whatever fate                 415
  Befall thee, I shall love thee to the last,
  And bear thy memory with me to the grave." The Shepherd ended here; and Luke stooped down,
  And, as his Father had requested, laid
  The first stone of the Sheep-fold. At the sight         420
  The old Man's grief broke from him; to his heart
  He pressed his Son, he kissed him and wept;
  And to the house together they returned. --Hushed was that House in peace, or seeming peace,
  Ere the night fell:--with morrow's dawn the Boy          425
  Began his journey, and when he had reached
  The public way, he put on a bold face;
  And all the neighbors, as he passed their doors,
  Came forth with wishes and with farewell prayers,
  That followed him till he was out of sight. 430

  A good report did from their Kinsman come,
  Of Luke and his well doing: and the Boy
  Wrote loving letters, full of wondrous news,
  Which, as the Housewife phrased it, were throughout
  "The prettiest letters that were ever seen." 435
  Both parents read them with rejoicing hearts. So, many months passed on; and once again
  The Shepherd went about his daily work
  With confident and cheerful thoughts; and now
  Sometimes when he could find a leisure hour              440
  He to that valley took his way, and there
  Wrought at the Sheep-fold. Meantime Luke began
  To slacken in his duty; and, at length,
  He in the dissolute city gave himself
  To evil courses: ignominy and shame                      445
  Fell on him, so that he was driven at last
  To seek a hiding place beyond the seas. There is a comfort in the strength of love;
  'Twill make a thing endurable, which else
  Would overset the brain, or break the heart:             450
  I have conversed with more than one who well
  Remember the old Man, and what he was
  Years after he had heard this heavy news. His bodily frame had been from youth to age
  Of an unusual strength. Among the rocks                 455
  He went, and still looked up to sun and cloud,
  And listened to the wind; and, as before,
  Performed all kinds of labor for his sheep,
  And for the land, his small inheritance. And to that hollow dell from time to time                460
  Did he repair, to build the Fold of which
  His flock had need. 'Tis not forgotten yet
  The pity which was then in every heart
  For the old Man--and 'tis believed by all
  That many and many a day he thither went,                465
  And never lifted up a single stone. There by the Sheep-fold, sometimes was he seen
  Sitting alone, or with his faithful Dog,
  Then old, beside him, lying at his feet. The length of full seven years, from time to time        570
  He at the building of this Sheep-fold wrought,
  And left the work unfinished when he died. Three years, or little more, did Isabel
  Survive her Husband; at her death the estate
  Was sold, and went into a stranger's hand. 475
  The Cottage which was named the EVENING STAR
  Is gone,--the ploughshare has been through the ground
  On which it stood; great changes have been wrought
  In all the neighborhood:--yet the oak is left,
  That grew beside their door; and the remains             480
  Of the unfinished Sheep-fold may be seen
  Beside the boisterous brook of Green-head Ghyll. 2. GREEN-HEAD GHYLL. Near Dove Cottage, Wordsworth's home at Grasmere. GHYLL. A short, steep, and narrow valley with a stream running through
it. 5. THE PASTORAL MOUNTAINS. In Professor Knight's _Life of Wordsworth_
are found fragments which the poet intended for _Michael_ and which
were recovered from Dorothy Wordsworth's manuscript book. Among these
are the following lines, which as Professor Dowden suggests, are given
as Wordsworth's answer to the question, "What feeling for external
nature had such a man as Michael?" The lines, which correspond to
lines 62-77 of the poem, are as follows;

  "No doubt if you in terms direct had asked
  Whether beloved the mountains, true it is
  That with blunt repetition of your words
  He might have stared at you, and said that they
  Were frightful to behold, but had you then
  Discoursed with him . . . . . . . . Of his own business and the goings on
  Of earth and sky, then truly had you seen
  That in his thoughts there were obscurities,
  Wonder and admiration, things that wrought
  Not less than a religion of his heart." 17. In Dorothy Wordsworth's Journal for October 11, 1800, we read:
"After dinner, we walked up Greenhead Gill in search of a
sheepfold. . . The sheepfold is falling away. It is built in the form
of a heart unequally divided." 48. THE MEANING OF ALL WINDS. This is not a figurative Statement. Michael knows by experience whether the sound and direction of the wind
forebode storm or fair weather,--precisely the practical kind of
knowledge which a herdsman should possess. 51. SUBTERRANEOUS. The meaning of this word has given rise to
discussion. "Subterraneous" cannot here be literally employed, unless
it refer to the sound of the wind in hollow places, and beneath
overhanging crags. 51-52. LIKE THE NOISE, etc. Is there a special appropriateness in the
use of a Scottish simile? What is the general character of the similes
throughout the poem? 56-77. Wordsworth never attributes to Michael the subtler and more
philosophical sensations which he himself derived from nature. Such
poems as _The Prelude_ or _The Excursion_ contain many elevated
passages on the influence of nature, which would have been exceedingly
inappropriate here. 115. Scan this line. 121. NOR CHEERFUL. The epithet seems not well chosen in view of the
fact that all the circumstances of their life breathe a spirit of quiet
cheerfulness. Surely the light (129-131) was a symbol of cheer. 126. PECULIAR WORK. Bring out the force of the epithet. 134. EASEDALE. Near Grasmere. DUNMAIL-RAISE. The pass leading from
Grasmere to Keswick. RAISE. A provincial word meaning "an ascent." 139. THE EVENING STAR. This name was actually given to a neighboring
house. 143-152. The love of Michael for Luke is inwrought with his love for
his home and for the land which surrounds it. These he desires at his
death to hand down unencumbered to his son. "I have attempted,"
Wordsworth wrote to Poole, "to give a picture of a man of strong mind
and lively sensibility, agitated by two of the most powerful affections
of the human heart--the parental affection and the love of property,
_landed_ property, including the feelings of inheritance, home and
personal and family independence." 145. Scan this line. 169. THE CLIPPING TREE. Clipping is the word used in the North of
England for shearing. (Wordsworth's note, 1800). 182. Notice the entire absence of pause at the end of the line. Point
out other instances of run-on lines (_enjambement_). 259. PARISH-BOY. Depending on charity. 268-270. Wordsworth added the following note on these lines: "The story
alluded to here is well known in the country. The chapel is called
Ing's Chapel; and is on the right hand side of the road leading from
Kendal to Ambleside." 283. AND TO THE FIELDS WENT FORTH  Observe the inconsistency. The
conversation took place in the evening. See l. 327. 284f. WITH A LIGHT HEART. Michael's growing misgivings are subtly
represented in the following lines, and the renewal of his hopes. 367-368. These lines forcibly show how tenaciously Michael's feelings
were rooted in the soil of his home. Hence the extreme pathos of the
situation. 388. Observe the dramatic force of this line. 393-396. What unconscious poetry there is in the old man's words! 420. Scan this line. 445. Scan this line. 466. Matthew Arnold commenting on this line says; "The right sort of
verse to choose from Wordsworth, if we are to seize his true and most
characteristic form of expression, is a line like this from Michael:
'And never lifted up a single stone.' There is nothing subtle in it,
no heightening, no study of poetic style strictly so called, at all;
yet it is an expression of the highest and most truly expressive kind." 467f. Note the noble simplicity and pathos of these closing lines. There is a reserved force of pent-up pathos here, which without effort
reaches the height of dramatic effectiveness. TO THE DAISY

  Bright Flower! whose home is everywhere,
  Bold in maternal Nature's care,
  And all the long year through the heir
    Of joy and sorrow,
  Methinks that there abides in thee                         5
  Some concord with humanity,
  Given to no other flower I see
    The forest thorough! Is it that Man is soon deprest? A thoughtless Thing! who, once unblest,                   10
  Does little on his memory rest,
    Or on his reason,
  And Thou would'st teach him how to find
  A shelter under every wind,
  A hope for times that are unkind,                         15
    And every season? Thou wander'st the wide world about,
  Uncheck'd by pride or scrupulous doubt,
  With friends to greet thee, or without,
    Yet pleased and wilting;                                20
  Meek, yielding to the occasion's call,
  And all things suffering from all,
  Thy function apostolical
    In peace fulfilling. 8. THOROUGH. This is by derivation the correct form of the modern word
"through." A.S. _thurh_, M.E. _thuruh_. The use of "thorough" is now
purely adjectival, except in archaic or poetic speech. 24. APOSTOLICAL. The stanza in which this word occurs was omitted in
1827 and 1832, because the expression was censured as almost profane. Wordsworth in his dictated note to Miss Fenwick has the following: "The
word [apostolical] is adopted with reference to its derivation, implying
something sent out on a mission; and assuredly this little flower,
especially when the subject of verse, may be regarded, in its humble
degree, as administering both to moral and spiritual purposes." TO THE CUCKOO

  O blithe New-comer! I have heard,
  I hear thee and rejoice. O Cuckoo! shall I call thee Bird,
  Or but a wandering Voice? While I am lying on the grass,                             5
  Thy twofold shout I hear;
  From hill to hill it seems to pass,
  At once far off, and near. Though babbling only to the Vale
  Of sunshine and of flowers,                               10
  Thou bringest unto me a tale
  Of visionary hours. Thrice welcome, darling of the Spring! Even yet thou art to me
  No bird, but an invisible thing,                          15
  A voice, a mystery;

  The same whom in my schoolboy days
  I listened to; that Cry
  Which made me look a thousand ways
  In bush, and tree, and sky. 20

  To seek thee did I often rove
  Through woods and on the green;
  And thou wert still a hope, a love;
  Still longed for, never seen. And I can listen to thee yet;                             25
  Can lie upon the plain
  And listen, till I do beget
  That golden time again. O blessed Bird! the earth we pace
  Again appears to be                                       30
  An unsubstantial, faery place;
  That is fit home for Thee! 1. O BLITHE NEW-COMER. The Cuckoo is migratory, and appears in England
in the early spring. Compare _Solitary Reaper_, l. 16. I HAV HEARD. i.e., in my youth. 3. SHALL I CALL THEE BIRD? Compare Shelley. Hail to thee, blithe spirit! Bird thou never wert. _To a Skylark_. 4. A WANDERING VOICE? Lacking substantial existence. 6. TWOFOLD SHOUT. Twofold, because consisting of a double note. Compare
Wordsworth's sonnet, _To the Cuckoo_, l. 4:

    "With its twin notes inseparably paired." Wordsworth employs the word "shout" in several of his Cuckoo
descriptions. See _The Excursion_, ii. l. 346-348 and vii. l. 408; also
the following from _Yes! it was the Mountain Echo_:

    Yes! it was the mountain echo,
    Solitary, clear, profound,
    Answering to the shouting Cuckoo;
    Giving to her sound for sound. NUTTING

  ------It seems a day
  (I speak of one from many singled out),
  One of those heavenly days that cannot die;
  When, in the eagerness of boyish hope,
  I left our cottage threshold, sallying forth               5
  With a huge wallet o'er my shoulders slung,
  A nutting-crook in hand, and turned my steps
  Toward some far-distant wood, a Figure quaint,
  Tricked out in proud disguise of cast-off weeds,
  Which for that service had been husbanded,                10
  By exhortation of my frugal Dame,--
  Motley accoutrement, of power to smile
  At thorns, and brakes, and brambles, and, in truth,
  More ragged than need was! O'er pathless rocks,
  Through beds of matted fern and tangled thickets,         15
  Forcing my way, I came to one dear nook
  Unvisited, where not a broken bough
  Drooped with its withered leaves, ungracious sign
  Of devastation; but the hazels rose
  Tall and erect, with tempting clusters hung,              20
  A virgin scene! A little while I stood,
  Breathing with such suppression of the heart
  As joy delights in; and with wise restraint
  Voluptuous, fearless of a rival, eyed
  The banquet; or beneath the trees I sate                  25
  Among the flowers, and with the flowers I played;
  A temper known to those, who, after long
  And weary expectation, have been blest
  With sudden happiness beyond all hope. Perhaps it was a bower beneath whose leaves               30
  The violets of five seasons reappear
  And fade, unseen by any human eye;
  Where fairy water-breaks do murmur on
  Forever; and I saw the sparkling foam,
  And, with my cheek on one of those green stones           35
  That, fleeced with moss, under the shady trees,
  Lay round me, scattered like a flock of sheep,
  I heard the murmur and the murmuring sound,
  In that sweet mood when pleasure loves to pay
  Tribute to ease; and of its joy secure,                   40
  The heart luxuriates with indifferent things,
  Wasting its kindliness on stocks and stones,
  And on the vacant air. Then up I rose,
  And dragged to earth both branch and bough, with crash
  And merciless ravage: and the shady nook                  45
  Of hazels, and the green and mossy bower,
  Deformed and sullied, patiently gave up
  Their quiet being: and unless I now
  Confound my present feelings with the past,
  Ere from the mutilated bower I turned                     50
  Exulting, rich beyond the wealth of kings,
  I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
  The silent trees, and saw the intruding sky.--
  Then, dearest Maiden, move along these shades
  In gentleness of heart; with gentle hand                  55
  Touch,--for there is a spirit in the woods. 5. OUR COTTAGE THRESHOLD. "The house at which I was boarded during the
time I was at school." (Wordsworth's note, 1800). The school was the
Hawkshead School. 9. TRICKED OUT=_dressed_. The verb "to trick"="to dress" is derived
probably from the noun, "trick" in the sense of 'a dexterous artifice,'
'a touch.' See "Century Dictionary." CAST-OFF WEEDS=_cast-off clothes_. Wordsworth originally wrote 'of
Beggar's weeds.' What prompted him to change the expression? 10. FOR THAT SERVICE. i.e., for nutting. 12-13. OF POWER TO SMILE AT THORNS=_able to defy_, etc. Not because of
their strength, but because so ragged that additional rents were of small
account. 21. VIRGIN=_unmarred, undevastated_. 31. Explain the line. Notice the poetical way in which the poet conveys
the idea of solitude, (l. 30-32). 33. FAIRY WATER-BREAKS=_wavelets, ripples_. _Cf_. :--

         Many a silvery _water-break_
         Above the golden gravel. Tennyson, _The Brook_. 36. FLEECED WITH MOSS. Suggest a reason why the term "fleeced" has
peculiar appropriateness here. 39-40. Paraphrase these lines to bring out their meaning. 43-48. THEN UP I ROSE. Contrast this active exuberant pleasure not
unmixed with pain with the passive meditative joy that the preceding
lines express. 47-48. PATIENTLY GAVE UP THEIR QUIET BEING. Notice the attribution of
life to inanimate nature. Wordsworth constantly held that there was a
mind and all the attributes of mind in nature. _Cf_. l.  56, "for there
is a spirit in the woods." 53. AND SAW THE INTRUDING SKY. Bring out the force of this passage. 54. THEN, DEAREST MAIDEN. This is a reference to the poet's Sister,
Dorothy Wordsworth. 56. FOR THERE IS A SPIRIT IN THE WOODS. _Cf. Tintern Abbey_, 101 f.

      A motion and a spirit that impels
      All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
      And rolls through all things. INFLUENCE OF NATURAL OBJECTS

  Wisdom and Spirit of the universe! Thou Soul, that art the Eternity of thought! And giv'st to forms and images a breath
  And everlasting motion! not in vain,
  By day or starlight, thus from my first dawn               5
  Of childhood didst thou intertwine for me
  The passions that build up our human soul;
  Not with the mean and vulgar works of Man:
  But with high objects, with enduring things,
  With life and nature: purifying thus                      10
  The elements of feeling and of thought,
  And sanctifying by such discipline
  Both pain and fear,--until we recognize
  A grandeur in the beatings of the heart. Nor was this fellowship vouchsafed to me                  15
  With stinted kindness. In November days,
  When vapors rolling down the valleys made
  A lonely scene more lonesome; among woods
  At noon; and 'mid the calm of summer nights,
  When, by the margin of the trembling lake,                20
  Beneath the gloomy hills, homeward I went
  In solitude, such intercourse was mine:
  Mine was it in the fields both day and night,
  And by the waters, all the summer long. And in the frosty season, when the sun                    25
  Was set, and, visible for many a mile,
  The cottage windows through the twilight blazed,
  I heeded not the summons: happy time
  It was indeed for all of us; for me
  It was a time of rapture! Clear and loud                 30
  The village clock tolled six--I wheeled about,
  Proud and exulting like an untired horse,
  That cares not for his home,--All shod with steel
  We hissed along the polished ice, in games
  Confederate, imitative of the chase                       35
  And woodland pleasures,--the resounding horn,
  The pack loud-chiming, and the hunted hare. So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
  And not a voice was idle; with the din
  Smitten, the precipices rang aloud;                       40
  The leafless trees and every icy crag
  Tinkled like iron; while far-distant hills
  Into the tumult sent an alien sound
  Of melancholy, not unnoticed, while the stars,
  Eastward, were sparkling clear, and in the west           45
  The orange sky of evening died away. Not seldom from the uproar I retired
  Into a silent bay, or sportively
  Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng,
  To cut across the reflex of a star;                       50
  Image, that, flying still before me, gleamed
  Upon the glassy plain; and oftentimes,
  When we had given our bodies to the wind,
  And all the shadowy banks on either side
  Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still        55
  The rapid line of motion, then at once
  Have I, reclining back upon my heels,
  Stopped short, yet still the solitary cliffs
  Wheeled by me--even as if the earth had rolled
  With visible motion her diurnal round! 60
  Behind me did they stretch in solemn train,
  Feebler and feebler, and I stood and watched
  Till all was tranquil as a summer sea. 1-14. In what other poems does Wordsworth describe "the education of
nature?" 8. Nature's teaching is never sordid nor mercenary, but always purifying
and ennobling. 10. PURIFYING, also SANCTIFYING (l. 12), refer to "Soul" (l. 2). 12-14. Human cares are lightened in proportion to our power of
sympathising with nature. The very beatings of our heart acquire a
certain grandeur from the fact that they are a process of nature and
linked thus to the general life of things. It is possible that "beatings
of the heart" may figuratively represent the mere play of the emotions,
and thus have a bearing upon the words "pain and fear" in line 13. 15. FELLOWSHIP. Communion with nature in her varying aspects as
described in the following lines. 31. VILLAGE CLOCK. The village was Hawkshead. 35. CONFEDERATE. Qualifies "we," or "games." Point out the different
shades of meaning for each agreement. 42. TINKLED LIKE IRON. "When very many are skating together, the sounds
and the noises give an impulse to the icy trees, and the woods all round
the lake _tinkle_." S. T. Coleridge in _The Friend_, ii, 325 (1818). 42-44. The keenness of Wordsworth's sense perceptions was very
remarkable. His susceptibility to impressions of sound is well
illustrated in this passage, which closes (l. 43-46) with a color picture
of striking beauty and appropriateness. 50. REFLEX=_reflection_. _Cf_. :

        Like the _reflex_ of the moon
        Seen in a wave under green leaves. Shelley, _Prometheus Unbound_, iii, 4. In later editions Wordsworth altered these lines as follows:

To cut across the image. 1809. To cross the bright reflection. 1820. 54-60. The effect of rapid motion is admirably described. The spinning
effect which Wordsworth evidently has in mind we have all noticed in the
fields which seem to revolve when viewed from a swiftly moving: train. However, a skater from the low level of a stream would see only the
fringe of trees sweep past him. The darkness and the height of the banks
would not permit him to see the relatively motionless objects in the
distance in either hand. 57-58. This method of stopping short upon one's heels might prove
disastrous. 58-60. The effect of motion persists after the motion has ceased. 62 63. The apparent motion of the cliffs grows feebler by degrees until
"all was tranquil as a summer sea." In _The_ [Transcriber's note:  the
rest of this footnote is missing from the original book because of a
printing error.] TO THE REV. DR. WORDSWORTH

  (WITH THE SONNETS TO THE RIVER DUDDON, AND OTHER
  POEMS IN THIS COLLECTION, 1820). The minstrels played their Christmas tune
  To-night beneath my cottage-eaves;
  While, smitten by a lofty moon,
  The encircling laurels, thick with leaves,
  Gave back a rich and dazzling sheen,                       5
  That overpowered their natural green. Through hill and valley every breeze
  Had sunk to rest with folded wings;
  Keen was the air, but could not freeze,
  Nor check, the music of the strings;                      10
  So stout and hardy were the band
  That scraped the chords with strenuous hand:

  And who but listened?--till was paid
  Respect to every Inmate's claim:
  The greeting given, the music played,                     15
  In honor of each household name,
  Duly pronounced with lusty call,
  And "Merry Christmas" wished to all! O Brother! I revere the choice
  That took thee from thy native hills;                     20
  And it is given thee to rejoice:
  Though public care full often tills
  (Heaven only witness of the toil)
  A barren and ungrateful soil. Yet, would that Thou, with me and mine,                   25
  Hadst heard this never-failing rite;
  And seen on other faces shine
  A true revival of the light
  Which Nature and these rustic Powers,
  In simple childhood, spread through ours! 30

  For pleasure hath not ceased to wait
  On these expected annual rounds;
  Whether the rich man's sumptuous gate
  Call forth the unelaborate sounds,
  Or they are offered at the door                           35
  That guards the lowliest of the poor. How touching, when, at midnight, sweep
  Snow-muffled winds, and all is dark
  To hear--and sink again-to sleep
  Or, at an earlier call, to mark,                          40
  By blazing fire, the still suspense
  Of self-complacent innocence;

  The mutual nod,--the grave disguise
  Of hearts with gladness brimming o'er;
  And some unbidden tears that rise                         45
  For names once heard, and heard no more;
  Tears brightened by the serenade
  For infant in the cradle laid. Ah! not for emerald fields alone,
  With ambient streams more pure and bright                 50
  Than fabled Cytherea's zone
  Glittering before the Thunderer's sight,
  Is to my heart of hearts endeared
  The ground where we were born and reared! Hail, ancient Manners! sure defence,                      55
  Where they survive, of wholesome laws;
  Remnants of love whose modest sense
  Thus into narrow room withdraws;
  Hail, Usages of pristine mould,
  And ye that guard them, Mountains old! 60

  Bear with me, Brother! quench the thought
  That slights this passion, or condemns;
  If thee fond Fancy ever brought
  From the proud margin of the Thames,
  And Lambeth's venerable towers,                           65
  To humbler streams, and greener bowers. Yes, they can make, who fail to fill
  Short leisure even in busiest days;
  Moments, to cast a look behind,
  And profit by those kindly rays                           70
  That through the clouds do sometimes steal,
  And all the far-off past reveal. Hence, while the imperial City's din
  Beats frequent on thy satiate ear,
  A pleased attention I may win                             75
  To agitations less severe,
  That neither overwhelm nor cloy,
  But fill the hollow vale with joy! Christopher Wordsworth was born at Cockermouth in Cumberland on June 9th,
1774. He received his early education at Hawkshead Grammar School and in
1792 entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner. He graduated in
1796 with high honours in mathematics, and in 1798 was elected a fellow
of his college. He took his M.A. degree in 1799 and was awarded the
degree of Doctor of Divinity in 1810. While at Cambridge Christopher had
been tutor to Viscount Canterbury, who introduced him to his father, at
that time Bishop of Norwich. Through the good offices of the Bishop he
was appointed to the rectory of Ashby, Norfolk, and thus, with prospects
settled, he was enabled to marry. On the appointment of the Bishop of
Norwich to the Archbishopric of Canterbury he was appointed domestic
chaplain to the Archbishop. Subsequently in 1816 he was appointed rector
of St. Mary's, Lambeth, the living he held at the time the poem in the
text was written. In 1820 Christopher was made Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, a
position he held until his resignation in 1841. He died at Buxted on
February 2nd, 1846. "He was an earnest and deeply religious man; in some
respects a high churchman of the old school, but with sympathy for
whatever was good and noble in others. In politics he was a staunch
Conservative." 15. THE GREETING GIVEN, THE MUSIC PLAYED. Till the greeting had been
given and the music played. 17. Attributive to "name" (l. 16.) 18. Explain the construction of "wished." 50. AMBIENT=_winding_. 51. CYTHEREA'S ZONE. The goddess Venus was named Cytherea because she
was supposed to have been born of the foam of the sea near Cythera, an
island off the coast of the Peloponnesus. Venus was the goddess of love,
and her power over the heart was strengthened by the marvellous zone or
girdle she wore. 52. THE THUNDERER. The reference is to Jupiter, who is generally
represented as seated upon a golden or ivory throne holding in one hand
the thunderbolts, and in the other a sceptre of cypress. 55-60. Suggest how this stanza is characteristic of Wordsworth. 65. LAMBETH'S VENERABLE TOWERS. Lambeth Palace, the official residence
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, is on the Thames. Wordsworth's brother
Christopher, afterwards Master of Trinity College, was then (1820) Rector
of Lambeth. ELEGIAC STANZAS

  SUGGESTED BY A PICTURE OF PEELE CASTLE, IN A STORM,
  PAINTED BY SIR GEORGE BEAUMONT. I was thy neighbor once, thou rugged Pile! Four summer weeks I dwelt in sight of thee:
  I saw thee every day; and all the while
  Thy Form was sleeping on a glassy sea. So pure the sky, so quiet was the air! 5
  So like, so very like, was day to day! Whene'er I looked, thy Image still was there;
  It trembled, but it never passed away. How perfect was the calm! it seemed no sleep;
  No mood, which season takes away, or brings:              10
  I could have fancied that the mighty Deep
  Was even the gentlest, of all gentle Things. Ah! THEN, if mine had been the Painter's hand,
  To express what then I saw; and add the gleam,
  The light that never was. On sea or land,                15
  The consecration, and the Poet's dream;

  I would have planted thee, thou hoary Pile,
  Amid a world how different from this! Beside a sea that could not cease to smile;
  On tranquil land, beneath a sky of bliss. 20

  Thou shouldst have seemed a treasure-house divine
  Of peaceful years; a chronicle of heaven;--
  Of all the sunbeams that did ever shine
  The very sweetest had to thee been given. A Picture had it been of lasting ease,                    25
  Elysian quiet, without toil or strife;
  No motion but the moving tide, a breeze,
  Or merely silent Nature's breathing life. Such, in the fond illusion of my heart,
  Such Picture would I at that time have made:              30
  And seen the soul of truth in every part,
  A steadfast peace that might not be betrayed. So once it would have been,--'tis so no more;
  I have submitted to a new control:
  A power is gone, which nothing can restore;               35
  A deep distress hath humanized my Soul. Not for a moment could I now behold
  A smiling sea, and be what I have been:
  The feeling of my loss will ne'er be old;
  This, which I know, I speak with mind serene. 40

  Then, Beaumont, Friend! who would have been the Friend,
  If he had lived, of Him whom I deplore,
  This work of thine I blame not, but commend;
  This sea in anger, and that dismal shore. O 'tis a passionate Work!--yet wise and well,             45
  Well chosen is the spirit that is here;
  That Hulk which labors in the deadly swell,
  This rueful sky, this pageantry of fear! And this huge Castle, standing here sublime,
  I love to see the look with which it braves,              50
  Cased in the unfeeling armor of old time,
  The lightning, the fierce wind, and trampling waves. Farewell, farewell the heart that lives alone,
  Housed in a dream, at distance from the Kind! Such happiness, wherever it be known,                     55
  Is to be pitied: for 'tis surely blind. But welcome fortitude, and patient cheer,
  And frequent sights of what is to be borne! Such sights, or worse, as are before me here.--
  Not without hope we suffer and we mourn. 60


2. FOUR SUMMER WEEKS. In 1794 Wordsworth spent part of a summer vacation
at the house of his cousin, Mr. Barker, at Rampside, a village near Peele
Castle. 6-7. Shelley has twice imitated these lines. Compare:--

        Within the surface of Time's fleeting river
          Its wrinkled Image lies, as then it lay
        Immovably unquiet, and for ever
          It trembles, but it cannot pass away. _Ode to Liberty_, vi. also the following:

        Within the surface of the fleeting river
          The wrinkled image of the city lay,
        Immovably unquiet, and for ever
          It trembles, but it never fades away. _Evening_. 9-10. The calm was so complete that it did not seem a transient mood of
the sea, a passing sleep. 13-16. Compare with the above original reading of 1807 (restored after
1827) the lines which Wordsworth substituted in 1820 and 1827. Ah! THEN, if mine had been the Painter's hand,
          To express what then I saw; and add a gleam,
          The lustre, known to neither sea nor land,
          But borrowed from the youthful Poet's dream. 35-36. A POWER IS GONE--SOUL. The reference is to the death at sea of
his brother Captain John Wordsworth. The poet can no longer see things
wholly idealized. His brother's death has revealed to him, however, the
ennobling virtue of grief. Thus a personal loss is converted into human
gain. Note especially in this connection l. 35 and ll. 53-60. 54. FROM THE KIND. From our fellow-beings. "IT IS NOT TO BE THOUGHT OF"

  It is not to be thought of that the Flood
  Of British freedom, which to the open sea
  Of the world's praise from dark antiquity
  Hath flowed, 'with pomp of waters, unwithstood,'
  Roused though it be full often to a mood                   5
  Which spurns the check of salutary bands,
  That this most famous Stream in bogs and sands
  Should perish, and to evil and to good
  Be lost forever. In our halls is hung
  Armoury of the invincible Knights of old:                 10
  We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
  That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold
  Which Milton held.--In everything we are sprung
  Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold. 4. 'WITH POMP OF WATERS, UNWITHSTOOD.' This is quoted from Daniel's
_Civil War_, Bk. ii, stanza 7. WRITTEN IN LONDON, SEPTEMBER, 1802

  O Friend! I know not which way I must look
  For comfort, being, as I am, oppressed,
  To think that now our life is only dressed
  For show; mean handiwork of craftsman, cook,
  Or groom!--We must run glittering like a brook             5
  In the open sunshine, or we are unblessed:
  The wealthiest man among us is the best:
  No grandeur now in nature or in book
  Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expense,
  This is idolatry; and these we adore:                     10
  Plain living and high thinking are no more:
  The homely beauty of the good old cause
  Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence,
  And pure religion breathing household laws. LONDON, 1802

  Milton! thou should'st be living at this hour:
  England hath need of thee: she is a fen
  Of stagnant waters; altar, sword, and pen,
  Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower,
  Have forfeited their ancient English dower                 5
  Of inward happiness. We are selfish men;
  Oh! raise us up, return to us again;
  And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power. Thy soul was like a Star, and dwelt apart:
  Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea:          10
  Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,
  So didst thou travel on life's common way,
  In cheerful godliness; and yet thy heart
  The lowliest duties on herself did lay. "DARK AND MORE DARK THE SHADES OF EVENING FELL"

  Dark and more dark the shades of evening fell;
  The wished-for point was reached--but at an hour
  When little could be gained from that rich dower
  Of Prospect, whereof many thousands tell. Yet did the glowing west with marvellous power             5
  Salute us; there stood Indian citadel,
  Temple of Greece, and minster with its tower
  Substantially expressed--a place for bell
  Or clock to toll from! Many a tempting isle,
  With groves that never were imagined, lay                 10
  'Mid seas how steadfast! objects all for the eye
  Of silent rapture, but we felt the while
  We should forget them; they are of the sky
  And from our earthly memory fade away. "SURPRISED BY JOY--IMPATIENT AS THE WIND"

  Surprised by joy--impatient as the wind
  I turned to share the transport--Oh! with whom
  But Thee, deep buried in the silent tomb,
  That spot which no vicissitude can find? Love, faithful love, recalled thee to my mind--            5
  But how could I forget thee? Through what power,
  Even for the least division of an hour,
  Have I been so beguiled as to be blind
  To my most grievous loss?--That thought's return
  Was the worst pang that sorrow ever bore,                 10
  Save one, one only, when I stood forlorn,
  Knowing my heart's best treasure was no more;
  That neither present time, nor years unborn
  Could to my sight that heavenly face restore. "HAIL, TWILIGHT, SOVEREIGN OF ONE PEACEFUL HOUR"

  Hail, Twilight, sovereign of one peaceful hour! Not dull art Thou as undiscerning Night;
  But studious only to remove from sight
  Day's mutable distinctions.--Ancient Power! Thus did the waters gleam, the mountains lower,            5
  To the rude Briton, when, in wolf-skin vest
  Here roving wild, he laid him down to rest
  On the bare rock, or through a leafy bower
  Looked ere his eyes were closed. By him was seen
  The self-same Vision which we now behold,                 10
  At thy meek bidding, shadowy Power! brought forth
  These mighty barriers, and the gulf between;
  The flood, the stars,--a spectacle as old
  As the beginning of the heavens and earth! "I THOUGHT OF THEE, MY PARTNER AND MY GUIDE"

  I thought of Thee, my partner and my guide,
  As being past away.--Vain sympathies! For, backward, Duddon, as I cast my eyes,
  I see what was, and is, and will abide;
  Still glides the Stream, and shall for ever glide;         5
  The Form remains, the Function never dies,
  While we, the brave, the mighty, and the wise,
  We Men, who in our morn of youth defied
  The elements, must vanish;--be it so! Enough, if something from our hands have power            10
  To live, and act, and serve the future hour;
  And if, as toward the silent tomb we go,
  Through love, through hope, and faith's transcendent dower,
  We feel that we are greater than we know. "SUCH AGE, HOW BEAUTIFUL!" Such age, how beautiful! O Lady bright,
  Whose mortal lineaments seem all refined
  By favouring Nature and a saintly Mind
  To something purer and more exquisite
  Than flesh and blood; whene'er thou meet'est my sight,     5
  When I behold thy blanched unwithered cheek,
  Thy temples fringed with locks of gleaming white,
  And head that droops because the soul is meek,
  Thee with the welcome Snowdrop I compare;
  That child of winter, prompting thoughts that climb       10
  From desolation toward the genial prime;
  Or with the Moon conquering earth's misty air,
  And filling more and more with crystal light
  As pensive Evening deepens into night. TENNYSON


  OENONE

  There lies a vale in Ida, lovelier
  Than all the valleys of Ionian hills. The swimming vapour slopes athwart the glen,
  Puts forth an arm, and creeps from pine to pine
  And loiters, slowly drawn. On either hand                 5
  The lawns and meadow-ledges midway down
  Hang rich in flowers, and far below them roars
  The long brook falling thro' the clov'n ravine
  In cataract after cataract to the sea. Behind the valley topmost Gargarus                        10
  Stands up and takes the morning: but in front
  The gorges, opening wide apart, reveal
  Troas and Ilion's column'd citadel,
  The crown of Troas. Hither came at noon
  Mournful Oenone, wandering forlorn                        15
  Of Paris, once her playmate on the hills. Her cheek had lost the rose, and round her neck
  Floated her hair or seem'd to float in rest. She, leaning on a fragment twined with vine,
  Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shade            20
  Sloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff

  "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. For now the noonday quiet holds the hill:
  The grasshopper is silent in the grass:                   25
  The lizard, with his shadow on the stone,
  Rests like a shadow, and the winds are dead
  The purple flower droops: the golden bee
  Is lily-cradled: I alone awake. My eyes are full of tears, my heart of love,              30
  My heart is breaking, and my eyes are dim,
  And I am all aweary of my life. "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. Hear me, O Earth; hear me, O Hills, O Caves               35
  That house the cold crowned snake! O mountain brooks,
  I am the daughter of a River-God,
  Hear me, for I will speak, and build up all
  My sorrow with my song, as yonder walls
  Rose slowly to a music slowly breathed,                   40
  A cloud that gather'd shape: for it may be
  That, while I speak of it, a little while
  My heart may wander from its deeper woe. "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. 45
  I waited underneath the dawning hills,
  Aloft the mountain lawn was dewy-dark,
  And dewy-dark aloft the mountain pine:
  Beautiful Paris, evil-hearted Paris,
  Leading a jet-black goat white-horn'd, white-hooved,      50
  Came up from reedy Simols all alone. "O mother Ida, harken ere I die. Far-off the torrent call'd me from the cleft:
  Far up the solitary morning smote
  The streaks of virgin snow. With down-dropt eyes         55
  I sat alone: white-breasted like a star
  Fronting the dawn he moved; a leopard skin
  Droop'd from his shoulder, but his sunny hair
  Cluster'd about his temples like a God's;
  And his cheek brighten'd as the foam-bow brightens        60
  When the wind blows the foam, and all my heart
  Went forth to embrace him coming ere he came. "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. He smiled, and opening out his milk-white palm
  Disclosed a fruit of pure Hesperian gold,                 65
  That smelt ambrosially, and while I look'd
  And listen'd, the full-flowing river of speech
  Came down upon my heart. "'My own Oenone,
  Beautiful-brow'd Oenone, my own soul,
  Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingrav'n           70
  "For the most fair," would seem to award it thine
  As lovelier than whatever Oread haunt
  The knolls of Ida, loveliest in all grace
  Of movement, and the charm of married brows. "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. 75
  He prest the blossom of his lips to mine,
  And added 'This was cast upon the board,
  When all the full-faced presence of the Gods
  Ranged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
  Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twere due:            80
  But light-foot Iris brought it yester-eve,
  Delivering that to me, by common voice
  Elected umpire, Here comes to-day,
  Pallas and Aphrodite, claiming each
  This meed of fairest. Thou, within the cave              85
  Behind yon whispering tuft of oldest pine,
  Mayst well behold them unbeheld, unheard
  Hear all, and see thy Paris judge of Gods.' "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. It was the deep mid-noon: one silvery cloud               90
  Had lost his way between the piney sides
  Of this long glen. Then to the bower they came,
  Naked they came to that smooth-swarded bower,
  And at their feet the crocus brake like fire,
  Violet, amaracus, and asphodel,                           95
  Lotos and lilies: and a wind arose,
  And overhead the wandering ivy and vine,
  This way and that, in many a wild festoon
  Ran riot, garlanding the gnarled boughs
  With bunch and berry and flower thro' and thro'. 100

  "O mother Ida, harken ere I die. On the tree-tops a crested peacock lit,
  And o'er him flow'd a golden cloud, and lean'd
  Upon him, slowly dropping fragrant dew. Then first I heard the voice other, to whom              105
  Coming thro' Heaven, like a light that grows
  Larger and clearer, with one mind the Gods
  Rise up for reverence. She to Paris made
  Proffer of royal power, ample rule
  Unquestion'd, overflowing revenue                        110
  Wherewith to embellish state, 'from many a vale
  And river-sunder'd champaign cloth'd with corn,
  Or labour'd mines undrainable of ore.
  Honour,' she said, 'and homage, tax and toll,
  From many an inland town and haven large,                115
  Mast-throng'd beneath her shadowing citadel
  In glassy bays among her tallest towers.' "O mother Ida, harken ere I die. Still she spake on and still she spake of power,
  'Which in all action is the end of all;                  120
  Power fitted to the season; wisdom-bred
  And throned of wisdom--from all neighbour crowns
  Alliance and allegiance, till thy hand
  Fail from the sceptre-staff. Such boon from me,
  From me, Heaven's Queen, Paris, to thee king-born,       125
  A shepherd all thy life but yet king-born,
  Should come most welcome, seeing men, in power
  Only, are likest gods, who have attain'd
  Rest in a happy place and quiet seats
  Above the thunder, with undying bliss                    130
  In knowledge of their own supremacy.' "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. She ceased, and Paris held the costly fruit
  Out at arm's-length, so much the thought of power
  Flatter'd his spirit; but Pallas where she stood         135
  Somewhat apart, her clear and bared limbs
  O'erthwarted with the brazen-headed spear
  Upon her pearly shoulder leaning cold,
  The while, above, her full and earnest eye
  Over her snow-cold breast and angry cheek                 140
  Kept watch, waiting decision, made reply. "'Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control;
  These three alone lead life to sovereign power. Yet not for power, (power of herself
  Would come uncall'd for) but to live by law,             145
  Acting the law we live by without fear;
  And, because right is right, to follow right
  Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.' "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. Again she said: 'I woo thee not with gifts. 150
  Sequel of guerdon could not alter me
  To fairer. Judge thou me by what I am,
  So shalt thou find me fairest. Yet, indeed,
  If gazing on divinity disrobed
  Thy mortal eyes are frail to judge of fair,              155
  Unbias'd by self-profit, oh! rest thee sure
  That I shall love thee well and cleave to thee,
  So that my vigour, wedded to thy blood,
  Shall strike within thy pulses, like a God's,
  To push thee forward thro' a life of shocks,             160
  Dangers, and deeds, until endurance grow
  Sinew'd with action, and the full-grown will,
  Circled thro' all experiences, pure law,
  Commeasure perfect freedom.' "Here she ceas'd,
  And Paris ponder'd, and I cried, 'O Paris,               165
  Give it to Pallas!' but he heard me not,
  Or hearing would not hear me, woe is me! "O mother Ida, many-fountain'd Ida,
  Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. Idalian Aphrodite beautiful,                             170
  Fresh as the foam, new-bathed in Paphian wells,
  With rosy slender fingers backward drew
  From her warm brows and bosom her deep hair
  Ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat
  And shoulder: from the violets her light foot            175
  Shone rosy-white, and o'er her rounded form
  Between the shadows of the vine-bunches
  Floated the glowing sunlights, as she moved. "Dear mother Ida, harken ere I die. She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes,                180
  The herald of her triumph, drawing nigh
  Half-whisper'd in his ear, 'I promise thee
  The fairest and most loving wife in Greece.' She spoke and laugh'd: I shut my sight for fear:
  But when I look'd, Paris had raised his arm,             185
  And I beheld great Here's angry eyes,
  As she withdrew into the golden cloud,
  And I was left alone within the bower;
  And from that time to this I am alone,
  And I shall be alone until I die. 190

  "Yet, mother Ida, harken ere I die. Fairest---why fairest wife? am I not fair? My love hath told me so a thousand times;
  Methinks I must be fair, for yesterday,
  When I past by, a wild and wanton pard,                  195
  Eyed like the evening star, with playful tail
  Crouch'd fawning in the weed. Most loving is she? Ah me, my mountain shepherd, that my arms
  Were wound about thee, and my hot lips prest
  Close, close to thine in that quick-falling dew          200
  Of fruitful kisses, thick as Autumn rains
  Flash in the pools of whirling Simois. "O mother, hear me yet before I die. They came, they cut away my tallest pines,
  My dark tall pines, that plumed the craggy ledge         205
  High over the blue gorge, and all between
  The snowy peak and snow-white cataract
  Foster'd the callow eaglet--from beneath
  Whose thick mysterious boughs in the dark morn
  The panther's roar came muffled, while I sat               210
  Low in the valley. Never, never more
  Shall lone Oenone see the morning mist
  Sweep thro' them; never see them overlaid
  With narrow moon-lit slips of silver cloud,
  Between the loud stream and the trembling stars. 215

  "O mother, hear me yet before I die. I wish that somewhere in the ruin'd folds,
  Among the fragments tumbled from the glens,
  Or the dry thickets, I could meet with her,
  The Abominable, that uninvited came                      220
  Into the fair Peleian banquet-hall,
  And cast the golden fruit upon the board,
  And bred this change; that I might speak my mind,
  And tell her to her face how much I hate
  Her presence, hated both of Gods and men. 225

  "O mother, hear me yet before I die. Hath he not sworn his love a thousand times,
  In this green valley, under this green hill,
  Ev'n on this hand, and sitting on this stone? Seal'd it with kisses? water'd it with tears? 230
  O happy tears, and how unlike to these! O happy Heaven, how canst thou see my face? O happy earth, how canst thou bear my weight? O death, death, death, thou ever-floating cloud,
  There are enough unhappy on this earth,                  235
  Pass by the happy souls, that love to live:
  I pray thee, pass before my light of life,
  And shadow all my soul, that I may die. Thou weighest heavy on the heart within,
  Weigh heavy on my eyelids: let me die. 240

  "O mother, hear me yet before I die. I will not die alone, for fiery thoughts
  Do shape themselves within me, more and more,
  Whereof I catch the issue, as I hear
  Dead sounds at night come from the inmost hills,         245
  Like footsteps upon wool. I dimly see
  My far-off doubtful purpose, as a mother
  Conjectures of the features of her child
  Ere it is born: her child!--a shudder comes
  Across me: never child be born of me,                    250
  Unblest, to vex me with his father's eyes! "O mother, hear me yet before I die. Hear me, O earth. I will not die alone,
  Lest their shrill happy laughter come to me
  Walking the cold and starless road of Death              255
  Uncomforted, leaving my ancient love
  With the Greek woman. I will rise and go
  Down into Troy, and ere the stars come forth
  Talk with the wild Cassandra, for she says
  A fire dances before her, and a sound                    260
  Rings ever in her ears of armed men. What this may be I know not, but I know
  That, wheresoe'er I am by night and day,
  All earth and air seem only burning fire." THE EPIC

  At Francis Allen's on the Christmas-eve,--
  The game of forfeits done--the girls all kiss'd
  Beneath the sacred bush and past away--
  The parson Holmes, the poet Everard Hall,
  The host, and I sat round the wassail-bowl,                5
  Then half-way ebb'd: and there we held a talk,
  How all the old honour had from Christmas gone,
  Or gone, or dwindled down to some odd games
  In some odd nooks like this; till I, tired out
  With cutting eights that day upon the pond,               10
  Where, three times slipping from the outer edge,
  I bump'd the ice into three several stars,
  Fell in a doze; and half-awake I heard
  The parson taking wide and wider sweeps,
  New harping on the church-commissioners,                  15
  Now hawking at Geology and schism,
  Until I woke, and found him settled down
  Upon the general decay of faith
  Right thro' the world, 'at home was little left,
  And none abroad: there was no anchor, none;               20
  To hold by.' Francis, laughing, clapt his hand
  On Everard's shoulder, with 'I hold by him.' 'And I,' quoth Everard, 'by the wassail-bowl.' 'Why yes,' I said, 'we knew your gift that way
  At college: but another which you had,                    25
  I mean of verse (for so we held it then),
  What came of that?' 'You know,' said Frank, 'he burnt
  His epic, his King Arthur, some twelve books'--
  And then to me demanding why? 'Oh, sir,
  He thought that nothing new was said, or else             30
  Something so said 'twas nothing---that a truth
  Looks freshest in the fashion of the day:
  God knows: he has a mint of reasons: ask. It pleased _me_ well enough,'  'Nay, nay,' said Hall,
  'Why take the style of those heroic times? 35
  For nature brings not back the Mastodon,
  Nor we those times; and why should any man
  Remodel models? these twelve books of mine
  Were faint Homeric echoes, nothing-worth,
  Mere chaff and draff, much better burnt.' 'But I,'       40
  Said Francis, 'pick'd the eleventh from this hearth'
  And have it: keep a thing, its use will come. I hoard it as a sugar-plum for Holmes.' He laugh'd, and I, tho' sleepy, like a horse
  That hears the corn-bin open, prick'd my ears;            45
  For I remember'd Everard's college fame
  When we were Freshmen: then at my request
  He brought it; and the poet little urged,
  But with some prelude of disparagement,
  Read, mouthing out his hollow oes and aes,                50
  Deep-chested music, and to this result. MORTE D'ARTHUR

  So all day long the noise of battle roll'd
  Among the mountains by the winter sea;
  Until King Arthur's table, man by man,
  Had fallen in Lyonnesse about their Lord,
  King Arthur: then, because his wound was deep,             5
  The bold Sir Bedivere uplifted him,
  Sir Bedivere, the last of all his knights,
  And bore him to a chapel nigh the field,
  A broken chancel with a broken cross,
  That stood on a dark strait of barren land. 10
  On one side lay the Ocean, and on one
  Lay a great water, and the moon was full. Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  The sequel of to-day unsolders all
  The goodliest fellowship of famous knights                15
  Whereof this world holds record. Such a sleep
  They sleep--the men I loved. I think that we
  Shall never more, at any future time,
  Delight our souls with talk of knightly deeds,
  Walking about the gardens and the halls                   20
  Of Camelot, as in the days that were. I perish by this people which I made,--
  Tho' Merlin sware that I should come again
  To rule once more--but let what will be, be,
  I am so deeply smitten thro' the helm                     25
  That without help I cannot last till morn. Thou therefore take my brand Excalibur,
  Which was my pride: for thou rememberest how
  In those old days, one summer noon, an arm
  Rose up from out the bosom of the lake,                   30
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  Holding the sword--and how I row'd across
  And took it, and have worn it, like a king:
  And, wheresoever I am sung or told
  In aftertime, this also shall be known:                   35
  But now delay not: take Excalibur,
  And fling him far into the middle mere:
  Watch what thou seest, and lightly being me word.' To him replied the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'It is not meet, Sir King, to leave thee thus,            40
  Aidless, alone, and smitten thro' the helm. A little thing may harm a wounded man. Yet I thy hest will all perform at full,
  Watch what I see, and lightly bring thee word.' So saying, from the ruin'd shrine he stept                45
  And in the moon athwart the place of tombs,
  Where lay the mighty bones of ancient men,
  Old knights, and over them the sea-wind sang
  Shrill, chill, with flakes of foam. He, stepping down
  By zig-zag paths and juts of pointed rock,                50
  Came on the shining levels of the lake. There drew he forth the brand Excalibur,
  And o'er him, drawing it, the winter moon,
  Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth
  And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt:             55
  For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks,
  Myriads of topaz-lights and jacinth-work
  Of subtlest jewellery. He gazed so long
  That both his eyes were dazzled, as he stood,
  This way and that dividing the swift mind,                60
  In act to throw: but at the last it seem'd
  Better to leave Excalibur conceal'd
  There in the many-knotted waterflags,
  That whistled stiff and dry about the marge. So strode he back slow to the wounded King                65

  Then spake King Arthur to Sir Bedivere:
  'Hast thou performed my mission which I gave? What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?' And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'I heard the ripple washing in the reeds,                 70
  And the wild water lapping on the crag.' To whom replied King Arthur, faint and pale:
  'Thou hast betray'd thy nature and thy name,
  Not rendering true answer, as beseem'd
  Thy fealty, nor like a noble knight:                      75
  For surer sign had follow'd, either hand,
  Or voice, or else a motion of the mere. This is a shameful thing for men to lie. Yet now, I charge thee, quickly go again
  As thou art lief and dear, and do the thing               80
  I bad thee, watch, and lightly bring me word.' Then went Sir Bedivere the second time
  Across the ridge, and paced beside the mere,
  Counting the dewy pebbles, fix'd in thought;
  But when he saw the wonder of the hilt,                   85
  How curiously and strangely chased, he smote
  His palms together, and he cried aloud,

  'And if indeed I cast the brand away,
  Surely a precious thing, one worthy note,
  Should thus be lost for ever from the earth,              90
  Which might have pleased the eyes of many men. What good should follow this, if this were done? What harm, undone? deep harm to disobey,
  Seeing obedience is the bond of rule. Were it well to obey then, if a king demand               95
  An act unprofitable, against himself? The King is sick, and knows not what he does. What record, or what relic of my lord
  Should be to aftertime, but empty breath
  And rumours of a doubt? but were this kept,              100
  Stored in some treasure-house of mighty kings,
  Some one might show it at a joust of arms,
  Saying, "King Arthur's sword, Excalibur,
  Wrought by the lonely maiden of the Lake. Nine years she wrought it, sitting in the deeps          105
  Upon the hidden bases of the hills." So might some old man speak in the after-time
  To all the people, winning reverence. But now much honour and much fame were lost.' So spake he, clouded with his own conceit,               110
  And hid Excalibur the second time,
  And so strode back slow to the wounded King. Then spoke King Arthur, breathing heavily:
  'What is it thou hast seen? or what hast heard?' And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:                   115
  'I heard the water lapping on the crag,
  And the long ripple washing in the reeds.' To whom replied King Arthur, much in wrath:
  'Ah, miserable and unkind, untrue,
  Unknightly, traitor-hearted! Woe is me! 120
  Authority forgets a dying king,
  Laid widow'd of the power in his eye
  That bow'd the will. I see thee what thou art,
  For thou, the latest-left of all my knights,
  In whom should meet the offices of all,                  125
  Thou wouldst betray me for the precious hilt;
  Either from lust of gold, or like a girl
  Valuing the giddy pleasure of the eyes. Yet, for a man may fail in duty twice,
  And the third time may prosper, get thee hence:          130
  But, if thou spare to fling Excalibur,
  I will arise and slay thee with my hands.' Then quickly rose Sir Bedivere, and ran,
  And, leaping down the ridges lightly, plunged
  Among the bulrush-beds, and clutch'd the sword,          135
  And strongly wheel'd and threw it. The great brand
  Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,
  And flashing round and round, and whirl'd in an arch,
  Shot like a streamer of the northern morn,
  Seen where the moving isles of winter shock              140
  By night, with noises of the northern sea. So flash'd and fell the brand Excalibur:
  But ere he dipt the surface, rose an arm
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  And caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him           145
  Three times, and drew him under in the mere. And lightly went the other to the King. Then spoke King-Arthur, drawing thicker breath:
  'Now see I by thine eyes that this is done. Speak out: what is it thou has heard, or seen?' 150

  And answer made the bold Sir Bedivere:
  'Sir King, I closed mine eyelids, lest the gems
  Should blind my purpose, for I never saw,
  Nor shall see, here or elsewhere, till I die,
  Not tho' I live three lives of mortal men,               155
  So great a miracle as yonder hilt. Then with both hands I flung him, wheeling him;
  But when I look'd again, behold an arm,
  Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful,
  That caught him by the hilt, and brandish'd him          160
  Three times, and drew him under in the mere.' And answer made King Arthur, breathing hard:
  'My end draws nigh; 'tis time that I were gone. Make broad thy shoulders to receive my weight,
  And bear me to the margin; yet I fear                    165
  My wound hath taken cold, and I shall die.' So saying, from the pavement he half rose,
  Slowly, with pain, reclining on his arm,
  And looking wistfully with wide blue eyes
  As in a picture. Him Sir Bedivere                       170
  Remorsefully regarded thro' his tears,
  And would have spoken, but he found not words,
  Then took with care, and kneeling on one knee,
  O'er both his shoulders drew the languid hands,
  And rising bore him thro' the place of tombs. 175

  But, as he walk'd, King Arthur panted hard,
  Like one that feels a nightmare on his bed
  When all the house is mute. So sigh'd the King,
  Muttering and murmuring at his ear, 'Quick, quick! I fear it is too late, and I shall die.' 180

  But the other swiftly strode from ridge to ridge,
  Clothed with his breath, and looking, as he walk'd,
  Larger than human on the frozen hills. He heard the deep behind him, and a cry
  Before. His own thought drove him like a goad. 185
  Dry clash'd his harness in the icy caves
  And barren chasms, and all to left and right
  The bare black cliff clang'd round him, as he based
  His feet on juts of slippery crag that rang
  Sharp-smitten with the dint of armed heels--             190
  And on a sudden, lo! the level lake,
  And the long glories of the winter moon. Then saw they how there hove a dusky barge,
  Dark as a funeral scarf from stem to stern,
  Beneath them; and descending they were ware              195
  That all the decks were dense with stately forms
  Black-stoled, black-hooded, like a dream--by these
  Three Queens with crowns of gold--and from them rose
  A cry that shiver'd to the tingling stars,
  And, as it were one voice an agony                       200
  Of lamentation, like a wind, that shrills
  All night in a waste land, where no one comes,
  Or hath come, since the making of the world,
  Then murmur'd Arthur, 'Place me in the barge.' And to the barge they came. There those three Queens    205
  Put forth their hands, and took the King, and wept. But she, that rose the tallest of them all
  And fairest, laid his head upon her lap,
  And loosed the shatter'd casque, and chafed his hands,
  And call'd him by his name, complaining loud,            210
  And dropping bitter tears against his brow
  Striped with dark blood: for all his face was white
  And colourless, and like the wither'd moon
  Smote by the fresh beam of the springing east;
  And all his greaves and cuisses dash'd with drops        215
  Of onset; and the light and lustrous curls--
  That made his forehead like a rising sun
  High from the dais-throne--were parch'd with dust;
  Or, clotted into points and hanging loose,
  Mix'd with the knightly growth that fringed his lips. 220
  So like a shatter'd column lay the King;
  Not like that Arthur who, with lance in rest,
  From spur to plume a star of tournament,
  Shot thro' the lists at Camelot, and charged
  Before the eyes of ladies and of kings. 225

  Then loudly cried the bold Sir Bedivere,
  'Ah! my Lord Arthur, whither shall I go? Where shall I hide my forehead and my eyes? For now I see the true old times are dead,
  When every morning brought a noble chance,               230
  And every chance brought out a noble knight. Such times have been not since the light that led
  The holy Elders with the gift of myrrh. But now the whole ROUND TABLE is dissolved
  Which was an image of the mighty world;                  235
  And I, the last, go forth companionless,
  And the days darken round me, and the years,
  Among new men, strange faces, other minds.' And slowly answered Arthur from the barge:
  'The old order changeth, yielding place to new,          240
  And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
  Lest one good custom should corrupt the world. Comfort thyself: what comfort is in me? I have lived my life, and that which I have done
  May He within Himself make pure! but thou,               245
  If thou shouldst never see my face again,
  Pray for my soul. More things are wrought by prayer
  Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let thy voice
  Rise like a fountain for me night and day. For what are men better than sheep or goats              250
  That nourish a blind life within the brain,
  If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
  Both for themselves and those who call them friend? For so the whole round earth is every way
  Bound by gold chains about the feet of God. 255
  But now farewell. I am going a long way
  With these thou seest--if indeed I go--
  (For all my mind is clouded with a doubt)
  To the island-valley of Avilion;
  Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,              260
  Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
  Deep-meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard-lawns
  And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea,
  Where I will heal me of my grievous wound.' So said he, and the barge with oar and sail              265
  Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan
  That, fluting a wild carol ere her death,
  Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood
  With swarthy webs. Long stood Sir Bedivere
  Revolving many memories, till the hull                   270
  Look'd one black dot against the verge of dawn,
  And on the mere the wailing died away. *      *      *      *      *      *

  Here ended Hall, and our last light, that long
  Had wink'd and threatened darkness, flared and fell:
  At which the Parson, sent to sleep with sound,
  And waked with silence, grunted 'Good!' but we            55
  Sat rapt: it was the tone with which he read--
  Perhaps some modern touches here and there
  Redeem'd it from the charge of nothingness--
  Or else we loved the man, and prized his work;
  I know not: but we sitting, as I said,                    60
  The cock crew loud; as at that time of year
  The lusty bird takes every hour for dawn:
  Then Francis, muttering, like a man ill-used,
  'There now--that's nothing!' drew a little back,
  And drove his heel into the smoulder'd log,               65
  That sent a blast of sparkles up the flue:
  And so to bed; where yet in sleep I seem'd
  To sail with Arthur under looming shores,
  Point after point; till on to dawn, when dreams
  Begin to feel the truth and stir of day,                  70
  To me, methought, who waited with a crowd,
  There came a bark that, blowing forward, bore
  King Arthur, like a modern gentleman
  Of stateliest port; and all the people cried,
  'Arthur is come again: he cannot die.' 75
  Then those that stood upon the hills behind
  Repeated--'Come again, and thrice as fair;'
  And, further inland, voices echo'd--'Come
  With all good things, and war shall be no more.' At this a hundred bells began to peal,                    80
  That with the sound I woke, and heard indeed
  The clear church-bells ring in the Christmas-morn. THE BROOK

  Here, by this brook, we parted; I to the East
  And he for Italy--too late--too late;
  One whom the strong sons of the world despise;
  For lucky rhymes to him were scrip and share,
  And mellow metres more than cent for cent;                 5
  Nor could he understand how money breeds;
  Thought it a dead thing; yet himself could make
  The thing that is not as the thing that is. O had he lived! In our schoolbooks we say,
  Of those that held their heads above the crowd,           10
  They flourish'd then or then; but life in him
  Could scarce be said to flourish, only touch'd
  On such a time as goes before the leaf,
  When all the wood stands in a mist of green,
  And nothing perfect: yet the brook he loved,             15
  For which, in branding summers of Bengal,
  Or ev'n the sweet half-English Neilgherry air
  I panted, seems; as I re-listen to it,
  Prattling the primrose fancies of the boy,
  To me that loved him; for 'O brook,' he says,            20
  'O babbling brook,' says Edmund in his rhyme,
  'Whence come you?' and the brook, why not? replies:

      I come from haunts of coot and hern,
        I make a sudden sally,
      And sparkle out among the fern,                        25
        To bicker down a valley. By thirty hills I hurry down,
        Or slip between the ridges,
      By twenty thorps, a little town,
        And half a hundred bridges. 30

      Till last by Philip's farm I flow
        To join the brimming river,
      For men may come and men may go,
        But I go on for ever. 'Poor lad, he died at Florence, quite worn out,         35
  Travelling to Naples. There is Darnley bridge,
  It has more ivy; there the river; and there
  Stands Philip's farm where brook and river meet. I chatter over stony ways,
        In little sharps and trebles,                      40
      I bubble into eddying bays,
        I babble on the pebbles. With many a curve my banks I fret
        By many a field and fallow,
      And many a fairy foreland set                        45
        With willow-weed and mallow. I chatter, chatter, as I flow
        To join the brimming river,
      For men may come and men may go,
        But I go on for ever. 50

  'But Philip chattered more than brook or bird;
  Old Philip; all about the fields you caught
  His weary daylong chirping, like the dry
  High-elbow'd grigs that leap in summer grass. I wind about, and in and out,                         55
        With here a blossom sailing,
      And here and there a lusty trout,
        And here and there a grayling,

      And here and there a foamy flake
        Upon me, as I travel                           60
      With many a silvery waterbreak
        Above the golden gravel,

      And draw them all along, and flow
        To join the brimming river,
      For men may come and men may go,
        But I go on for ever. 'O darling Katie Willows, his one child! A maiden of our century, yet most meek;
  A daughter of our meadows, yet not coarse;
  Straight, but as lissome as a hazel wand;              70
  Her eyes a bashful azure, and her hair
  In gloss and hue the chestnut, when the shell
  Divides threefold to show the fruit within. Sweet Katie, once I did her a good turn,
  Her and her far-off cousin and betrothed,                  75
  James Willows, of one name and heart with her. For here I came, twenty years back--the week
  Before I parted with poor Edmund; crost
  By that old bridge which, half in ruins then,
  Still makes a hoary eyebrow for the gleam               80
  Beyond it, where the waters marry--crost,
  Whistling a random bar of Bonny Doon,
  And push'd at Philip's garden-gate. The gate,
  Half-parted from a weak and scolding hinge,
  Stuck; and he clamour'd from a casement, "Run"        85
  To Katie somewhere in the walks below,
  "Run, Katie!" Katie never ran: she moved
  To meet me, winding under woodbine bowers,
  A little flutter'd, with her eyelids down,
  Fresh apple-blossom, blushing for a boon. 90

  'What was it? less of sentiment than sense
  Had Katie; not illiterate; nor of those
  Who dabbling in the fount of fictive tears,
  And nursed by mealy-mouth'd philanthropies,
  Divorce the Feeling from her mate the Deed. 95
  'She told me. She and James had quarrell'd. Why? What cause of quarrel? None, she said, no cause;
  James had no cause: but when I prest the cause,
  I learnt that James had flickering jealousies
  Which anger'd her. Who anger'd James? I said. 100
  But Katie snatch'd her eyes at once from mine,
  And sketching with her slender pointed foot
  Some figure like a wizard pentagram
  On garden gravel, let my query pass
  Unclaimed, in flushing silence, till I ask'd           105
  If James were coming. "Coming every day,"
  She answer'd, "ever longing to explain,
  But evermore her father came across
  With some long-winded tale, and broke him short;
  And James departed vext with him and her." 110
  How could I help her? "Would I--was it wrong?" (Claspt hands and that petitionary grace
  Of sweet seventeen subdued me ere she spoke)
  "O would I take her father for one hour,
  For one half-hour, and let him talk to me!" 115
  And even while she spoke, I saw where James
  Made toward us, like a wader in the surf,
  Beyond the brook, waist-deep in meadow-sweet. 'O Katie, what I suffer'd for your sake! For in I went, and call'd old Philip out               120
  To show the farm: full willingly he rose:
  He led me thro' the short sweet-smelling lanes
  Of his wheat-suburb, babbling as he went,
  He praised his land, his horses, his machines;
  He praised his ploughs, his cows, his hogs, his dogs;   125
  He praised his hens, his geese, his guinea-hens,
  His pigeons, who in session on their roofs
  Approved him, bowing at their own deserts:
  Then from the plaintive mother's teat he took
  Her blind and shuddering puppies, naming each,          130
  And naming those, his friends, for whom they were:
  Then crost the common into Darnley chase
  To show Sir Arthur's deer. In copse and fern
  Twinkled the innumerable ear and tail. Then, seated on a serpent-rooted beech,                135
  He pointed out a pasturing colt, and said:
  "That was the four-year-old I sold the Squire." And there he told a long long-winded tale
  Of how the Squire had seen the colt at grass,
  And how it was the thing his daughter wish'd,           140
  And how he sent the bailiff to the farm
  To learn the price, and what the price he ask'd,
  And how the bailiff swore that he was mad,
  But he stood firm; and so the matter hung;
  He gave them line; and five days after that              145
  He met the bailiff at the Golden Fleece,
  Who then and there had offer'd something more,
  But he stood firm; and so the matter hung;
  He knew the man; the colt would fetch its price;
  He gave them line: and how by chance at last             150
  (It might be May or April, he forgot,
  The last of April or the first of May)
  He found the bailiff riding by the farm,
  And, talking from the point, he drew him in,
  And there he mellow'd all his heart with ale,           155
  Until they closed a bargain, hand in hand. 'Then, while I breathed in sight of haven, he,
  Poor fellow, could he help it? recommenced,
  And ran thro' all the coltish chronicle,
  Wild Will, Black Bess, Tantivy, Tallyho,                 160
  Reform, White Rose, Bellerophon, the Jilt,
  Arbaces, and Phenomenon, and the rest,
  Tilt, not to die a listener, I arose,
  And with me Philip, talking still; and so
  We turn'd our foreheads from the falling sun,          165
  And following our own shadows thrice as long
  As when they follow'd us from Philip's door,
  Arrived, and found the sun of sweet content
  Re-risen in Katie's eyes, and all thing's well. I steal by lawns and grassy plots,                 170
        I slide by hazel covers;
      I move the sweet forget-me-nots
        That grow for happy lovers. I slip, I slide, I gloom, I glance,
        Among my skimming swallows;                        175
      I make the netted sunbeam dance
        Against my sandy shallows. I murmur under moon and stars
        In brambly wildernesses;
      I linger by my shingly bars;                        180
        I loiter round my cresses;

      And out again I curve and flow
        To join the brimming river,
      For men may come and men may go,
        But I go on for ever. 185

  Yes, men may come and go; and these are gone,
  All gone. My dearest brother, Edmund, sleeps,
  Not by the well-known stream and rustic spire,
  But unfamiliar Arno, and the dome
  Of Brunelleschi; sleeps in peace: and he,            190
  Poor Philip, of all his lavish waste of words
  Remains the lean P. W. on his tomb:
  I scraped the lichen from it: Katie walks
  By the long wash of Australasian seas
  Far off, and holds her head to other stars,           195
  And breathes in April autumns. All are gone.' So Lawrence Aylmer, seated on a stile
  In the long hedge, and rolling in his mind
  Old waifs of rhyme, and bowing o'er the brook
  A tonsured head in middle age forlorn,                200
  Mused and was mute. On a sudden a low breath
  Offender air made tremble in the hedge
  The fragile bindweed-bells and briony rings;
  And he look'd up. There stood a maiden near,
  Waiting to pass. In much amaze he stared              205
  On eyes a bashful azure, and on hair
  In gloss and hue the chestnut, when the shell
  Divides threefold to show the fruit within:
  Then, wondering, ask'd her 'Are you from the farm?' 'Yes' answer'd she. 'Pray stay a little: pardon me;     210
  What do they call you?' 'Katie.' 'That were strange. What surname?' 'Willows.' 'No!' 'That is my name.' 'Indeed!' and here he look'd so self-perplext,
  That Katie laugh'd, and laughing blush'd, till he
  Laugh'd also, but as one before he wakes,               215
  Who feels a glimmering strangeness in his dream;
  Then looking at her; 'Too happy, fresh and fair,
  Too fresh and fair in our sad world's best bloom,
  To be the ghost of one who bore your name
  About these meadows, twenty years ago. 220

  'Have you not heard?' said Katie, 'we came back. We bought the farm we tenanted before. Am I so like her? so they said on board. Sir, if you knew her in her English days,
  My mother, as it seems you did, the days               225
  That most she loves to talk of, come with me. My brother James is in the harvest-field:
  But she--you will be welcome--O, come in!' IN MEMORIAM

  XXVII

  I envy not in any moods
    The captive void of noble rage,
    The linnet born within the cage,
  That never knew the summer woods:

  I envy not the beast that takes                            5
    His license in the field of time,
    Unfetter'd by the sense of crime,
  To whom a conscience never wakes;

  Nor, what may count itself as blest,
    The heart that never plighted troth                     10
    But stagnates in the weeds of sloth;
  Nor any want-begotten rest. I hold it true, whate'er befall;
    I feel it, when I sorrow most;
    'Tis better to have loved and lost                      15
  Than never to have lov'd at all. LXIV

  Dost thou look back on what hath been,
    As some divinely gifted man,
    Whose life in low estate began
  And on a simple village green;

  Who breaks his birth's invidious bar,                      5
    And grasps the skirts of happy chance,
    And breasts the blows of circumstance,
  And grapples with his evil star;

  Who makes by force his merit known
    And lives to clutch the golden keys,                    10
    To mould a mighty state's decrees,
  And shape the whisper of the throne;

  And moving up from high to higher,
    Becomes on Fortune's crowning slope
    The pillar of a people's hope,                          15
  The centre of a world's desire;

  Yet feels, as in a pensive dream,
    When all his active powers are still,
    A distant dearness in the hill,
  A secret sweetness in the stream,                         20

  The limit of his narrower fate,
    While yet beside its vocal springs
    He play'd at counsellors and kings,
  With one that was his earliest mate;

  Who ploughs with pain his native lea                      25
    And reaps the labour of his hands,
    Or in the furrow musing stands;
  "Does my old friend remember me?" LXXXIII

  Dip down upon the northern shore,
    O sweet new-year delaying long;
    Thou doest expectant nature wrong;
  Delaying long, delay no more. What stays thee from the clouded noons,                    5
    Thy sweetness from its proper place? Can trouble live with April days,
  Or sadness in the summer moons? Bring orchis, bring the foxglove spire,
    The little speedwell's darling blue,                    10
    Deep tulips dash'd with fiery dew,
  Laburnums, dropping-wells of fire. O thou, new-year, delaying long,
    Delayest the sorrow in my blood,
    That longs to burst a frozen bud                        15
  And flood a fresher throat with song. LXXXVI

  Sweet after showers, ambrosial air,
    That rollest from the gorgeous gloom
    Of evening over brake and bloom
  And meadow, slowly breathing bare

  The round of space, and rapt below                         5
    Thro' all the dewy-tassell'd wood,
    And shadowing down the horned flood
  In ripples, fan my brows and blow

  The fever from my cheek, and sigh
    The full new life that feeds thy breath                 10
    Throughout my frame, till Doubt and Death,
  Ill brethren, let the fancy fly

  From belt to belt of crimson seas
    On leagues of odour streaming far,
    To where in yonder orient star                          15
  A hundred spirits whisper "Peace." CI

  Unwatch'd, the garden bough shall sway,
    The tender blossom flutter down,
    Unloved, that beech will gather brown,
  This maple burn itself away;

  Unloved, the sun-flower, shining fair,                     5
    Ray round with flames her disk of seed,
    And many a rose-carnation feed
  With summer spice the humming air;

  Unloved, by many a sandy bar,
    The brook shall babble down the plain,                  10
    At noon or when the lesser wain
  Is twisting round the polar star;

  Uncared for, gird the windy grove,
    And flood the haunts of hern and crake;
    Or into silver arrows break                             15
  The sailing moon in creek and cove;

  Till from the garden and the wild
    A fresh association blow,
    And year by year the landscape grow
  Familiar to the stranger's child;                         20

  As year by year the labourer tills
    His wonted glebe, or lops the glades;
    And year by year our memory fades
  From all the circle of the hills. CXIV

  Who loves not Knowledge? Who shall rail
    Against her beauty? May she mix
    With men and prosper! Who shall fix
  Her pillars? Let her work prevail. But on her forehead sits a fire:                           5
    She sets her forward countenance
    And leaps into the future chance,
  Submitting all things to desire. Half-grown as yet, a child, and vain--
    She cannot fight the fear of death. 10
    What is she, cut from love and faith,
  But some wild Pallas from the brain

  Of Demons? fiery-hot to burst
    All barriers in her onward race
    For power. Let her know her place;                     15
  She is the second, not the first. A higher hand must make her mild,
    If all be not in vain; and guide
    Her footsteps, moving side by side
  With wisdom, like the younger child:                      20

  For she is earthly of the mind,
    But Wisdom heavenly of the soul. O friend, who earnest to thy goal
  So early, leaving me behind

  I would the great world grew like thee,                   25
    Who grewest not alone in power
    And knowledge, but by year and hour
  In reverence and in charity. CXV

  Now fades the last long streak of snow,
    Now burgeons every maze of quick
    About the flowering squares, and thick
  By ashen roots the violets blow,

  Now rings the woodland loud and long,                      5
    The distance takes a lovelier hue,
    And drown'd in yonder living blue
  The lark becomes a sightless song. Now dance the lights on lawn and lea,
    The flocks are whiter down the vale,                    10
    And milkier every milky sail
  On winding stream or distant sea;

  Where now the seamew pipes, or dives
    In yonder greening gleam, and fly
    The happy birds, that change their sky                  15
  To build and brood, that live their lives

  From land to land; and in my breast
    Spring wakens too; and my regret
    Becomes an April violet,
  And buds and blossoms like the rest. 20



  CXVIII

  Contemplate all this work of Time,
    The giant labouring in his youth;
    Nor dream of human love and truth,
  As dying Nature's earth and lime;

  But trust that those we call the dead                      5
    Are breathers of an ampler day
    For ever nobler ends. They say,
  The solid earth whereon we tread

  In tracts of fluent heat began,
    And grew to seeming-random forms,                       10
    The seeming prey of cyclic storms,
  Till at the last arose the man;

  Who throve and branch'd from clime to clime,
    The herald of a higher race,
    And of himself in higher place,                         15
  If so he type this work of time

  Within himself, from more to more;
    Or, crown'd with attributes of woe
    Like glories, move his course, and show
  That life is not as idle ore,                             20

  But iron dug from central gloom,
    And heated hot with burning fears,
    And dipt in baths of hissing tears,
  And batter'd with the shocks of doom

  To shape and use. Arise and fly                          25
    The reeling Faun, the sensual feast;
    Move upward, working out the beast
  And let the ape and tiger die. CXXIII

  There rolls the deep where grew the tree. O earth, what changes hast thou seen! There where the long street roars hath been
  The stillness of the central sea. The hills are shadows, and they flow                       5
    From form to form, and nothing stands;
    They melt like mist, the solid lands,
  Like clouds they shape themselves and go. But in my spirit will I dwell,
    And dream my dream, and hold it true;                   10
    For tho' my lips may breathe adieu,
  I cannot think the thine farewell. WORDSWORTH

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

William Wordsworth was born at Cockermouth, Cumberland, on April 7th,
1770. His father, John Wordsworth, was the agent of Sir J. Lowther,
who later became the first Earl of Lonsdale. At the age of eight the
boy was sent to school at Hawkshead. The impressions of his boyhood
period are related in the autobiographical poem, _The Prelude_,
(written 1805, published 1850), and from this poetical record we
discern how strong the influences of Nature were to shape and develop
his imagination. Wordsworth's father died in 1783, leaving the family
poorly provided for. The main asset was a considerable claim upon the
Earl of Lonsdale, which that individual refused to pay. On his death,
in 1802, the successor to the title and estates paid the amount of the
claim in full with accumulated interest. In the interval, however, the
Wordsworth family remained in very straitened circumstances. Enough
money was provided by Wordsworth's guardians to send him to Cambridge
University In 1787. He entered St. John's College, and after an
undistinguished course graduated without honors in January, 1791. His
vacations were spent chiefly in Hawkshead and Wales, but one memorable
vacation was marked by a walking excursion with a friend through France
and Switzerland, the former country then being on the verge of
revolution. Shortly after leaving the University, in November, 1791, Wordsworth
returned to France, remaining there until December of the following
year. During this period he was completely won over to the principles
of the revolution. The later reaction from these principles
constituted the one moral struggle of his life. In 1793 his first work appeared before the public--two poems, entitled
_The Evening Walk_ and _Descriptive Sketches_. Coleridge, who read
these pieces at Cambridge, divined that they announced the emergence of
an original poetical genius above the horizon. Readers of the poems
to-day, who are wise after the event, could scarcely divine as much. At about this period Wordsworth received a bequest of 900 pounds from
Raisley Calvert, which enabled him and his sister Dorothy to take a
small cottage at Racedown in Dorsetshire. Here he wrote a number of
poems in which he worked off the ferment of his revolutionary ideas. These ideas can scarcely be said to have troubled him much in later
years. An important incident in his life, hardly second in importance to the
stimulating companionship of his sister, was his meeting with
Coleridge, which occurred probably towards the close of 1795. Coleridge, who was but little younger than Wordsworth, had the more
richly equipped, if not the more richly endowed, mind. He was living
at Nether Stowey, and in order to benefit by the stimulus which such a
friendship offered, the Wordsworth's moved to Alfoxden, three miles
away from Stowey (July, 1797). It was during a walking expedition to
the Quantock Hills in November of that year that the poem of _The
Ancient Mariner_ was planned. It was intended that the poem should be
a joint production, but Wordsworth's contribution was confined to the
suggestion of a few details merely, and some scattered lines which are
indicated in the notes to that poem. Their poetic theories were soon
to take definite shape in the publication of the famous _Lyrical
Ballads_ (September, 1798), to which Coleridge contributed _The Ancient
Mariner_, and Wordsworth some characteristic lyrical, reflective, and
narrative poems. The excessive simplicity and alleged triviality of
some of these poems long continued to give offence to the conservative
lovers of poetry. Even to-day we feel that Wordsworth was sometimes
the victim of his own theories. In June of this same year (1798) Wordsworth and his sister accompanied
Coleridge to Germany. They soon parted company, the Wordsworths
settling at Goslar, while Coleridge, intent upon study, went in search
of German metaphysics at Gottingen. Wordsworth did not come into any
contract with German life or thought, but sat through the winter by a
stove writing poems for a second edition of the _Lyrical Ballads_. April, 1799, found the brother and sister again in England. In
December they settled down at Dove Cottage, Town End, Grasmere, and
never, save for brief intervals, abandoned the Lake Country. In 1802,
as has been said, a slight accession of fortune fell to Wordsworth by
the settlement of the Lonsdale claim. The share of each of the family
was 1,800 pounds. On the strength of this wind-fall the poet felt that
he might marry, and accordingly brought home Mary Hutchinson as his
wife. The subsequent career of Wordsworth belongs to the history of poetry. Of events in the ordinary sense there are few to record. He
successively occupies three houses in the Lake Country after abandoning
Dove Cottage. We find him at Allan Bank in 1808, in the Parsonage at
Grasmere in 1810, and at Rydal Mount from 1813 to his death in 1850. He makes occasional excursions to Scotland or the Continent, and at
long intervals visits London, where Carlyle sees him and records his
vivid impressions. For many years Wordsworth enjoys the sinecure of
Distributor of Stamps for Westmoreland (400 pounds a year), and on his
resignation of that office in his son's favor, he is placed on the
Civil List for a well deserved pension of 300 pounds. On Southey's
death, in 1843, he is appointed Poet Laureate. He died at Grasmere on
April 23rd, 1850. Wordsworth's principal long poems are: _The Prelude_ (1805 published
1850); _The Excursion_ (1814); _The White Doe of Rylstone_ (1815) and
_Peter Bell The Waggoner_ (1819). His fame rests principally on his
shorter narrative poems, his meditative lyrics, including his two great
odes, _To Duty_ and _On the Intimations of Immortality_, and on the
sonnets, which rank with the finest in the language. The longer poems
have many fine passages exhibiting his powers of graphic description,
and illustrating his mystical philosophy of nature. Thomas Carlyle's description of Wordsworth is of interest: "For the
rest, he talked well in his way; with veracity, easy brevity, and
force, as a wise tradesman would of his tools and workshop, and as no
unwise one could. His voice was good, frank, and sonorous, though
practically clear, distinct, and forcible, rather than melodious; the
tone of him, businesslike, sedately confident; no discourtesy, yet no
anxiety about being courteous. A fine wholesome rusticity, fresh as
his mountain breezes, sat well on the stalwart veteran, and on all he
said and did. You would have said that he was a usually taciturn man,
glad to unlock himself to audience sympathetic and intelligent, when
such offered itself. His face bore marks of much, not always peaceful,
meditation; the look of it not bland or benevolent so much as close,
impregnable, and hard; a man _multa tacere loquive paratus_, in a world
where he had experienced no lack of contradictions as he strode along. The eyes were not very brilliant, but they had a quiet clearness; there
was enough of brow, and well-shaped; rather too much cheek ('horse
face' I have heard satirists say); face of squarish shape, and
decidedly longish, as I think the head itself was (its length going
horizontal); he was large-boned, lean, but still firm-knit, tall, and
strong-looking when he stood, a right good old steel-gray figure, with
rustic simplicity and dignity about him, and a vivacious strength
looking through him, which might have suited one of those old
steel-gray markgrafs whom Henry the Fowler set up towards the 'marches'
and do battle with the intrusive heathen in a stalwart and judicious
manner." CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE

Born, April 7, 1770, at Cockermouth, Cumberland. Goes to Hawkshead Grammar School, 1778. Sent by guardians to St. John's College, Cambridge, October, 1787. Foreign tour with Jones, 1790. Graduates as B.A. without honors, January, 1791. Residence in France, November, 1791, to December, 1792. Publication of _The Evening Walk_, and _Descriptive Sketches_, 1793. Legacy from Raisley Calvert of 900 pounds, 1794. Lives at Racedown, Dorsetshire, autumn of 1795 to summer of 1797. Composes _The Borderers_, a tragedy, 1795-1796. Close friendship with Coleridge begins in 1797. Rents a house at Alfoxden, 1797. Genesis of the _Lyrical Ballads_, 1797. _Lyrical Ballads_ published September, 1798. German visit, September, 1798, to April, 1799. Lives at Dove Cottage, Grasmere, December 21, 1799 to 1806, 1807-1808. The Lonsdale debt of 8,500 pounds repaid, 1802. Marries Mary Hutchinson, October, 1802. Death by drowning of his brother, Captain John Wordsworth, 1805. Lives at Coleorton, Leicestershire, 1806 to 1807. Collected Edition of poems, 1807. Lives at Allan Bank, Easedale, 1808 to 1810. Lives at the Parsonage, Grasmere, 1810 to 1812. Loss of two children and removal to Rydal Mount, Grasmere, 1813 to 1850. Appointed distributor of stamps for Westmoreland (400 pounds a year),
1813. _The Excursion_ appears, July, 1814. Honorary degree of D.C.L. from Oxford, 1839. Resigns his office as distributor of stamps, 1842. Receives a pension from Sir R. Peel of 300 pounds, 1842. Appointed Poet Laureate, 1843. Dies at Grasmere, April 23, 1850. APPRECIATIONS

Coleridge, with rare insight, summarized Wordsworth's characteristic
defects and merits as follows;

"The first characteristic, though only occasional defect, which I
appear to myself to find in these poems is the inconstancy of the
style. Under this name I refer to the sudden and unprepared
transitions from lines or sentences of peculiar felicity (at all events
striking and original) to a style, not only unimpassioned but
undistinguished. "The second defect I can generalize with tolerable accuracy, if the
reader will pardon an uncouth and newly-coined word. There is, I
should say, not seldom a _matter-of-factness_ in certain poems. This
may be divided into, first, a laborious minuteness and fidelity in the
representation of objects, and there positions, as they appeared to the
poet himself; secondly, the insertion of accidental circumstances, in
order to the full explanation of his living characters, their
dispositions and actions; which circumstances might be necessary to
establish the probability of a statement in real life, when nothing is
taken for granted by the hearer; but appear superfluous in poetry,
where the reader is willing to believe for his own sake. . . "Third; an undue predilection for the _dramatic_ form in certain poems,
from which one or other of two evils result. Either the thoughts and
diction are different from that of the poet, and then there arises an
incongruity of style; or they are the same and indistinguishable, where
two are represented as talking, while in truth one man only speaks. . . "The fourth class of defects is closely connected with the former; but
yet are such as arise likewise from an intensity of feeling
disproportionate to such knowledge and value of the objects described,
as can be fairly anticipated of men in general, even of the most
cultivated classes; and with which therefore few only, and those few
particularly circumstanced, can be supposed to sympathize: in this
class, I comprise occasional prolixity, repetition, and an eddying,
instead of progression, of thought. . . "Fifth and last; thoughts and images too great for the subject. This
is an approximation to what might be called mental bombast, as
distinguished from verbal: for, as in the latter there is a
disproportion of the expressions to the thoughts, so in this there is a
disproportion of thought to the circumstance and occasion. . . "To these defects, which . . . are only occasional, I may oppose . . . the following (for the most part correspondent) excellencies:

"First; an austere purity of language both grammatically and logically;
in short a perfect appropriateness of the words to the meaning. . . "The second characteristic excellence of Mr. Wordsworth's works is--a
correspondent weight and sanity of the thoughts and sentiments, won not
from books, but from the poet's own meditative observations. They are
fresh and have the dew upon them. . . "Third; . . . the sinewy strength and originality of single lines and
paragraphs; the frequent _curiosa felicitas_ of his diction. . . "Fourth; the perfect truth of nature in his images and descriptions as
taken immediately from nature, and proving a long and genial intimacy
with the very spirit which gives the physiognomic expressions to all
the works of nature. Like a green field reflected in a calm and
perfectly transparent lake, the image is distinguished from the reality
only by its greater softness and lustre. Like the moisture or the
polish on a pebble, genius neither distorts nor false-colors its
objects; but on the contrary, brings out many a vein and many a tint,
which escape the eye of common observation, thus raising to the rank of
gems what had been often kicked away by the hurrying foot of the
traveller on the dusty high-road of custom. . . "Fifth; a meditative pathos, a union of deep and subtle thought with
sensibility; a sympathy with man as man; the sympathy indeed of a
contemplator, rather than a fellow-sufferer or co-mate, but of a
contemplator, from whose view no difference of rank conceals the
sameness of the nature; no injuries of wind or weather, of toil, or
even of ignorance, wholly disguise the human face divine. The
superscription and the image of the Creator still remains legible to
_him_ under the dark lines, with which guilt or calamity had cancelled
or cross-barred it. Here the Man and the Poet lose and find themselves
in each other, the one as glorified, the latter as substantiated. In
this mild and philosophic pathos, Wordsworth appears to me without a
compeer. Such as he is; so he writes. "Last and pre-eminently, I challenge for this poet the gift of
imagination in the highest and strictest sense of the word. In the
play of fancy, Wordsworth, to my feelings, is not always graceful, and
sometimes recondite. . . But in imaginative power, he stands nearest of
all writers to Shakespeare and Milton; and yet in a kind perfectly
unborrowed and his own." These are the grounds upon which Coleridge bases the poetic claims of
Wordsworth. Matthew Arnold, in the preface to his well-known collection of
Wordsworth's poems, accords to the poet a rank no less exalted. "I
firmly believe that the poetical performance of Wordsworth is, after
that of Shakespeare and Milton, of which all the world now recognizes
the worth, undoubtedly the most considerable in our language from the
Elizabethan age to the present time." His essential greatness is to be
found in his shorter pieces, despite the frequent intrusion of much
that is very inferior. Still it is "by the great body of powerful and
significant work which remains to him after every reduction and
deduction has been made, that Wordsworth's superiority is proved." Coleridge had not dwelt sufficiently, perhaps, upon the joyousness
which results from Wordsworth's philosophy of human life and external
nature. This Matthew Arnold considers to be the prime source of his
greatness. "Wordsworth's poetry is great because of the extraordinary
power with which Wordsworth feels the joy offered to us in the simple
primary affections and duties; and because of the extraordinary power
with which, in case after case, he shows us this joy, and renders it so
as to make us share it." Goethe's poetry, as Wordsworth once said, is
not inevitable enough, is too consciously moulded by the supreme will
of the artist. "But Wordsworth's poetry," writes Arnold, "when he is
at his best, is inevitable, as inevitable as Nature herself. It might
seem that Nature not only gave him the matter for his poem, but wrote
his poem for him." The set poetic style of _The Excursion_ is a
failure, but there is something unique and unmatchable in the simple
grace of his narrative poems and lyrics. "Nature herself seems, I say,
to take the pen out of his hand, and to write for him with her own
bare, sheer, penetrating power. This arises from two causes: from the
profound sincereness with which Wordsworth feels his subject, and also
from the profoundly sincere and natural character of his subject
itself. He can and will treat such a subject with nothing but the most
plain, first hand, almost austere naturalness. His expression may
often be called bald, as, for instance, in the poem of _Resolution and
Independence_; but it is bald as the bare mountain tops are bald, with
a baldness which is full of grandeur. . . Wherever we meet with the
successful balance, in Wordsworth, of profound truth of subject with
profound truth of execution, he is unique." Professor Dowden has also laid stress upon the harmonious balance of
Wordsworth's nature, his different faculties seeming to interpenetrate
one another, and yield mutual support. He has likewise called
attention to the austere naturalism of which Arnold speaks. "Wordsworth was a great naturalist in literature, but he was also a
great Idealist; and between the naturalist and the idealist in
Wordsworth no opposition existed: each worked with the other, each
served the other. While Scott, by allying romance with reality, saved
romantic fiction from the extravagances and follies into which it had
fallen, Wordsworth's special work was to open a higher way for
naturalism in art by its union with ideal truth." Criticism has long since ceased to ridicule his _Betty Foy_, and his
_Harry Gill_, whose "teeth, they chatter, chatter still." Such
malicious sport proved only too easy for Wordsworth's contemporaries,
and still the essential value of his poetry was unimpaired. The range of poetry is indeed inexhaustible, and even the greatest
poets must suffer some subtraction from universal pre-eminence. Therefore we may frankly admit the deficiencies of Wordsworth,--that he
was lacking in dramatic force and in the power of characterization;
that he was singularly deficient in humor, and therefore in the saving
grace of self-criticism in the capacity to see himself occasionally in
a ridiculous light; that he has little of the romantic glamor and none
of the narrative energy of Scott; that Shelley's lyrical flights leave
him plodding along the dusty highway; and that Byron's preternatural
force makes his passion seen by contrast pale and ineffectual. All
this and more may freely be granted, and yet for his influence upon
English thought, and especially upon the poetic thought of his country,
he must be named after Shakespeare and Milton. The intellectual value
of his work will endure; for leaving aside much valuable doctrine,
which from didactic excess fails as poetry, he has brought into the
world a new philosophy of Nature and has emphasised in a manner
distinctively his own the dignity of simple manhood.--_Pelham Edgar_. REFERENCES ON WORDSWORTH'S LIFE AND WORKS

_Wordsworth_ by F. W. H. Myers, in _English Men of Letters_ series. Toronto: The Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited. _Wordsworth_ by Walter Raleigh, London: Edward Arnold. _Wordsworth_ by Rosaline Masson, in _The People's Books_ series. London: T. C. & E. C. Jack,

_Wordsworthiana_ edited by William Knight. Toronto: The Macmillan
Company of Canada, Limited. _Essays Chiefly on Poetry_ by Aubrey de Vere, 2 volumes. Toronto: The
Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited. _Literary Essays_ by Richard Holt Hutton. Toronto: The Macmillan
Company of Canada, Limited. _Studies in Literature_ by Edward Dowden. London: Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trubner & Co., Ltd.

_Aspects of Poetry_ by J. S. C. Shairp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin and
Company. _Lives of Great English Writers from Chaucer to Browning_ by Walter S.
Hinchman and Francis B. Gummere. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. _Great English Poets_ by Julian Hill. Philadelphia: George W. Jacobs &
Co.

_The Greater English Poets of the Nineteenth Century_ by William Morton
Payne. New York: Henry Holt and Company. _The Religious Spirit in the Poets_ by W. Boyd Carpenter, New York:
Thomas Y. Crowell & Co,

_Landscape in Poetry from Homer to Tennyson_ by Francis T. Palgrave. Toronto: The Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited. _A History of Nineteenth Century Literature_ by George Saintsbury. Toronto: The Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited. _Personal Traits of British Authors_ by E. T. Mason. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons. _The English Poets_ edited by T. Humphrey Ward, Vol. iv. Toronto: The
Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited. _Selections from Wordsworth_ edited by Matthew Arnold in _The Golden
Treasury Series_. Toronto: The Macmillan Company of Canada, Limited. _Literary Studies_ by Walter Bagehot,  Vol. 