



Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Daniel Emerson Griffith and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





BY HENRY VAN DYKE

  Six Days of the Week

  Little Rivers
  Fisherman's Luck
  Days Off
  Out-of-Doors in the Holy Land

  The Ruling Passion
  The Blue Flower
  The Unknown Quantity
  The Valley of Vision

  Camp-Fires and Guide-Posts
  Companionable Books

  Poems, Collection in one volume

  Songs out of Doors
  Golden Stars
  The Red Flower
  The Grand Canyon, and Other Poems
  The White Bees, and Other Poems
  The Builders, and Other Poems
  Music, and Other Poems
  The Toiling of Felix, and Other Poems
  The House of Rimmon

  Studies in Tennyson
  Poems of Tennyson
  Fighting for Peace

  CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS




THE POEMS OF

HENRY VAN DYKE


A NEW AND REVISED EDITION
WITH MANY HITHERTO UNCOLLECTED


LONDON   ARTHUR F. BIRD   MCMXXV

[From an edition:]
Printed by The Scribner Press,
New York, U.S.A. Dedicated in Friendship to

KATRINA TRASK

AND

JOHN HUSTON FINLEY




CONTENTS


SONGS OUT OF DOORS

EARLY VERSES

  The After-Echo
  Dulciora
  Three Alpine Sonnets
  Matins
  The Parting and the Coming Guest
  If All the Skies
  Wings of a Dove
  The Fall of the Leaves
  A Snow-Song
  Roslin and Hawthornden


SONGS OUT OF DOORS

LATER POEMS

  When Tulips Bloom
  The Whip-Poor-Will
  The Lily of Yorrow
  The Veery
  The Song-Sparrow
  The Maryland Yellow-Throat
  A November Daisy
  The Angler's Reveille
  The Ruby-Crowned Kinglet
  School
  Indian Summer
  Spring in the North
  Spring in the South
  A Noon Song
  Light Between the Trees
  The Hermit Thrush
  Turn o' the Tide
  Sierra Madre
  The Grand Canyon
  The Heavenly Hills of Holland
  Flood-Tide of Flowers
  God of the Open Air


NARRATIVE POEMS

  The Toiling of Felix
  Vera
  Another Chance
  A Legend of Service
  The White Bees
  New Year's Eve
  The Vain King
  The Foolish Fir-Tree
  "Gran' Boule"
  Heroes of the "Titanic"
  The Standard-Bearer
  The Proud Lady


LABOUR AND ROMANCE

  A Mile with Me
  The Three Best Things
  Reliance
  Doors of Daring
  The Child in the Garden
  Love's Reason
  The Echo in the Heart
  "Undine"
  "Rencontre"
  Love in a Look
  My April Lady
  A Lover's Envy
  Fire-Fly City
  The Gentle Traveller
  Nepenthe
  Day and Night
  Hesper
  Arrival
  Departure
  The Black Birds
  Without Disguise
  An Hour
  "Rappelle-Toi"
  Love's Nearness
  Two Songs of Heine
  Eight Echoes from the Poems of Auguste Angellier
  Rappel d'Amour
  The River of Dreams


HEARTH AND ALTAR

  A Home Song
  "Little Boatie"
  A Mother's Birthday
  Transformation
  Rendezvous
  Gratitude
  Peace
  Santa Christina
  The Bargain
  To the Child Jesus
  Bitter-Sweet
  Hymn of Joy
  Song of a Pilgrim-Soul
  Ode to Peace
  Three Prayers for Sleep and Waking
  Portrait and Reality
  The Wind of Sorrow
  Hide and Seek
  Autumn in the Garden
  The Message
  Dulcis Memoria
  The Window
  Christmas Tears
  Dorothea, 1888-1912


EPIGRAMS, GREETINGS, AND INSCRIPTIONS

  For Katrina's Sun-Dial
  For Katrina's Window
  For the Friends at Hurstmont
  The Sun-Dial at Morven
  The Sun-Dial at Wells College
  To Mark Twain
  Stars and the Soul
  To Julia Marlowe
  To Joseph Jefferson
  The Mocking-Bird
  The Empty Quatrain
  Pan Learns Music
  The Shepherd of Nymphs
  Echoes from the Greek Anthology
  One World
  Joy and Duty
  The Prison and the Angel
  The Way
  Love and Light
  _Facta non Verba_
  Four Things
  The Great River
  Inscription for a Tomb in England
  The Talisman
  Thorn and Rose
  "The Signs"


PRO PATRIA

  Patria
  America
  The Ancestral Dwellings
  Hudson's Last Voyage
  Sea-Gulls of Manhattan
  A Ballad of Claremont Hill
  Urbs Coronata
  Mercy for Armenia
  Sicily, December, 1908
  "Come Back Again, Jeanne d'Arc"
  National Monuments
  The Monument of Francis Makemie
  The Statue of Sherman by St. Gaudens
  "America for Me"
  The Builders
  Spirit of the Everlasting Boy
  Texas
  Who Follow the Flag
  Stain not the Sky
  Peace-Hymn of the Republic


THE RED FLOWER AND GOLDEN STARS

  The Red Flower
  A Scrap of Paper
  Stand Fast
  Lights Out
  Remarks About Kings
  Might and Right
  The Price of Peace
  Storm-Music
  The Bells of Malines
  Jeanne d'Arc Returns
  The Name of France
  America's Prosperity
  The Glory of Ships
  Mare Liberum
  "Liberty Enlightening the World"
  The Oxford Thrushes
  Homeward Bound
  The Winds of War-News
  Righteous Wrath
  The Peaceful Warrior
  From Glory Unto Glory
  Britain, France, America
  The Red Cross
  Easter Road
  America's Welcome Home
  The Surrender of the German Fleet
  Golden Stars
  In the Blue Heaven
  A Shrine in the Pantheon


IN PRAISE OF POETS

  Mother Earth
  Milton
  Wordsworth
  Keats
  Shelley
  Robert Browning
  Tennyson
  "In Memoriam"
  Victor Hugo
  Longfellow
  Thomas Bailey Aldrich
  Edmund Clarence Stedman
  To James Whitcomb Riley
  Richard Watson Gilder
  The Valley of Vain Verses


MUSIC

  Music
  Master of Music
  The Pipes o' Pan
  To a Young Girl Singing
  The Old Flute
  The First Bird o' Spring


THE HOUSE OF RIMMON

A DRAMA IN FOUR ACTS

  The House of Rimmon
  Dramatis Personae


APPENDIX

CARMINA FESTIVA

  The Little-Neck Clam
  A Fairy Tale
  The Ballad of the Solemn Ass
  A Ballad of Santa Claus
  Ars Agricolaris
  Angler's Fireside Song
  How Spring Comes to Shasta Jim
  A Bunch of Trout-Flies


Index of First Lines




SONGS OUT OF DOORS

EARLY VERSES



THE AFTER-ECHO


  How long the echoes love to play
    Around the shore of silence, as a wave
    Retreating circles down the sand! One after one, with sweet delay,
  The mellow sounds that cliff and island gave,
    Have lingered in the crescent bay,
    Until, by lightest breezes fanned,
  They float far off beyond the dying day
        And leave it still as death. But hark,--
        Another singing breath
      Comes from the edge of dark;
        A note as clear and slow
      As falls from some enchanted bell,
      Or spirit, passing from the world below,
        That whispers back, Farewell. So in the heart,
      When, fading slowly down the past,
        Fond memories depart,
      And each that leaves it seems the last;
      Long after all the rest are flown,
      Returns a solitary tone,--
      The after-echo of departed years,--
      And touches all the soul to tears. 1871. DULCIORA


  A tear that trembles for a little while
  Upon the trembling eyelid, till the world
  Wavers within its circle like a dream,
  Holds more of meaning in its narrow orb
  Than all the distant landscape that it blurs. A smile that hovers round a mouth beloved,
  Like the faint pulsing of the Northern Light,
  And grows in silence to an amber dawn
  Born in the sweetest depths of trustful eyes,
  Is dearer to the soul than sun or star. A joy that falls into the hollow heart
  From some far-lifted height of love unseen,
  Unknown, makes a more perfect melody
  Than hidden brooks that murmur in the dusk,
  Or fall athwart the cliff with wavering gleam. Ah, not for their own sake are earth and sky
  And the fair ministries of Nature dear,
  But as they set themselves unto the tune
  That fills our life; as light mysterious
  Flows from within and glorifies the world. For so a common wayside blossom, touched
  With tender thought, assumes a grace more sweet
  Than crowns the royal lily of the South;
  And so a well-remembered perfume seems
  The breath of one who breathes in Paradise. 1872. THREE ALPINE SONNETS


I

THE GLACIER

  At dawn in silence moves the mighty stream,
    The silver-crested waves no murmur make;
    But far away the avalanches wake
  The rumbling echoes, dull as in a dream;
  Their momentary thunders, dying, seem
    To fall into the stillness, flake by flake,
    And leave the hollow air with naught to break
  The frozen spell of solitude supreme. At noon unnumbered rills begin to spring
    Beneath the burning sun, and all the walls
  Of all the ocean-blue crevasses ring
    With liquid lyrics of their waterfalls;
  As if a poet's heart had felt the glow
  Of sovereign love, and song began to flow. Zermatt, 1872. II

THE SNOW-FIELD

  White Death had laid his pall upon the plain,
    And crowned the mountain-peaks like monarchs dead;
    The vault of heaven was glaring overhead
  With pitiless light that filled my eyes with pain;
  And while I vainly longed, and looked in vain
    For sign or trace of life, my spirit said,
    "Shall any living thing that dares to tread
  This royal lair of Death escape again?" But even then I saw before my feet
    A line of pointed footprints in the snow:
    Some roving chamois, but an hour ago,
  Had passed this way along his journey fleet,
  And left a message from a friend unknown
  To cheer my pilgrim-heart, no more alone. Zermatt, 1872. III

MOVING BELLS

  I love the hour that comes, with dusky hair
    And dewy feet, along the Alpine dells,
    To lead the cattle forth. A thousand bells
  Go chiming after her across the fair
  And flowery uplands, while the rosy flare
    Of sunset on the snowy mountain dwells,
    And valleys darken, and the drowsy spells
  Of peace are woven through the purple air. Dear is the magic of this hour: she seems
    To walk before the dark by falling rills,
  And lend a sweeter song to hidden streams;
    She opens all the doors of night, and fills
  With moving bells the music of my dreams,
    That wander far among the sleeping hills. Gstaad, August, 1909. MATINS


  Flowers rejoice when night is done,
  Lift their heads to greet the sun;
  Sweetest looks and odours raise,
  In a silent hymn of praise. So my heart would turn away
  From the darkness to the day;
  Lying open in God's sight
  Like a flower in the light. THE PARTING AND THE COMING GUEST


  Who watched the worn-out Winter die? Who, peering through the window-pane
    At nightfall, under sleet and rain
  Saw the old graybeard totter by? Who listened to his parting sigh,
    The sobbing of his feeble breath,
    His whispered colloquy with Death,
    And when his all of life was done
  Stood near to bid a last good-bye? Of all his former friends not one
  Saw the forsaken Winter die. Who welcomed in the maiden Spring? Who heard her footfall, swift and light
    As fairy-dancing in the night? Who guessed what happy dawn would bring
  The flutter of her bluebird's wing,
  The blossom of her mayflower-face
    To brighten every shady place? One morning, down the village street,
  "Oh, here am I," we heard her sing,--
    And none had been awake to greet
  The coming of the maiden Spring. But look, her violet eyes are wet
    With bright, unfallen, dewy tears;
    And in her song my fancy hears
  A note of sorrow trembling yet. Perhaps, beyond the town, she met
    Old Winter as he limped away
    To die forlorn, and let him lay
    His weary head upon her knee,
    And kissed his forehead with regret
    For one so gray and lonely,--see,
  Her eyes with tender tears are wet. And so, by night, while we were all at rest,
  I think the coming sped the parting guest. 1873. IF ALL THE SKIES


  If all the skies were sunshine,
    Our faces would be fain
  To feel once more upon them
    The cooling plash of rain. If all the world were music,
    Our hearts would often long
  For one sweet strain of silence. To break the endless song. If life were always merry,
    Our souls would seek relief,
  And rest from weary laughter
    In the quiet arms of grief. WINGS OF A DOVE


I

  At sunset, when the rosy light was dying
    Far down the pathway of the west,
  I saw a lonely dove in silence flying,
              To be at rest. Pilgrim of air, I cried, could I but borrow
    Thy wandering wings, thy freedom blest,
  I'd fly away from every careful sorrow,
              And find my rest. II

  But when the filmy veil of dusk was falling,
    Home flew the dove to seek his nest,
  Deep in the forest where his mate was calling
              To love and rest. Peace, heart of mine! no longer sigh to wander;
    Lose not thy life in barren quest. There are no happy islands over yonder;
              Come home and rest. 1874. THE FALL OF THE LEAVES


I

  In warlike pomp, with banners flowing,
    The regiments of autumn stood:
  I saw their gold and scarlet glowing
    From every hillside, every wood. Above the sea the clouds were keeping
    Their secret leaguer, gray and still;
  They sent their misty vanguard creeping
    With muffled step from hill to hill. All day the sullen armies drifted
    Athwart the sky with slanting rain;
  At sunset for a space they lifted,
    With dusk they settled down again. II

  At dark the winds began to blow
  With mutterings distant, low;
    From sea and sky they called their strength
      Till with an angry, broken roar,
      Like billows on an unseen shore,
  Their fury burst at length. I heard through the night
    The rush and the clamour;
  The pulse of the fight
    Like blows of Thor's hammer;
  The pattering flight
  Of the leaves, and the anguished
  Moan of the forest vanquished. At daybreak came a gusty song:
  "Shout! the winds are strong. The little people of the leaves are fled. Shout! The Autumn is dead!" III

  The storm is ended! The impartial sun
  Laughs down upon the battle lost and won,
  And crowns the triumph of the cloudy host
  In rolling lines retreating to the coast. But we, fond lovers of the woodland shade,
  And grateful friends of every fallen leaf,
  Forget the glories of the cloud-parade,
  And walk the ruined woods in quiet grief. For ever so our thoughtful hearts repeat
  On fields of triumph dirges of defeat;
  And still we turn on gala-days to tread
  Among the rustling memories of the dead. 1874. A SNOW-SONG


  Does the snow fall at sea? Yes, when the north winds blow,
    When the wild clouds fly low,
    Out of each gloomy wing,
    Silently glimmering,
    Over the stormy sea
      Falleth the snow. Does the snow hide the sea? Nay, on the tossing plains
    Never a flake remains;
    Drift never resteth there;
    Vanishing everywhere,
    Into the hungry sea
      Falleth the snow. What means the snow at sea? Whirled in the veering blast,
    Thickly the flakes drive past;
    Each like a childish ghost
    Wavers, and then is lost;
    In the forgetful sea
      Fadeth the snow. 1875. ROSLIN AND HAWTHORNDEN


  Fair Roslin Chapel, how divine
  The art that reared thy costly shrine! Thy carven columns must have grown
  By magic, like a dream in stone. Yet not within thy storied wall
  Would I in adoration fall,
  So gladly as within the glen
  That leads to lovely Hawthornden. A long-drawn aisle, with roof of green
  And vine-clad pillars, while between,
  The Esk runs murmuring on its way,
  In living music night and day. Within the temple of this wood
  The martyrs of the covenant stood,
  And rolled the psalm, and poured the prayer,
  From Nature's solemn altar-stair. Edinburgh, 1877. SONGS OUT OF DOORS

LATER POEMS



WHEN TULIPS BLOOM


I

  When tulips bloom in Union Square,
  And timid breaths of vernal air
    Go wandering down the dusty town,
  Like children lost in Vanity Fair;

  When every long, unlovely row
  Of westward houses stands aglow,
    And leads the eyes to sunset skies
  Beyond the hills where green trees grow;

  Then weary seems the street parade,
  And weary books, and weary trade:
    I'm only wishing to go a-fishing;
  For this the month of May was made. II

  I guess the pussy-willows now
  Are creeping out on every bough
    Along the brook; and robins look
  For early worms behind the plough. The thistle-birds have changed their dun,
  For yellow coats, to match the sun;
    And in the same array of flame
  The Dandelion Show's begun. The flocks of young anemones
  Are dancing round the budding trees:
    Who can help wishing to go a-fishing
  In days as full of joy as these? III

  I think the meadow-lark's clear sound
  Leaks upward slowly from the ground,
    While on the wing the bluebirds ring
  Their wedding-bells to woods around. The flirting chewink calls his dear
  Behind the bush; and very near,
    Where water flows, where green grass grows,
  Song-sparrows gently sing, "Good cheer." And, best of all, through twilight's calm
  The hermit-thrush repeats his psalm. How much I'm wishing to go a-fishing
  In days so sweet with music's balm! IV

  'Tis not a proud desire of mine;
  I ask for nothing superfine;
    No heavy weight, no salmon great,
  To break the record, or my line. Only an idle little stream,
  Whose amber waters softly gleam,
    Where I may wade through woodland shade,
  And cast the fly, and loaf, and dream:

  Only a trout or two, to dart
  From foaming pools, and try my art:
    'Tis all I'm wishing--old-fashioned fishing,
  And just a day on Nature's heart. 1894. THE WHIP-POOR-WILL


  Do you remember, father,--
    It seems so long ago,--
  The day we fished together
    Along the Pocono? At dusk I waited for you,
    Beside the lumber-mill,
  And there I heard a hidden bird
    That chanted, "whip-poor-will,"
    "_Whippoorwill!_ _whippoorwill!_"
    Sad and shrill,--"_whippoorwill!_"

  The place was all deserted;
    The mill-wheel hung at rest;
  The lonely star of evening
    Was throbbing in the west;
  The veil of night was falling;
    The winds were folded still;
  And everywhere the trembling air
    Re-echoed "whip-poor-will!" "_Whippoorwill!_ _whippoorwill!_"
    Sad and shrill,--"_whippoorwill!_"

  You seemed so long in coming,
    I felt so much alone;
  The wide, dark world was round me,
    And life was all unknown;
  The hand of sorrow touched me,
    And made my senses thrill
  With all the pain that haunts the strain
    Of mournful whip-poor-will. "_Whippoorwill!_ _whippoorwill!_"
    Sad and shrill,--"_whippoorwill!_"

  What knew I then of trouble? An idle little lad,
  I had not learned the lessons
    That make men wise and sad. I dreamed of grief and parting,
    And something seemed to fill
  My heart with tears, while in my ears
    Resounded "whip-poor-will." "_Whippoorwill!_ _whippoorwill!_"
    Sad and shrill,--"_whippoorwill!_"

  'Twas but a cloud of sadness,
    That lightly passed away;
  But I have learned the meaning
    Of sorrow, since that day. For nevermore at twilight,
    Beside the silent mill,
  I'll wait for you, in the falling dew,
    And hear the whip-poor-will. "_Whippoorwill!_ _whippoorwill!_"
    Sad and shrill,--"_whippoorwill!_"

  But if you still remember
    In that fair land of light,
  The pains and fears that touch us
    Along this edge of night,
  I think all earthly grieving,
    And all our mortal ill,
  To you must seem like a sad boy's dream. Who hears the whip-poor-will. "_Whippoorwill!_ _whippoorwill!_"
    A passing thrill,--"_whippoorwill!_"

1894. THE LILY OF YORROW


  Deep in the heart of the forest the lily of Yorrow is growing;
  Blue is its cup as the sky, and with mystical odour o'erflowing;
  Faintly it falls through the shadowy glades when the south wind is
            blowing. Sweet are the primroses pale and the violets after a shower;
  Sweet are the borders of pinks and the blossoming grapes on the bower;
  Sweeter by far is the breath of that far-away woodland flower. Searching and strange in its sweetness, it steals like a perfume
            enchanted
  Under the arch of the forest, and all who perceive it are haunted,
  Seeking and seeking for ever, till sight of the lily is granted. Who can describe how it grows, with its chalice of lazuli leaning
  Over a crystalline spring, where the ferns and the mosses are greening? Who can imagine its beauty, or utter the depth of its meaning? Calm of the journeying stars, and repose of the mountains olden,
  Joy of the swift-running rivers, and glory of sunsets golden,
  Secrets that cannot be told in the heart of the flower are holden. Surely to see it is peace and the crown of a life-long endeavour;
  Surely to pluck it is gladness,--but they who have found it can never
  Tell of the gladness and peace: they are hid from our vision for ever. 'Twas but a moment ago that a comrade was walking near me:
  Turning aside from the pathway he murmured a greeting to cheer me,--
  Then he was lost in the shade, and I called but he did not hear me. Why should I dream he is dead, and bewail him with passionate sorrow? Surely I know there is gladness in finding the lily of Yorrow:
  He has discovered it first, and perhaps I shall find it to-morrow. 1894. THE VEERY


  The moonbeams over Arno's vale in silver flood were pouring,
  When first I heard the nightingale a long-lost love deploring. So passionate, so full of pain, it sounded strange and eerie;
  I longed to hear a simpler strain,--the wood-notes of the veery. The laverock sings a bonny lay above the Scottish heather;
  It sprinkles down from far away like light and love together;
  He drops the golden notes to greet his brooding mate, his dearie;
  I only know one song more sweet,--the vespers of the veery. In English gardens, green and bright and full of fruity treasure,
  I heard the blackbird with delight repeat his merry measure:
  The ballad was a pleasant one, the tune was loud and cheery,
  And yet, with every setting sun, I listened for the veery. But far away, and far away, the tawny thrush is singing;
  New England woods, at close of day, with that clear chant are ringing:
  And when my light of life is low, and heart and flesh are weary,
  I fain would hear, before I go, the wood-notes of the veery. 1895. THE SONG-SPARROW


  There is a bird I know so well,
    It seems as if he must have sung
    Beside my crib when I was young;
  Before I knew the way to spell
    The name of even the smallest bird,
    His gentle-joyful song I heard. Now see if you can tell, my dear. What bird it is that, every year,
  Sings "_Sweet--sweet--sweet--very merry cheer._"

  He comes in March, when winds are strong,
    And snow returns to hide the earth;
    But still he warms his heart with mirth,
  And waits for May. He lingers long
    While flowers fade; and every day
    Repeats his small, contented lay;
  As if to say, we need not fear
  The season's change, if love is here
  With "_Sweet--sweet--sweet--very merry cheer._"

  He does not wear a Joseph's-coat
    Of many colours, smart and gay;
    His suit is Quaker brown and gray,
  With darker patches at his throat. And yet of all the well-dressed throng
    Not one can sing so brave a song. It makes the pride of looks appear
  A vain and foolish thing, to hear
  His "_Sweet--sweet--sweet--very merry cheer._"

  A lofty place he does not love,
    But sits by choice, and well at ease,
    In hedges, and in little trees
  That stretch their slender arms above
    The meadow-brook; and there he sings
    Till all the field with pleasure rings;
  And so he tells in every ear,
  That lowly homes to heaven are near
  In "_Sweet--sweet--sweet--very merry cheer._"

  I like the tune, I like the words;
    They seem so true, so free from art,
    So friendly, and so full of heart,
  That if but one of all the birds
    Could be my comrade everywhere,
    My little brother of the air,
  I'd choose the song-sparrow, my dear,
  Because he'd bless me, every year,
  With "_Sweet--sweet--sweet--very merry cheer._"

1895. THE MARYLAND YELLOW-THROAT


  When May bedecks the naked trees
  With tassels and embroideries,
  And many blue-eyed violets beam
  Along the edges of the stream,
  I hear a voice that seems to say,
  Now near at hand, now far away,
    "_Witchery--witchery--witchery._"

  An incantation so serene,
  So innocent, befits the scene:
  There's magic in that small bird's note--
  See, there he flits--the Yellow-throat;
  A living sunbeam, tipped with wings,
  A spark of light that shines and sings
    "_Witchery--witchery--witchery._"

  You prophet with a pleasant name,
  If out of Mary-land you came,
  You know the way that thither goes
  Where Mary's lovely garden grows:
  Fly swiftly back to her, I pray,
  And try to call her down this way,
    "_Witchery--witchery--witchery!_"

  Tell her to leave her cockle-shells,
  And all her little silver bells
  That blossom into melody,
  And all her maids less fair than she. She does not need these pretty things,
  For everywhere she comes, she brings
    "_Witchery--witchery--witchery!_"

  The woods are greening overhead,
  And flowers adorn each mossy bed;
  The waters babble as they run--
  One thing is lacking, only one:
  If Mary were but here to-day,
  I would believe your charming lay,
    "_Witchery--witchery--witchery!_"

  Along the shady road I look--
  Who's coming now across the brook? A woodland maid, all robed in white--
  The leaves dance round her with delight,
  The stream laughs out beneath her feet--
  Sing, merry bird, the charm's complete,
    "_Witchery--witchery--witchery!_"

1895. A NOVEMBER DAISY


  Afterthought of summer's bloom! Late arrival at the feast,
  Coming when the songs have ceased
  And the merry guests departed,
  Leaving but an empty room,
  Silence, solitude, and gloom,--
  Are you lonely, heavy-hearted;
  You, the last of all your kind,
  Nodding in the autumn-wind;
  Now that all your friends are flown,
  Blooming late and all alone? Nay, I wrong you, little flower,
  Reading mournful mood of mine
  In your looks, that give no sign
  Of a spirit dark and cheerless! You possess the heavenly power
  That rejoices in the hour. Glad, contented, free, and fearless,
  Lift a sunny face to heaven
  When a sunny day is given! Make a summer of your own,
  Blooming late and all alone! Once the daisies gold and white
  Sea-like through the meadow rolled:
  Once my heart could hardly hold
  All its pleasures. I remember,
  In the flood of youth's delight
  Separate joys were lost to sight. That was summer! Now November
  Sets the perfect flower apart;
  Gives each blossom of the heart
  Meaning, beauty, grace unknown,--
  Blooming late and all alone. November, 1899. THE ANGLER'S REVEILLE


  What time the rose of dawn is laid across the lips of night,
  And all the little watchman-stars have fallen asleep in light,
  'Tis then a merry wind awakes, and runs from tree to tree,
  And borrows words from all the birds to sound the reveille. This is the carol the Robin throws
            Over the edge of the valley;
          Listen how boldly it flows,
            Sally on sally:
                   _Tirra-lirra,
                    Early morn,
                    New born! Day is near,
                    Clear, clear. Down the river
                    All a-quiver,
                    Fish are breaking;
                    Time for waking,
                    Tup, tup, tup! Do you hear? All clear--
                    Wake up!_

  The phantom flood of dreams has ebbed and vanished with the dark,
  And like a dove the heart forsakes the prison of the ark;
  Now forth she fares thro' friendly woods and diamond-fields of dew,
  While every voice cries out "Rejoice!" as if the world were new. This is the ballad the Bluebird sings,
            Unto his mate replying,
          Shaking the tune from his wings
            While he is flying:
                 _Surely, surely, surely,
                      Life is dear
                      Even here. Blue above,
                      You to love,
                    Purely, purely, purely._

  There's wild azalea on the hill, and iris down the dell,
  And just one spray of lilac still abloom beside the well;
  The columbine adorns the rocks, the laurel buds grow pink,
  Along the stream white arums gleam, and violets bend to drink. This is the song of the Yellow-throat,
            Fluttering gaily beside you;
          Hear how each voluble note
            Offers to guide you:
                   _Which way, sir? I say, sir,
                    Let me teach you,
                    I beseech you! Are you wishing
                    Jolly fishing? This way, sir! I'll teach you._

  Then come, my friend, forget your foes and leave your fears behind,
  And wander forth to try your luck, with cheerful, quiet mind;
  For be your fortune great or small, you take what God will give,
  And all the day your heart will say, "'Tis luck enough to live." This is the song the Brown Thrush flings
            Out of his thicket of roses;
          Hark how it bubbles and rings,
            Mark how it closes:
                   _Luck, luck,
                    What luck? Good enough for me,
                    I'm alive, you see! Sun shining,
                    No repining;
                    Never borrow
                    Idle sorrow;
                    Drop it! Cover it up! Hold your cup! Joy will fill it,
                    Don't spill it,
                    Steady, be ready,
                    Good luck!_

1899. THE RUBY-CROWNED KINGLET


I

  Where's your kingdom, little king? Where the land you call your own,
    Where your palace and your throne? Fluttering lightly on the wing
    Through the blossom-world of May,
    Whither lies your royal way,
              Little king? _Far to northward lies a land
      Where the trees together stand
      Closely as the blades of wheat
      When the summer is complete. Rolling like an ocean wide
      Over vale and mountainside,
      Balsam, hemlock, spruce and pine,--
      All those mighty trees are mine. There's a river flowing free,--
      All its waves belong to me. There's a lake so clear and bright
      Stars shine out of it all night;
      Rowan-berries round it spread
      Like a belt of coral red. Never royal garden planned
      Fair as my Canadian land! There I build my summer nest,
      There I reign and there I rest,
      While from dawn to dark I sing,
      Happy kingdom! Lucky king!_


II

  Back again, my little king! Is your happy kingdom lost
    To the rebel knave, Jack Frost? Have you felt the snow-flakes sting? Houseless, homeless in October,
    Whither now? Your plight is sober,
              Exiled king! _Far to southward lie the regions
      Where my loyal flower-legions
      Hold possession of the year,
      Filling every month with cheer. Christmas wakes the winter rose;
      New Year daffodils unclose;
      Yellow jasmine through the wood
      Flows in February flood,
      Dropping from the tallest trees
      Golden streams that never freeze. Thither now I take my flight
      Down the pathway of the night,
      Till I see the southern moon
      Glisten on the broad lagoon,
      Where the cypress' dusky green,
      And the dark magnolia's sheen,
      Weave a shelter round my home. There the snow-storms never come;
      There the bannered mosses gray
      Like a curtain gently sway,
      Hanging low on every side
      Round the covert where I bide,
      Till the March azalea glows,
      Royal red and heavenly rose,
      Through the Carolina glade
      Where my winter home is made. There I hold my southern court,
      Full of merriment and sport:
      There I take my ease and sing,
      Happy kingdom! Lucky king!_


III

  Little boaster, vagrant king,
    Neither north nor south is yours,
    You've no kingdom that endures! Wandering every fall and spring,
    With your ruby crown so slender,
    Are you only a Pretender,
              Landless king? _Never king by right divine
      Ruled a richer realm than mine! What are lands and golden crowns,
      Armies, fortresses and towns,
      Jewels, sceptres, robes and rings,--
      What are these to song and wings? Everywhere that I can fly,
      There I own the earth and sky;
      Everywhere that I can sing. There I'm happy as a king._

1900. SCHOOL


  I put my heart to school
  In the world where men grow wise:
  "Go out," I said, "and learn the rule;
  Come back when you win a prize." My heart came back again:
  "Now where is the prize?" I cried.--
  "The rule was false, and the prize was pain,
  And the teacher's name was Pride." I put my heart to school
  In the woods where veeries sing
  And brooks run clear and cool,
  In the fields where wild flowers spring. "And why do you stay so long
  My heart, and where do you roam?" The answer came with a laugh and a song,--
  "I find this school is home." April, 1901. INDIAN SUMMER


  A silken curtain veils the skies,
  And half conceals from pensive eyes
    The bronzing tokens of the fall;
  A calmness broods upon the hills,
  And summer's parting dream distils
    A charm of silence over all. The stacks of corn, in brown array,
  Stand waiting through the tranquil day,
    Like tattered wigwams on the plain;
  The tribes that find a shelter there
  Are phantom peoples, forms of air,
    And ghosts of vanished joy and pain. At evening when the crimson crest
  Of sunset passes down the West,
    I hear the whispering host returning;
  On far-off fields, by elm and oak,
  I see the lights, I smell the smoke,--
    The Camp-fires of the Past are burning. _Tertius and Henry van Dyke._

November, 1903. SPRING IN THE NORTH


I

  Ah, who will tell me, in these leaden days,
  Why the sweet Spring delays,
  And where she hides,--the dear desire
    Of every heart that longs
  For bloom, and fragrance, and the ruby fire
  Of maple-buds along the misty hills,
  And that immortal call which fills
    The waiting wood with songs? The snow-drops came so long ago,
    It seemed that Spring was near! But then returned the snow
  With biting winds, and earth grew sere,
    And sullen clouds drooped low
  To veil the sadness of a hope deferred:
  Then rain, rain, rain, incessant rain
    Beat on the window-pane,
  Through which I watched the solitary bird
  That braved the tempest, buffeted and tossed
  With rumpled feathers down the wind again. Oh, were the seeds all lost
  When winter laid the wild flowers in their tomb? I searched the woods in vain
  For blue hepaticas, and trilliums white,
  And trailing arbutus, the Spring's delight,
  Starring the withered leaves with rosy bloom. But every night the frost
  To all my longing spoke a silent nay,
  And told me Spring was far away. Even the robins were too cold to sing,
  Except a broken and discouraged note,--
  Only the tuneful sparrow, on whose throat
  Music has put her triple finger-print,
  Lifted his head and sang my heart a hint,--
  "Wait, wait, wait! oh, wait a while for Spring!" II

  But now, Carina, what divine amends
  For all delay! What sweetness treasured up,
    What wine of joy that blends
  A hundred flavours in a single cup,
  Is poured into this perfect day! For look, sweet heart, here are the early flowers
    That lingered on their way,
  Thronging in haste to kiss the feet of May,
  Entangled with the bloom of later hours,--
  Anemones and cinque-foils, violets blue
  And white, and iris richly gleaming through
  The grasses of the meadow, and a blaze
  Of butter-cups and daisies in the field,
    Filling the air with praise,
  As if a chime of golden bells had pealed! The frozen songs within the breast
  Of silent birds that hid in leafless woods,
    Melt into rippling floods
    Of gladness unrepressed. Now oriole and bluebird, thrush and lark,
  Warbler and wren and vireo,
  Mingle their melody; the living spark
  Of Love has touched the fuel of desire,
  And every heart leaps up in singing fire. It seems as if the land
  Were breathing deep beneath the sun's caress,
    Trembling with tenderness,
    While all the woods expand,
  In shimmering clouds of rose and gold and green,
  To veil a joy too sacred to be seen. III

    Come, put your hand in mine,
  True love, long sought and found at last,
  And lead me deep into the Spring divine
    That makes amends for all the wintry past. For all the flowers and songs I feared to miss
      Arrive with you;
  And in the lingering pressure of your kiss
      My dreams come true;
  And in the promise of your generous eyes
      I read the mystic sign
      Of joy more perfect made
      Because so long delayed,
  And bliss enhanced by rapture of surprise. Ah, think not early love alone is strong;
  He loveth best whose heart has learned to wait:
  Dear messenger of Spring that tarried long,
  You're doubly dear because you come so late. SPRING IN THE SOUTH


  Now in the oak the sap of life is welling,
    Tho' to the bough the rusty leafage clings;
  Now on the elm the misty buds are swelling;
    Every little pine-wood grows alive with wings;
  Blue-jays are fluttering, yodeling and crying,
    Meadow-larks sailing low above the faded grass,
  Red-birds whistling clear, silent robins flying,--
    Who has waked the birds up? What has come to pass? Last year's cotton-plants, desolately bowing,
    Tremble in the March-wind, ragged and forlorn;
  Red are the hillsides of the early ploughing,
    Gray are the lowlands, waiting for the corn. Earth seems asleep, but she is only feigning;
    Deep in her bosom thrills a sweet unrest;
  Look where the jasmine lavishly is raining
    Jove's golden shower into Danaee's breast! Now on the plum-tree a snowy bloom is sifted,
    Now on the peach-tree, the glory of the rose,
  Far o'er the hills a tender haze is drifted,
    Full to the brim the yellow river flows. Dark cypress boughs with vivid jewels glisten,
    Greener than emeralds shining in the sun. Whence comes the magic? Listen, sweetheart, listen! The mocking-bird is singing: Spring is begun. Hark, in his song no tremor of misgiving! All of his heart he pours into his lay,--
  "Love, love, love, and pure delight of living:
    Winter is forgotten: here's a happy day!" Fair in your face I read the flowery presage,
    Snowy on your brow and rosy on your mouth:
  Sweet in your voice I hear the season's message,--
    Love, love, love, and Spring in the South! 1904. A NOON SONG


  There are songs for the morning and songs for the night,
    For sunrise and sunset, the stars and the moon;
  But who will give praise to the fulness of light,
    And sing us a song of the glory of noon? Oh, the high noon, the clear noon,
          The noon with golden crest;
        When the blue sky burns, and the great sun turns
          With his face to the way of the west! How swiftly he rose in the dawn of his strength! How slowly he crept as the morning wore by! Ah, steep was the climbing that led him at length
    To the height of his throne in the wide summer sky. Oh, the long toil, the slow toil,
          The toil that may not rest,
        Till the sun looks down from his journey's crown,
          To the wonderful way of the west! Then a quietness falls over meadow and hill,
    The wings of the wind in the forest are furled,
  The river runs softly, the birds are all still,
    The workers are resting all over the world. Oh, the good hour, the kind hour,
          The hour that calms the breast! Little inn half-way on the road of the day,
          Where it follows the turn to the west! There's a plentiful feast in the maple-tree shade,
    The lilt of a song to an old-fashioned tune,
  The talk of a friend, or the kiss of a maid,
    To sweeten the cup that we drink to the noon. Oh, the deep noon, the full noon,
          Of all the day the best! When the blue sky burns, and the great sun turns
          To his home by the way of the west! 1906. LIGHT BETWEEN THE TREES


  Long, long, long the trail
    Through the brooding forest-gloom,
  Down the shadowy, lonely vale
    Into silence, like a room
      Where the light of life has fled,
    And the jealous curtains close
    Round the passionless repose
      Of the silent dead. Plod, plod, plod away,
    Step by step in mouldering moss;
  Thick branches bar the day
    Over languid streams that cross
      Softly, slowly, with a sound
    Like a smothered weeping,
    In their aimless creeping
      Through enchanted ground. "Yield, yield, yield thy quest,"
    Whispers through the woodland deep;
  "Come to me and be at rest;
    I am slumber, I am sleep." Then the weary feet would fail,
    But the never-daunted will
    Urges "Forward, forward still! Press along the trail!" Breast, breast, breast the slope
    See, the path is growing steep. Hark! a little song of hope
    Where the stream begins to leap. Though the forest, far and wide,
    Still shuts out the bending blue,
    We shall finally win through,
      Cross the long divide. On, on, on we tramp! Will the journey never end? Over yonder lies the camp;
    Welcome waits us there, my friend. Can we reach it ere the night? Upward, upward, never fear! Look, the summit must be near;
      See the line of light! Red, red, red the shine
    Of the splendour in the west,
  Glowing through the ranks of pine,
    Clear along the mountain-crest! Long, long, long the trail
    Out of sorrow's lonely vale;
      But at last the traveller sees
      Light between the trees! March, 1904. THE HERMIT THRUSH


  O wonderful! How liquid clear
  The molten gold of that ethereal tone,
  Floating and falling through the wood alone,
  A hermit-hymn poured out for God to hear! _O holy, holy, holy! Hyaline,
  Long light, low light, glory of eventide! Love far away, far up,--up,--love divine! Little love, too, for ever, ever near,
  Warm love, earth love, tender love of mine,
  In the leafy dark where you hide,
  You are mine,--mine,--mine!_

  Ah, my beloved, do you feel with me
  The hidden virtue of that melody,
  The rapture and the purity of love,
  The heavenly joy that can not find the word? Then, while we wait again to hear the bird,
  Come very near to me, and do not move,--
  Now, hermit of the woodland, fill anew
  The cool, green cup of air with harmony,
  And we will drink the wine of love with you. May, 1908. TURN O' THE TIDE


  The tide flows in to the harbour,--
    The bold tide, the gold tide, the flood o' the sunlit sea,--
  And the little ships riding at anchor,
    Are swinging and slanting their prows to the ocean, panting
      To lift their wings to the wide wild air,
      And venture a voyage they know not where,--
    To fly away and be free! The tide runs out of the harbour,--
    The low tide, the slow tide, the ebb o' the moonlit bay,--
  And the little ships rocking at anchor,
    Are rounding and turning their bows to the landward, yearning
      To breathe the breath of the sun-warmed strand,
      To rest in the lee of the high hill land,--
  To hold their haven and stay! My heart goes round with the vessels,--
    My wild heart, my child heart, in love with the sea and the land,--
  And the turn o' the tide passes through it,
    In rising and falling with mystical currents, calling
      At morn, to range where the far waves foam,
      At night, to a harbour in love's true home,
    With the hearts that understand! Seal Harbour, August 12, 1911. SIERRA MADRE


  O Mother mountains! billowing far to the snow-lands,
    Robed in aerial amethyst, silver, and blue,
  Why do ye look so proudly down on the lowlands? What have their groves and gardens to do with you? Theirs is the languorous charm of the orange and myrtle,
    Theirs are the fruitage and fragrance of Eden of old,--
  Broad-boughed oaks in the meadows fair and fertile,
    Dark-leaved orchards gleaming with globes of gold. You, in your solitude standing, lofty and lonely,
    Bear neither garden nor grove on your barren breasts;
  Rough is the rock-loving growth of your canyons, and only
    Storm-battered pines and fir-trees cling to your crests. Why are ye throned so high, and arrayed in splendour
    Richer than all the fields at your feet can claim? What is your right, ye rugged peaks, to the tender
    Queenly promise and pride of the mother-name? Answered the mountains, dim in the distance dreaming:
    "Ours are the forests that treasure the riches of rain;
  Ours are the secret springs and the rivulets gleaming
    Silverly down through the manifold bloom of the plain. "Vain were the toiling of men in the dust of the dry land,
    Vain were the ploughing and planting in waterless fields,
  Save for the life-giving currents we send from the sky-land,
    Save for the fruit our embrace with the storm-cloud yields." O mother mountains, Madre Sierra, I love you! Rightly you reign o'er the vale that your bounty fills--
  Kissed by the sun, or with big, bright stars above you,--
    I murmur your name and lift up mine eyes to the hills. Pasadena, March, 1913. THE GRAND CANYON

DAYBREAK


  What makes the lingering Night so cling to thee? Thou vast, profound, primeval hiding-place
  Of ancient secrets,--gray and ghostly gulf
  Cleft in the green of this high forest land,
  And crowded in the dark with giant forms! Art thou a grave, a prison, or a shrine? A stillness deeper than the dearth of sound
  Broods over thee: a living silence breathes
  Perpetual incense from thy dim abyss. The morning-stars that sang above the bower
  Of Eden, passing over thee, are dumb
  With trembling bright amazement; and the Dawn
  Steals through the glimmering pines with naked feet,
  Her hand upon her lips, to look on thee! She peers into thy depths with silent prayer
  For light, more light, to part thy purple veil. O Earth, swift-rolling Earth, reveal, reveal,--
  Turn to the East, and show upon thy breast
  The mightiest marvel in the realm of Time! 'Tis done,--the morning miracle of light,--
  The resurrection of the world of hues
  That die with dark, and daily rise again
  With every rising of the splendid Sun! Be still, my heart! Now Nature holds her breath
  To see the solar flood of radiance leap
  Across the chasm, and crown the western rim
  Of alabaster with a far-away
  Rampart of pearl, and flowing down by walls
  Of changeful opal, deepen into gold
  Of topaz, rosy gold of tourmaline,
  Crimson of garnet, green and gray of jade,
  Purple of amethyst, and ruby red,
  Beryl, and sard, and royal porphyry;
  Until the cataract of colour breaks
  Upon the blackness of the granite floor. How far below! And all between is cleft
  And carved into a hundred curving miles
  Of unimagined architecture! Tombs,
  Temples, and colonnades are neighboured there
  By fortresses that Titans might defend,
  And amphitheatres where Gods might strive. Cathedrals, buttressed with unnumbered tiers
  Of ruddy rock, lift to the sapphire sky
  A single spire of marble pure as snow;
  And huge aerial palaces arise
  Like mountains built of unconsuming flame. Along the weathered walls, or standing deep
  In riven valleys where no foot may tread,
  Are lonely pillars, and tall monuments
  Of perished aeons and forgotten things. My sight is baffled by the wide array
  Of countless forms: my vision reels and swims
  Above them, like a bird in whirling winds. Yet no confusion fills the awful chasm;
  But spacious order and a sense of peace
  Brood over all. For every shape that looms
  Majestic in the throng, is set apart
  From all the others by its far-flung shade,
  Blue, blue, as if a mountain-lake were there. How still it is! Dear God, I hardly dare
  To breathe, for fear the fathomless abyss
  Will draw me down into eternal sleep. What force has formed this masterpiece of awe? What hands have wrought these wonders in the waste? O river, gleaming in the narrow rift
  Of gloom that cleaves the valley's nether deep,--
  Fierce Colorado, prisoned by thy toil,
  And blindly toiling still to reach the sea,--
  Thy waters, gathered from the snows and springs
  Amid the Utah hills, have carved this road
  Of glory to the Californian Gulf. But now, O sunken stream, thy splendour lost,
  'Twixt iron walls thou rollest turbid waves,
  Too far away to make their fury heard! At sight of thee, thou sullen labouring slave
  Of gravitation,--yellow torrent poured
  From distant mountains by no will of thine,
  Through thrice a hundred centuries of slow
  Fallings and liftings of the crust of Earth,--
  At sight of thee my spirit sinks and fails. Art thou alone the Maker? Is the blind
  Unconscious power that drew thee dumbly down
  To cut this gash across the layered globe,
  The sole creative cause of all I see? Are force and matter all? The rest a dream? Then is thy gorge a canyon of despair,
  A prison for the soul of man, a grave
  Of all his dearest daring hopes! The world
  Wherein we live and move is meaningless,
  No spirit here to answer to our own! The stars without a guide: The chance-born Earth
  Adrift in space, no Captain on the ship:
  Nothing in all the universe to prove
  Eternal wisdom and eternal love! And man, the latest accident of Time,--
  Who thinks he loves, and longs to understand,
  Who vainly suffers, and in vain is brave,
  Who dupes his heart with immortality,--
  Man is a living lie,--a bitter jest
  Upon himself,--a conscious grain of sand
  Lost in a desert of unconsciousness,
  Thirsting for God and mocked by his own thirst. Spirit of Beauty, mother of delight,
  Thou fairest offspring of Omnipotence
  Inhabiting this lofty lone abode,
  Speak to my heart again and set me free
  From all these doubts that darken earth and heaven! Who sent thee forth into the wilderness
  To bless and comfort all who see thy face? Who clad thee in this more than royal robe
  Of rainbows? Who designed these jewelled thrones
  For thee, and wrought these glittering palaces? Who gave thee power upon the soul of man
  To lift him up through wonder into joy? God! let the radiant cliffs bear witness, God! Let all the shining pillars signal, God! He only, on the mystic loom of light. Hath woven webs of loveliness to clothe
  His most majestic works: and He alone
  Hath delicately wrought the cactus-flower
  To star the desert floor with rosy bloom. O Beauty, handiwork of the Most High,
  Where'er thou art He tells his Love to man,
  And lo, the day breaks, and the shadows flee! Now, far beyond all language and all art
  In thy wild splendour, Canyon marvellous,
  The secret of thy stillness lies unveiled
  In wordless worship! This is holy ground;
  Thou art no grave, no prison, but a shrine. Garden of Temples filled with Silent Praise,
  If God were blind thy Beauty could not be! February 24-26, 1913. THE HEAVENLY HILLS OF HOLLAND


  The heavenly hills of Holland,--
    How wondrously they rise
  Above the smooth green pastures
    Into the azure skies! With blue and purple hollows,
    With peaks of dazzling snow,
  Along the far horizon
    The clouds are marching slow. No mortal foot has trodden
    The summits of that range,
  Nor walked those mystic valleys
    Whose colours ever change;
  Yet we possess their beauty,
    And visit them in dreams,
  While ruddy gold of sunset
    From cliff and canyon gleams. In days of cloudless weather
    They melt into the light;
  When fog and mist surround us
    They're hidden from our sight;
  But when returns a season
    Clear shining after rain,
  While the northwest wind is blowing,
    We see the hills again. The old Dutch painters loved them,
    Their pictures show them fair,--
  Old Hobbema and Ruysdael,
    Van Goyen and Vermeer. Above the level landscape,
    Rich polders, long-armed mills,
  Canals and ancient cities,--
    Float Holland's heavenly hills. The Hague, November, 1916. FLOOD-TIDE OF FLOWERS

IN HOLLAND


  The laggard winter ebbed so slow
  With freezing rain and melting snow,
  It seemed as if the earth would stay
  Forever where the tide was low,
  In sodden green and watery gray. But now from depths beyond our sight,
  The tide is turning in the night,
  And floods of colour long concealed
  Come silent rising toward the light,
  Through garden bare and empty field. And first, along the sheltered nooks,
  The crocus runs in little brooks
  Of joyance, till by light made bold
  They show the gladness of their looks
  In shining pools of white and gold. The tiny scilla, sapphire blue,
  Is gently seeping in, to strew
  The earth with heaven; and sudden rills
  Of sunlit yellow, sweeping through,
  Spread into lakes of daffodils. The hyacinths, with fragrant heads,
  Have overflowed their sandy beds,
  And fill the earth with faint perfume,
  The breath that Spring around her sheds. And now the tulips break in bloom! A sea, a rainbow-tinted sea,
  A splendour and a mystery,
  Floods o'er the fields of faded gray:
  The roads are full of folks in glee,
  For lo,--to-day is Easter Day! April, 1916. ODE

GOD OF THE OPEN AIR


I

    Thou who hast made thy dwelling fair
      With flowers below, above with starry lights
    And set thine altars everywhere,--
            On mountain heights,
    In woodlands dim with many a dream,
            In valleys bright with springs,
  And on the curving capes of every stream:
  Thou who hast taken to thyself the wings
            Of morning, to abide
  Upon the secret places of the sea,
    And on far islands, where the tide
  Visits the beauty of untrodden shores,
  Waiting for worshippers to come to thee
            In thy great out-of-doors! To thee I turn, to thee I make my prayer,
            God of the open air. II

  Seeking for thee, the heart of man
          Lonely and longing ran,
  In that first, solitary hour,
          When the mysterious power
  To know and love the wonder of the morn
  Was breathed within him, and his soul was born;
          And thou didst meet thy child,
          Not in some hidden shrine,
  But in the freedom of the garden wild,
          And take his hand in thine,--
  There all day long in Paradise he walked,
  And in the cool of evening with thee talked. III

    Lost, long ago, that garden bright and pure,
    Lost, that calm day too perfect to endure,
  And lost the child-like love that worshipped and was sure! For men have dulled their eyes with sin,
    And dimmed the light of heaven with doubt,
    And built their temple walls to shut thee in,
    And framed their iron creeds to shut thee out. But not for thee the closing of the door,
            O Spirit unconfined! Thy ways are free
            As is the wandering wind,
    And thou hast wooed thy children, to restore
          Their fellowship with thee,
    In peace of soul and simpleness of mind. IV

    Joyful the heart that, when the flood rolled by,
    Leaped up to see the rainbow in the sky;
    And glad the pilgrim, in the lonely night,
    For whom the hills of Haran, tier on tier,
    Built up a secret stairway to the height
    Where stars like angel eyes were shining clear. From mountain-peaks, in many a land and age,
      Disciples of the Persian seer
    Have hailed the rising sun and worshipped thee;
    And wayworn followers of the Indian sage
  Have found the peace of God beneath a spreading tree. V

    But One, but One,--ah, Son most dear,
  And perfect image of the Love Unseen,--
    Walked every day in pastures green,
  And all his life the quiet waters by,
  Reading their beauty with a tranquil eye. To him the desert was a place prepared
        For weary hearts to rest;
    The hillside was a temple blest;
    The grassy vale a banquet-room
  Where he could feed and comfort many a guest. With him the lily shared
  The vital joy that breathes itself in bloom;
  And every bird that sang beside the nest
  Told of the love that broods o'er every living thing. He watched the shepherd bring
  His flock at sundown to the welcome fold,
    The fisherman at daybreak fling
  His net across the waters gray and cold,
  And all day long the patient reaper swing
  His curving sickle through the harvest-gold. So through the world the foot-path way he trod,
  Breathing the air of heaven in every breath;
  And in the evening sacrifice of death
  Beneath the open sky he gave his soul to God. Him will I trust, and for my Master take;
  Him will I follow; and for his dear sake,
          God of the open air,
        To thee I make my prayer. VI

  From the prison of anxious thought that greed has builded,
  From the fetters that envy has wrought and pride has gilded,
  From the noise of the crowded ways and the fierce confusion,
  From the folly that wastes its days in a world of illusion,
  (Ah, but the life is lost that frets and languishes there!) I would escape and be free in the joy of the open air. By the breadth of the blue that shines in silence o'er me,
  By the length of the mountain-lines that stretch before me,
  By the height of the cloud that sails, with rest in motion,
  Over the plains and the vales to the measureless ocean,
  (Oh, how the sight of the greater things enlarges the eyes!) Draw me away from myself to the peace of the hills and skies. While the tremulous leafy haze on the woodland is spreading,
  And the bloom on the meadow betrays where May has been treading;
  While the birds on the branches above, and the brooks flowing under,
  Are singing together of love in a world full of wonder,
  (Lo, in the magic of Springtime, dreams are changed into truth!) Quicken my heart, and restore the beautiful hopes of youth. By the faith that the wild-flowers show when they bloom unbidden,
  By the calm of the river's flow to a goal that is hidden,
  By the strength of the tree that clings to its deep foundation,
  By the courage of birds' light wings on the long migration,
  (Wonderful spirit of trust that abides in Nature's breast!) Teach me how to confide, and live my life, and rest. For the comforting warmth of the sun that my body embraces,
  For the cool of the waters that run through the shadowy places,
  For the balm of the breezes that brush my face with their fingers,
  For the vesper-hymn of the thrush when the twilight lingers,
  For the long breath, the deep breath, the breath of a heart without
            care,--
  I will give thanks and adore thee, God of the open air! VII

          These are the gifts I ask
          Of thee, Spirit serene:
          Strength for the daily task,
          Courage to face the road,
    Good cheer to help me bear the traveller's load,
    And, for the hours of rest that come between,
    An inward joy in all things heard and seen. These are the sins I fain
          Would have thee take away:
          Malice, and cold disdain,
          Hot anger, sullen hate,
    Scorn of the lowly, envy of the great,
    And discontent that casts a shadow gray
    On all the brightness of the common day. These are the things I prize
          And hold of dearest worth:
          Light of the sapphire skies,
          Peace of the silent hills,
    Shelter of forests, comfort of the grass,
    Music of birds, murmur of little rills,
    Shadows of cloud that swiftly pass,
          And, after showers,
          The smell of flowers
        And of the good brown earth,--
  And best of all, along the way, friendship and mirth. So let me keep
        These treasures of the humble heart
      In true possession, owning them by love;
      And when at last I can no longer move
        Among them freely, but must part
      From the green fields and from the waters clear,
          Let me not creep
    Into some darkened room and hide
    From all that makes the world so bright and dear;
          But throw the windows wide
          To welcome in the light;
      And while I clasp a well-beloved hand,
          Let me once more have sight
      Of the deep sky and the far-smiling land,--
          Then gently fall on sleep,
  And breathe my body back to Nature's care,
  My spirit out to thee, God of the open air. 1904. NARRATIVE POEMS



THE TOILING OF FELIX

A LEGEND ON A NEW SAYING OF JESUS


In the rubbish heaps of the ancient city of Oxyrhynchus, near the
River Nile, a party of English explorers, in the winter of 1897,
discovered a fragment of a papyrus book, written in the second or
third century, and hitherto unknown. This single leaf contained
parts of seven short sentences of Christ, each introduced by the
words, "Jesus says." It is to the fifth of these Sayings of Jesus
that the following poem refers. THE TOILING OF FELIX


I

PRELUDE

        Hear a word that Jesus spake
          Nineteen hundred years ago,
          Where the crimson lilies blow
        Round the blue Tiberian lake:
        There the bread of life He brake,
          Through the fields of harvest walking
          With His lowly comrades, talking
          Of the secret thoughts that feed
          Weary souls in time of need. Art thou hungry? Come and take;
        Hear the word that Jesus spake! 'Tis the sacrament of labour, bread and wine divinely blest;
  Friendship's food and sweet refreshment, strength and courage, joy and
            rest. But this word the Master said
          Long ago and far away,
          Silent and forgotten lay
        Buried with the silent dead,
        Where the sands of Egypt spread
          Sea-like, tawny billows heaping
          Over ancient cities sleeping,
          While the River Nile between
          Rolls its summer flood of green
        Rolls its autumn flood of red:
        There the word the Master said,
  Written on a frail papyrus, wrinkled, scorched by fire, and torn,
  Hidden by God's hand was waiting for its resurrection morn. Now at last the buried word
          By the delving spade is found,
          Sleeping in the quiet ground. Now the call of life is heard:
        Rise again, and like a bird,
          Fly abroad on wings of gladness
          Through the darkness and the sadness,
          Of the toiling age, and sing
          Sweeter than the voice of Spring,
        Till the hearts of men are stirred
        By the music of the word,--
  Gospel for the heavy-laden, answer to the labourer's cry:
  "_Raise the stone, and thou shall find me; cleave the wood and there
            am I._"


II

LEGEND

  Brother-men who look for Jesus, long to see Him close and clear,
  Hearken to the tale of Felix, how he found the Master near. Born in Egypt, 'neath the shadow of the crumbling gods of night,
  He forsook the ancient darkness, turned his young heart toward the Light. Seeking Christ, in vain he waited for the vision of the Lord;
  Vainly pondered many volumes where the creeds of men were stored;

  Vainly shut himself in silence, keeping vigil night and day;
  Vainly haunted shrines and churches where the Christians came to pray. One by one he dropped the duties of the common life of care,
  Broke the human ties that bound him, laid his spirit waste and bare,

  Hoping that the Lord would enter that deserted dwelling-place,
  And reward the loss of all things with the vision of His face. Still the blessed vision tarried; still the light was unrevealed;
  Still the Master, dim and distant, kept His countenance concealed. Fainter grew the hope of finding, wearier grew the fruitless quest;
  Prayer and penitence and fasting gave no comfort, brought no rest. Lingering in the darkened temple, ere the lamp of faith went out,
  Felix knelt before the altar, lonely, sad, and full of doubt. "Hear me, O my Lord and Master," from the altar-step he cried,
  "Let my one desire be granted, let my hope be satisfied! "Only once I long to see Thee, in the fulness of Thy grace:
  Break the clouds that now enfold Thee, with the sunrise of Thy face! "All that men desire and treasure have I counted loss for Thee;
  Every hope have I forsaken, save this one, my Lord to see. "Loosed the sacred bands of friendship, solitary stands my heart;
  Thou shalt be my sole companion when I see Thee as Thou art. "From Thy distant throne in glory, flash upon my inward sight,
  Fill the midnight of my spirit with the splendour of Thy light. "All Thine other gifts and blessings, common mercies, I disown;
  Separated from my brothers, I would see Thy face alone. "I have watched and I have waited as one waiteth for the morn:
  Still the veil is never lifted, still Thou leavest me forlorn. "Now I seek Thee in the desert, where the holy hermits dwell;
  There, beside the saint Serapion, I will find a lonely cell. "There at last Thou wilt be gracious; there Thy presence,
            long-concealed,
  In the solitude and silence to my heart shall be revealed. "Thou wilt come, at dawn or twilight, o'er the rolling waves of sand;
  I shall see Thee close beside me, I shall touch Thy pierced hand. "Lo, Thy pilgrim kneels before Thee; bless my journey with a word;
  Tell me now that if I follow, I shall find Thee, O my Lord!" Felix listened: through the darkness, like a murmur of the wind,
  Came a gentle sound of stillness: "Never faint, and thou shalt find." Long and toilsome was his journey through the heavy land of heat,
  Egypt's blazing sun above him, blistering sand beneath his feet. Patiently he plodded onward, from the pathway never erred,
  Till he reached the river-headland called the Mountain of the Bird. There the tribes of air assemble, once a year, their noisy flock,
  Then, departing, leave a sentinel perched upon the highest rock. Far away, on joyful pinions, over land and sea they fly;
  But the watcher on the summit lonely stands against the sky. There the eremite Serapion in a cave had made his bed;
  There the faithful bands of pilgrims sought his blessing, brought him
            bread. Month by month, in deep seclusion, hidden in the rocky cleft,
  Dwelt the hermit, fasting, praying; once a year the cave he left. On that day a happy pilgrim, chosen out of all the band,
  Won a special sign of favour from the holy hermit's hand. Underneath the narrow window, at the doorway closely sealed,
  While the afterglow of sunset deepened round him, Felix kneeled. "Man of God, of men most holy, thou whose gifts cannot be priced! Grant me thy most precious guerdon; tell me how to find the Christ." Breathless, Felix bent and listened, but no answering voice he heard;
  Darkness folded, dumb and deathlike, round the Mountain of the Bird. Then he said, "The saint is silent; he would teach my soul to wait:
  I will tarry here in patience, like a beggar at his gate." Near the dwelling of the hermit Felix found a rude abode,
  In a shallow tomb deserted, close beside the pilgrim-road. So the faithful pilgrims saw him waiting there without complaint,--
  Soon they learned to call him holy, fed him as they fed the saint. Day by day he watched the sunrise flood the distant plain with gold,
  While the River Nile beneath him, silvery coiling, sea-ward rolled. Night by night he saw the planets range their glittering court on high,
  Saw the moon, with queenly motion, mount her throne and rule the sky. Morn advanced and midnight fled, in visionary pomp attired;
  Never morn and never midnight brought the vision long-desired. Now at last the day is dawning when Serapion makes his gift;
  Felix kneels before the threshold, hardly dares his eyes to lift. Now the cavern door uncloses, now the saint above him stands,
  Blesses him without a word, and leaves a token in his hands. 'Tis the guerdon of thy waiting! Look, thou happy pilgrim, look! Nothing but a tattered fragment of an old papyrus book. Read! perchance the clue to guide thee hidden in the words may lie:
  "_Raise the stone, and thou shalt find me; cleave the wood, and there
            am I._"

  Can it be the mighty Master spake such simple words as these? Can it be that men must seek Him at their toil 'mid rocks and trees? Disappointed, heavy-hearted, from the Mountain of the Bird
  Felix mournfully descended, questioning the Master's word. Not for him a sacred dwelling, far above the haunts of men:
  He must turn his footsteps backward to the common life again. From a quarry near the river, hollowed out amid the hills,
  Rose the clattering voice of labour, clanking hammers, clinking drills. Dust, and noise, and hot confusion made a Babel of the spot:
  There, among the lowliest workers, Felix sought and found his lot. Now he swung the ponderous mallet, smote the iron in the rock--
  Muscles quivering, tingling, throbbing--blow on blow and shock on shock;

  Now he drove the willow wedges, wet them till they swelled and split,
  With their silent strength, the fragment, sent it thundering down the
            pit. Now the groaning tackle raised it; now the rollers made it slide;
  Harnessed men, like beasts of burden, drew it to the river-side. Now the palm-trees must be riven, massive timbers hewn and dressed;
  Rafts to bear the stones in safety on the rushing river's breast. Axe and auger, saw and chisel, wrought the will of man in wood:
  'Mid the many-handed labour Felix toiled, and found it good. Every day the blood ran fleeter through his limbs and round his heart;
  Every night he slept the sweeter, knowing he had done his part. Dreams of solitary saintship faded from him; but, instead,
  Came a sense of daily comfort in the toil for daily bread. Far away, across the river, gleamed the white walls of the town
  Whither all the stones and timbers day by day were floated down. There the workman saw his labour taking form and bearing fruit,
  Like a tree with splendid branches rising from a humble root. Looking at the distant city, temples, houses, domes, and towers,
  Felix cried in exultation: "All that mighty work is ours. "Every toiler in the quarry, every builder on the shore,
  Every chopper in the palm-grove, every raftsman at the oar,

  "Hewing wood and drawing water, splitting stones and cleaving sod,
  All the dusty ranks of labour, in the regiment of God,

  "March together toward His triumph, do the task His hands prepare:
  Honest toil is holy service; faithful work is praise and prayer." While he bore the heat and burden Felix felt the sense of rest
  Flowing softly like a fountain, deep within his weary breast;

  Felt the brotherhood of labour, rising round him like a tide,
  Overflow his heart and join him to the workers at his side. Oft he cheered them with his singing at the breaking of the light,
  Told them tales of Christ at noonday, taught them words of prayer at
            night. Once he bent above a comrade fainting in the mid-day heat,
  Sheltered him with woven palm-leaves, gave him water, cool and sweet. Then it seemed, for one swift moment, secret radiance filled the place;
  Underneath the green palm-branches flashed a look of Jesus' face. Once again, a raftsman, slipping, plunged beneath the stream and sank;
  Swiftly Felix leaped to rescue, caught him, drew him toward the bank--

  Battling with the cruel river, using all his strength to save--
  Did he dream? or was there One beside him walking on the wave? Now at last the work was ended, grove deserted, quarry stilled;
  Felix journeyed to the city that his hands had helped to build. In the darkness of the temple, at the closing hour of day,
  As of old he sought the altar, as of old he knelt to pray:

  "Hear me, O Thou hidden Master! Thou hast sent a word to me;
  It is written--Thy commandment--I have kept it faithfully. "Thou hast bid me leave the visions of the solitary life,
  Bear my part in human labour, take my share in human strife. "I have done Thy bidding, Master; raised the rock and felled the tree,
  Swung the axe and plied the hammer, working every day for Thee. "Once it seemed I saw Thy presence through the bending palm-leaves gleam;
  Once upon the flowing water--Nay, I know not; 'twas a dream! "This I know: Thou hast been near me: more than this I dare not ask. Though I see Thee not, I love Thee. Let me do Thy humblest task!" Through the dimness of the temple slowly dawned a mystic light;
  There the Master stood in glory, manifest to mortal sight:

  Hands that bore the mark of labour, brow that bore the print of care;
  Hands of power, divinely tender; brow of light, divinely fair. "Hearken, good and faithful servant, true disciple, loyal friend! Thou hast followed me and found me; I will keep thee to the end. "Well I know thy toil and trouble; often weary, fainting, worn,
  I have lived the life of labour, heavy burdens I have borne. "Never in a prince's palace have I slept on golden bed,
  Never in a hermit's cavern have I eaten unearned bread. "Born within a lowly stable, where the cattle round me stood,
  Trained a carpenter in Nazareth, I have toiled, and found it good. "They who tread the path of labour follow where my feet have trod;
  They who work without complaining do the holy will of God. "Where the many toil together, there am I among my own;
  Where the tired workman sleepeth, there am I with him alone. "I, the peace that passeth knowledge, dwell amid the daily strife;
  I, the bread of heaven, am broken in the sacrament of life. "Every task, however simple, sets the soul that does it free;
  Every deed of love and mercy, done to man, is done to me. "Thou hast learned the open secret; thou hast come to me for rest;
  With thy burden, in thy labour, thou art Felix, doubly blest. "Nevermore thou needest seek me; I am with thee everywhere;
  _Raise the stone, and thou shall find me; cleave the wood, and
            I am there._"


III

ENVOY

  The legend of Felix is ended, the toiling of Felix is done;
  The Master has paid him his wages, the goal of his journey is won;
  He rests, but he never is idle; a thousand years pass like a day,
  In the glad surprise of that Paradise where work is sweeter than play. Yet often the King of that country comes out from His tireless host,
  And walks in this world of the weary as if He loved it the most;
  For here in the dusty confusion, with eyes that are heavy and dim,
  He meets again the labouring men who are looking and longing for Him. He cancels the curse of Eden, and brings them a blessing instead:
  Blessed are they that labour, for Jesus partakes of their bread. He puts His hand to their burdens, He enters their homes at night:
  Who does his best shall have as a guest the Master of life and light. And courage will come with His presence, and patience return at His
            touch,
  And manifold sins be forgiven to those who love Him much;
  The cries of envy and anger will change to the songs of cheer,
  The toiling age will forget its rage when the Prince of Peace draws near. This is the gospel of labour, ring it, ye bells of the kirk! The Lord of Love came down from above, to live with the men who work. This is the rose that He planted, here in the thorn-curst soil:
  Heaven is blest with perfect rest, but the blessing of Earth is toil. 1898. VERA


I

  A silent world,--yet full of vital joy
  Uttered in rhythmic movements manifold,
  And sunbeams flashing on the face of things
  Like sudden smilings of divine delight,--
  A world of many sorrows too, revealed
  In fading flowers and withering leaves and dark
  Tear-laden clouds, and tearless, clinging mists
  That hung above the earth too sad to weep,--
  A world of fluent change, and changeless flow,
  And infinite suggestion of new thought,
  Reflected in the crystal of the heart,--
  A world of many meanings but no words,
  A silent world was Vera's home. For her
  The inner doors of sound were closely sealed
  The outer portals, delicate as shells
  Suffused with faintest rose of far-off morn,
  Like underglow of daybreak in the sea,--
  The ear-gates of the garden of her soul,
  Shaded by drooping tendrils of brown hair,--
  Waited in vain for messengers to pass,
  And thread the labyrinth with flying feet,
  And swiftly knock upon the inmost door,
  And enter in, and speak the mystic word. But through those gates no message ever came. Only with eyes did she behold and see,--
  With eyes as luminous and bright and brown
  As waters of a woodland river,--eyes
  That questioned so they almost seemed to speak,
  And answered so they almost seemed to hear,--
  Only with wondering eyes did she behold
  The silent splendour of a living world. She saw the great wind ranging freely down
  Interminable archways of the wood,
  While tossing boughs and bending tree-tops hailed
  His coming: but no sea-toned voice of pines,
  No roaring of the oaks, no silvery song
  Of poplars or of birches, followed him. He passed; they waved their arms and clapped their hands;
  There was no sound. The torrents from the hills
  Leaped down their rocky pathways, like wild steeds
  Breaking the yoke and shaking manes of foam. The lowland brooks coiled smoothly through the fields,
  And softly spread themselves in glistening lakes
  Whose ripples merrily danced among the reeds. The standing waves that ever keep their place
  In the swift rapids, curled upon themselves,
  And seemed about to break and never broke;
  And all the wandering waves that fill the sea
  Came buffeting in along the stony shore,
  Or plunging in along the level sands,
  Or creeping in along the winding creeks
  And inlets. Yet from all the ceaseless flow
  And turmoil of the restless element
  Came neither song of joy nor sob of grief;
  For there were many waters, but no voice. Silent the actors all on Nature's stage
  Performed their parts before her watchful eyes,
  Coming and going, making war and love,
  Working and playing, all without a sound. The oxen drew their load with swaying necks;
  The cows came sauntering home along the lane;
  The nodding sheep were led from field to fold
  In mute obedience. Down the woodland track
  The hounds with panting sides and lolling tongues
  Pursued their flying prey in noiseless haste. The birds, the most alive of living things,
  Mated, and built their nests, and reared their young,
  And swam the flood of air like tiny ships
  Rising and falling over unseen waves,
  And, gathering in great navies, bore away
  To North or South, without a note of song. All these were Vera's playmates; and she loved
  To watch them, wondering oftentimes how well
  They knew their parts, and how the drama moved
  So swiftly, smoothly on from scene to scene
  Without confusion. But she sometimes dreamed
  There must be something hidden in the play
  Unknown to her, an utterance of life
  More clear than action and more deep than looks. And this she felt most deeply when she watched
  Her human comrades and the throngs of men,
  Who met and parted oft with moving lips
  That had a meaning more than she could see. She saw a lover bend above a maid,
  With moving lips; and though he touched her not
  A sudden rose of joy bloomed in her face. She saw a hater stand before his foe
  And move his lips; whereat the other shrank
  As if he had been smitten on the mouth. She saw the regiments of toiling men
  Marshalled in ranks and led by moving lips. And once she saw a sight more strange than all:
  A crowd of people sitting charmed and still
  Around a little company of men
  Who touched their hands in measured, rhythmic time
  To curious instruments; a woman stood
  Among them, with bright eyes and heaving breast,
  And lifted up her face and moved her lips. Then Vera wondered at the idle play,
  But when she looked around, she saw the glow
  Of deep delight on every face, as if
  Some visitor from a celestial world
  Had brought glad tidings. But to her alone
  No angel entered, for the choir of sound
  Was vacant in the temple of her soul,
  And worship lacked her golden crown of song. So when by vision baffled and perplexed
  She saw that all the world could not be seen,
  And knew she could not know the whole of life
  Unless a hidden gate should be unsealed,
  She felt imprisoned. In her heart there grew
  The bitter creeping plant of discontent,
  The plant that only grows in prison soil,
  Whose root is hunger and whose fruit is pain. The springs of still delight and tranquil joy
  Were drained as dry as desert dust to feed
  That never-flowering vine, whose tendrils clung
  With strangling touch around the bloom of life
  And made it wither. Vera could not rest
  Within the limits of her silent world;
  Along its dumb and desolate paths she roamed
  A captive, looking sadly for escape. Now in those distant days, and in that land
  Remote, there lived a Master wonderful,
  Who knew the secret of all life, and could,
  With gentle touches and with potent words,
  Open all gates that ever had been sealed,
  And loose all prisoners whom Fate had bound. Obscure he dwelt, not in the wilderness,
  But in a hut among the throngs of men,
  Concealed by meekness and simplicity. And ever as he walked the city streets,
  Or sat in quietude beside the sea,
  Or trod the hillsides and the harvest fields,
  The multitude passed by and knew him not. But there were some who knew, and turned to him
  For help; and unto all who asked, he gave. Thus Vera came, and found him in the field,
  And knew him by the pity in his face. She knelt to him and held him by one hand,
  And laid the other hand upon her lips
  In mute entreaty. Then she lifted up
  The coils of hair that hung about her neck,
  And bared the beauty of the gates of sound,--
  Those virgin gates through which no voice had passed,--
  She made them bare before the Master's sight,
  And looked into the kindness of his face
  With eyes that spoke of all her prisoned pain,
  And told her great desire without a word. The Master waited long in silent thought,
  As one reluctant to bestow a gift,
  Not for the sake of holding back the thing
  Entreated, but because he surely knew
  Of something better that he fain would give
  If only she would ask it. Then he stooped
  To Vera, smiling, touched her ears and spoke:
  "Open, fair gates, and you, reluctant doors,
  Within the ivory labyrinth of the ear,
  Let fall the bar of silence and unfold! Enter, you voices of all living things,
  Enter the garden sealed,--but softly, slowly,
  Not with a noise confused and broken tumult,--
  Come in an order sweet as I command you,
  And bring the double gift of speech and hearing." Vera began to hear. At first the wind
  Breathed a low prelude of the birth of sound,
  As if an organ far away were touched
  By unseen fingers; then the little stream
  That hurried down the hillside, swept the harp
  Of music into merry, tinkling notes;
  And then the lark that poised above her head
  On wings a-quiver, overflowed the air
  With showers of song; and one by one the tones
  Of all things living, in an order sweet,
  Without confusion and with deepening power,
  Entered the garden sealed. And last of all
  The Master's voice, the human voice divine,
  Passed through the gates and called her by her name,
  And Vera heard. II

                  What rapture of new life
  Must come to one for whom a silent world
  Is suddenly made vocal, and whose heart
  By the same magic is awaked at once,
  Without the learner's toil and long delay,
  Out of a night of dumbly moving dreams,
  Into a day that overflows with music! This joy was Vera's; and to her it seemed
  As if a new creative morn had risen
  Upon the earth, and after the full week
  When living things unfolded silently,
  And after the long, quiet Sabbath day,
  When all was still, another day had dawned,
  And through the calm expectancy of heaven
  A secret voice had said, "Let all things speak." The world responded with an instant joy;
  And all the unseen avenues of sound
  Were thronged with varying forms of viewless life. To every living thing a voice was given
  Distinct and personal. The forest trees
  Were not more varied in their shades of green
  Than in their tones of speech; and every bird
  That nested in their branches had a song
  Unknown to other birds and all his own. The waters spoke a hundred dialects
  Of one great language; now with pattering fall
  Of raindrops on the glistening leaves, and now
  With steady roar of rivers rushing down
  To meet the sea, and now with rhythmic throb
  And measured tumult of tempestuous waves,
  And now with lingering lisp of creeping tides,--
  The manifold discourse of many waters. But most of all the human voice was full
  Of infinite variety, and ranged
  Along the scale of life's experience
  With changing tones, and notes both sweet and sad,
  All fitted to express some unseen thought,
  Some vital motion of the hidden heart. So Vera listened with her new-born sense
  To all the messengers that passed the gates,
  In measureless delight and utter trust,
  Believing that they brought a true report
  From every living thing of its true life,
  And hoping that at last they would make clear
  The mystery and the meaning of the world. But soon there came a trouble in her joy,
  A note discordant that dissolved the chord
  And broke the bliss of hearing into pain. Not from the harsher sounds and voices wild
  Of anger and of anguish, that reveal
  The secret strife in nature, and confess
  The touch of sorrow on the heart of life,--
  From these her trouble came not. For in these,
  However sad, she felt the note of truth,
  And truth, though sad, is always musical. The raging of the tempest-ridden sea,
  The crash of thunder, and the hollow moan
  Of winds complaining round the mountain-crags,
  The shrill and quavering cry of birds of prey,
  The fiercer roar of conflict-loving beasts,--
  All these wild sounds are potent in their place
  Within life's mighty symphony; the charm
  Of truth attunes them, and the hearing ear
  Finds pleasure in their rude sincerity. Even the broken and tumultuous noise
  That rises from great cities, where the heart
  Of human toil is beating heavily
  With ceaseless murmurs of the labouring pulse,
  Is not a discord; for it speaks to life
  Of life unfeigned, and full of hopes and fears,
  And touched through all the trouble of its notes
  With something real and therefore glorious. One voice alone of all that sound on earth,
  Is hateful to the soul, and full of pain,--
  The voice of falsehood. So when Vera heard
  This mocking voice, and knew that it was false;
  When first she learned that human lips can speak
  The thing that is not, and betray the ear
  Of simple trust with treachery of words;
  The joy of hearing withered in her heart. For now she felt that faithless messengers
  Could pass the open and unguarded gates
  Of sound, and bring a message all untrue,
  Or half a truth that makes the deadliest lie,
  Or idle babble, neither false nor true,
  But hollow to the heart, and meaningless. She heard the flattering voices of deceit,
  That mask the hidden purposes of men
  With fair attire of favourable words,
  And hide the evil in the guise of good:
  The voices vain and decorous and smooth,
  That fill the world with empty-hearted talk;
  The foolish voices, wandering and confused,
  That never clearly speak the thing they would,
  But ramble blindly round their true intent
  And tangle sense in hopeless coils of sound,--
  All these she heard, and with a deep mistrust
  Began to doubt the value of her gift. It seemed as if the world, the living world,
  Sincere, and vast, and real, were still concealed,
  And she, within the prison of her soul,
  Still waiting silently to hear the voice
  Of perfect knowledge and of perfect peace. So with the burden of her discontent
  She turned to seek the Master once again,
  And found him sitting in the market-place,
  Half-hidden in the shadow of a porch,
  Alone among the careless crowd. She spoke:
  "Thy gift was great, dear Master, and my heart
  Has thanked thee many times because I hear
  But I have learned that hearing is not all;
  For underneath the speech of men, there flows
  Another current of their hidden thoughts;
  Behind the mask of language I perceive
  The eyes of things unsaid. Touch me again,
  O Master, with thy liberating hand,
  And free me from the bondage of deceit. Open another gate, and let me hear
  The secret thoughts and purposes of men;
  For only thus my heart will be at rest,
  And only thus, at last, I shall perceive
  The mystery and the meaning of the world." The Master's face was turned aside from her;
  His eyes looked far away, as if he saw
  Something beyond her sight; and yet she knew
  That he was listening; for her pleading voice
  No sooner ceased than he put forth his hand
  To touch her brow, and very gently spoke:
  "Thou seekest for thyself a wondrous gift,--
  The opening of the second gate, a gift
  That many wise men have desired in vain:
  But some have found it,--whether well or ill
  For their own peace, they have attained the power
  To hear unspoken thoughts of other men. And thou hast begged this gift? Thou shalt receive,--
  Not knowing what thou seekest,--it is thine:
  The second gate is open! Thou shalt hear
  All that men think and feel within their hearts:
  Thy prayer is granted, daughter, go thy way! But if thou findest sorrow on this path,
  Come back again,--there is a path to peace." III

  Beyond our power of vision, poets say,
  There is another world of forms unseen,
  Yet visible to purer eyes than ours. And if the crystal of our sight were clear,
  We should behold the mountain-slopes of cloud,
  The moving meadows of the untilled sea,
  The groves of twilight and the dales of dawn,
  And every wide and lonely field of air,
  More populous than cities, crowded close
  With living creatures of all shapes and hues. But if that sight were ours, the things that now
  Engage our eyes would seem but dull and dim
  Beside the wonders of our new-found world,
  And we should be amazed and overwhelmed
  Not knowing how to use the plenitude
  Of vision. So in Vera's soul, at first,
  The opening of the second gate of sound
  Let in confusion like a whirling flood. The murmur of a myriad-throated mob;
  The trampling of an army through a place
  Where echoes hide; the sudden, whistling flight
  Of an innumerable flock of birds
  Along the highway of the midnight sky;
  The many-whispered rustling of the reeds
  Beneath the passing feet of all the winds;
  The long-drawn, inarticulate, wailing cry
  Of million-pebbled beaches when the lash
  Of stormy waves is drawn across their back,--
  All these were less bewildering than to hear
  What now she heard at once: the tangled sound
  Of all that moves within the minds of men. For now there was no measured flow of words
  To mark the time; nor any interval
  Of silence to repose the listening ear. But through the dead of night, and through the calm
  Of weary noon-tide, through the solemn hush
  That fills the temple in the pause of praise,
  And through the breathless awe in rooms of death,
  She heard the ceaseless motion and the stir
  Of never-silent hearts, that fill the world
  With interwoven thoughts of good and ill,
  With mingled music of delight and grief,
  With songs of love, and bitter cries of hate,
  With hymns of faith, and dirges of despair,
  And murmurs deeper and more vague than all,--
  Thoughts that are born and die without a name,
  Or rather, never die, but haunt the soul,
  With sad persistence, till a name is given. These Vera heard, at first with mind perplexed
  And half-benumbed by the disordered sound. But soon a clearer sense began to pierce
  The cloudy turmoil with discerning power. She learned to know the tones of human thought
  As plainly as she knew the tones of speech. She could divide the evil from the good,
  Interpreting the language of the mind,
  And tracing every feeling like a thread
  Within the mystic web the passions weave
  From heart to heart around the living world. But when at last the Master's second gift
  Was perfected within her, and she heard
  And understood the secret thoughts of men,
  A sadness fell upon her, and the load
  Of insupportable knowledge pressed her down
  With weary wishes to know more, or less. For all she knew was like a broken word
  Inscribed upon the fragment of a ring;
  And all she heard was like a broken strain
  Preluding music that is never played. Then she remembered in her sad unrest
  The Master's parting word,--"a path to peace,"--
  And turned again to seek him with her grief. She found him in a hollow of the hills,
  Beside a little spring that issued forth
  Beneath the rocks and filled a mossy cup
  With never-failing water. There he sat,
  With waiting looks that welcomed her afar. "I know that thou hast heard, my child," he said,
  "For all the wonder of the world of sound
  Is written in thy face. But hast thou heard,
  Among the many voices, one of peace? And is thy heart that hears the secret thoughts,
  The hidden wishes and desires of men,
  Content with hearing? Art thou satisfied?" "Nay, Master," she replied, "thou knowest well
  That I am not at rest, nor have I heard
  The voice of perfect peace; but what I hear
  Brings me disquiet and a troubled mind. The evil voices in the souls of men,
  Voices of rage and cruelty and fear
  Have not dismayed me; for I have believed
  The voices of the good, the kind, the true,
  Are more in number and excel in strength. There is more love than hate, more hope than fear,
  In the deep throbbing of the human heart. But while I listen to the troubled sound,
  One thing torments me, and destroys my rest
  And presses me with dull, unceasing pain. For out of all the minds of all mankind,
  There rises evermore a questioning voice
  That asks the meaning of this mighty world
  And finds no answer,--asks, and asks again,
  With patient pleading or with wild complaint,
  But wakens no response, except the sound
  Of other questions, wandering to and fro,
  From other souls in doubt. And so this voice
  Persists above all others that I hear,
  And binds them up together into one,
  Until the mingled murmur of the world
  Sounds through the inner temple of my heart
  Like an eternal question, vainly asked
  By every human soul that thinks and feels. This is the heaviness that weighs me down,
  And this the pain that will not let me rest. Therefore, dear Master, shut the gates again,
  And let me live in silence as before! Or else,--and if there is indeed a gate
  Unopened yet, through which I might receive
  An answer in the voice of perfect peace--"

  She ceased; and in her upward faltering tone
  The question echoed. Then the Master said:
  "There is another gate, not yet unclosed. For through the outer portal of the ear
  Only the outer voice of things may pass;
  And through the middle doorway of the mind
  Only the half-formed voice of human thoughts,
  Uncertain and perplexed with endless doubt;
  But through the inmost gate the spirit hears
  The voice of that great Spirit who is Life. Beneath the tones of living things He breathes
  A deeper tone than ever ear hath heard;
  And underneath the troubled thoughts of men
  He thinks forever, and His thought is peace. Behold, I touch thee once again, my child:
  The third and last of those three hidden gates
  That closed around thy soul and shut thee in,
  Is open now, and thou shalt truly hear." Then Vera heard. The spiritual gate
  Was opened softly as a full-blown flower
  Unfolds its heart to welcome in the dawn,
  And on her listening face there shone a light
  Of still amazement and completed joy
  In the full gift of hearing. What she heard
  I cannot tell; nor could she ever tell
  In words; because all human words are vain. There is no speech nor language, to express
  The secret messages of God, that make
  Perpetual music in the hearing heart. Below the voice of waters, and above
  The wandering voice of winds, and underneath
  The song of birds, and all the varying tones
  Of living things that fill the world with sound,
  God spoke to her, and what she heard was peace. So when the Master questioned, "Dost thou hear?" She answered, "Yea, at last I hear." And then
  He asked her once again, "What hearest thou? What means the voice of Life?" She answered, "Love! For love is life, and they who do not love
  Are not alive. But every soul that loves,
  Lives in the heart of God and hears Him speak." 1898. ANOTHER CHANCE

A DRAMATIC LYRIC


  Come, give me back my life again, you heavy-handed Death! Uncrook your fingers from my throat, and let me draw my breath. You do me wrong to take me now--too soon for me to die--
  Ah, loose me from this clutching pain, and hear the reason why. I know I've had my forty years, and wasted every one;
  And yet, I tell you honestly, my life is just begun;
  I've walked the world like one asleep, a dreamer in a trance;
  But now you've gripped me wide awake--I want another chance. My dreams were always beautiful, my thoughts were high and fine;
  No life was ever lived on earth to match those dreams of mine. And would you wreck them unfulfilled? What folly, nay, what crime! You rob the world, you waste a soul; give me a little time. You'll hear me? Yes, I'm sure you will, my hope is not in vain:
  I feel the even pulse of peace, the sweet relief from pain;
  The black fog rolls away from me; I'm free once more to plan:
  Another chance is all I need to prove myself a man! *       *       *       *       *

  The world is full of warfare 'twixt the evil and the good;
  I watched the battle from afar as one who understood
  The shouting and confusion, the bloody, blundering fight--
  How few there are that see it clear, how few that wage it right! The captains flushed with foolish pride, the soldiers pale with fear,
  The faltering flags, the feeble fire from ranks that swerve and veer,
  The wild mistakes, the dismal doubts, the coward hearts that flee--
  The good cause needs a nobler knight to win the victory. A man whose soul is pure and strong, whose sword is bright and keen,
  Who knows the splendour of the fight and what its issues mean;
  Who never takes one step aside, nor halts, though hope be dim,
  But cleaves a pathway thro' the strife, and bids men follow him. No blot upon his stainless shield, no weakness in his arm;
  No sign of trembling in his face to break his valour's charm:
  A man like this could stay the flight and lead the wavering line;
  Ah, give me but a year of life--I'll make that glory mine! *       *       *       *       *

  Religion? Yes, I know it well; I've heard its prayers and creeds,
  And seen men put them all to shame with poor, half-hearted deeds. They follow Christ, but far away; they wander and they doubt. I'll serve him in a better way, and live his precepts out. You see, I waited just for this; I could not be content
  To own a feeble, faltering faith with human weakness blent. Too many runners in the race move slowly, stumble, fall;
  But I will run so straight and swift I shall outstrip them all. Oh, think what it will mean to men, amid their foolish strife,
  To see the clear, unshadowed light of one true Christian life,
  Without a touch of selfishness, without a taint of sin,--
  With one short month of such a life a new world would begin! *       *       *       *       *

  And love!--I often dream of that--the treasure of the earth;
  How little they who use the coin have realised its worth! 'Twill pay all debts, enrich all hearts, and make all joys secure. But love, to do its perfect work, must be sincere and pure. My heart is full of virgin gold. I'll pour it out and spend
  My hidden wealth with open hand on all who call me friend. Not one shall miss the kindly deed, the largess of relief,
  The generous fellowship of joy, the sympathy of grief. I'll say the loyal, helpful things that make life sweet and fair,
  I'll pay the gratitude I owe for human love and care. Perhaps I've been at fault sometimes--I'll ask to be forgiven,
  And make this little room of mine seem like a bit of heaven. For one by one I'll call my friends to stand beside my bed;
  I'll speak the true and tender words so often left unsaid;
  And every heart shall throb and glow, all coldness melt away
  Around my altar-fire of love--ah, give me but one day! *       *       *       *       *

  What's that? I've had another day, and wasted it again? A priceless day in empty dreams, another chance in vain? Thou fool--this night--it's very dark--the last--this choking breath--
  One prayer--have mercy on a dreamer's soul--God, this is death! A LEGEND OF SERVICE


  It pleased the Lord of Angels (praise His name!) To hear, one day, report from those who came
  With pitying sorrow, or exultant joy,
  To tell of earthly tasks in His employ. For some were grieved because they saw how slow
  The stream of heavenly love on earth must flow;
  And some were glad because their eyes had seen,
  Along its banks, fresh flowers and living green. At last, before the whiteness of the throne
  The youngest angel, Asmiel, stood alone;
  Nor glad, nor sad, but full of earnest thought,
  And thus his tidings to the Master brought
  "Lord, in the city Lupon I have found
  Three servants of thy holy name, renowned
  Above their fellows. One is very wise,
  With thoughts that ever range beyond the skies;
  And one is gifted with the golden speech
  That makes men gladly hear when he will teach;
  And one, with no rare gift or grace endued,
  Has won the people's love by doing good. With three such saints Lupon is trebly blest;
  But, Lord, I fain would know, which loves Thee best?" Then spake the Lord of Angels, to whose look
  The hearts of all are like an open book:
  "In every soul the secret thought I read,
  And well I know who loves me best indeed. But every life has pages vacant still,
  Whereon a man may write the thing he will;
  Therefore I read the record, day by day,
  And wait for hearts untaught to learn my way. But thou shalt go to Lupon, to the three
  Who serve me there, and take this word from me:
  Tell each of them his Master bids him go
  Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow;
  There he shall find a certain task for me:
  But what, I do not tell to them nor thee. Give thou the message, make my word the test,
  And crown for me the one who loves me best." Silent the angel stood, with folded hands,
  To take the imprint of his Lord's commands;
  Then drew one breath, obedient and elate,
  And passed the self-same hour, through Lupon's gate. *       *       *       *       *

  First to the Temple door he made his way;
  And there, because it was a holy-day,
  He saw the folk in thousands thronging, stirred
  By ardent thirst to hear the preacher's word. Then, while the people whispered Bernol's name,
  Through aisles that hushed behind him Bernol came;
  Strung to the keenest pitch of conscious might,
  With lips prepared and firm, and eyes alight. One moment at the pulpit step he knelt
  In silent prayer, and on his shoulder felt
  The angel's hand:--"The Master bids thee go
  Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow,
  To serve Him there." Then Bernol's hidden face
  Went white as death, and for about the space
  Of ten slow heart-beats there was no reply;
  Till Bernol looked around and whispered, "_Why?_"
  But answer to his question came there none;
  The angel sighed, and with a sigh was gone. *       *       *       *       *

  Within the humble house where Malvin spent
  His studious years, on holy things intent,
  Sweet stillness reigned; and there the angel found
  The saintly sage immersed in thought profound,
  Weaving with patient toil and willing care
  A web of wisdom, wonderful and fair:
  A seamless robe for Truth's great bridal meet,
  And needing but one thread to be complete. Then Asmiel touched his hand, and broke the thread
  Of fine-spun thought, and very gently said,
  "The One of whom thou thinkest bids thee go
  Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow,
  To serve Him there." With sorrow and surprise
  Malvin looked up, reluctance in his eyes. The broken thought, the strangeness of the call,
  The perilous passage of the mountain-wall,
  The solitary journey, and the length
  Of ways unknown, too great for his frail strength,
  Appalled him. With a doubtful brow
  He scanned the doubtful task, and muttered "_How?_"
  But Asmiel answered, as he turned to go,
  With cold, disheartened voice, "I do not know." *       *       *       *       *

  Now as he went, with fading hope, to seek
  The third and last to whom God bade him speak,
  Scarce twenty steps away whom should he meet
  But Fermor, hurrying cheerful down the street,
  With ready heart that faced his work like play,
  And joyed to find it greater every day! The angel stopped him with uplifted hand,
  And gave without delay his Lord's command:
  "He whom thou servest here would have thee go
  Alone to Spiran's huts, across the snow,
  To serve Him there." Ere Asmiel breathed again
  The eager answer leaped to meet him, "_When?_"

  The angel's face with inward joy grew bright,
  And all his figure glowed with heavenly light;
  He took the golden circlet from his brow
  And gave the crown to Fermor, answering, "Now! For thou hast met the Master's hidden test,
  And I have found the man who loves Him best. Not thine, nor mine, to question or reply
  When He commands us, asking 'how?' or 'why?' He knows the cause; His ways are wise and just;
  Who serves the King must serve with perfect trust." February, 1902. THE WHITE BEES


I

LEGEND

  Long ago Apollo called to Aristaeus, youngest of the shepherds,
    Saying, "I will make you keeper of my bees." Golden were the hives and golden was the honey; golden, too, the music
    Where the honey-makers hummed among the trees. Happy Aristaeus loitered in the garden, wandered in the orchard,
    Careless and contented, indolent and free;
  Lightly took his labour, lightly took his pleasure, till the fated moment
    When across his pathway came Eurydice. Then her eyes enkindled burning love within him; drove him wild with
            longing
    For the perfect sweetness of her flower-like face;
  Eagerly he followed, while she fled before him, over mead and mountain,
    On through field and forest, in a breathless race. But the nymph, in flying, trod upon a serpent; like a dream she vanished;
    Pluto's chariot bore her down among the dead! Lonely Aristaeus, sadly home returning, found his garden empty,
    All the hives deserted, all the music fled. Mournfully bewailing,--"Ah, my honey-makers, where have you departed?" Far and wide he sought them over sea and shore;
  Foolish is the tale that says he ever found them, brought them home in
            triumph,--
    Joys that once escape us fly for evermore. Yet I dream that somewhere, clad in downy whiteness, dwell the
            honey-makers,
    In aerial gardens that no mortal sees:
  And at times returning, lo, they flutter round us, gathering mystic
            harvest,--
    So I weave the legend of the long-lost bees. II

THE SWARMING OF THE BEES

  Who can tell the hiding of the white bees' nest? Who can trace the guiding of their swift home flight? Far would be his riding on a life-long quest:
    Surely ere it ended would his beard grow white. Never in the coming of the rose-red Spring,
    Never in the passing of the wine-red Fall,
  May you hear the humming of the white bee's wing
    Murmur o'er the meadow ere the night bells call. Wait till winter hardens in the cold gray sky,
    Wait till leaves are fallen and the brooks all freeze,
  Then above the gardens where the dead flowers lie,
    Swarm the merry millions of the wild white bees. Out of the high-built airy hive,
        Deep in the clouds that veil the sun,
        Look how the first of the swarm arrive;
        Timidly venturing, one by one,
        Down through the tranquil air,
        Wavering here and there,
        Large, and lazy in flight,--
        Caught by a lift of the breeze,
        Tangled among the naked trees,--
        Dropping then, without a sound,
        Feather-white, feather-light,
        To their rest on the ground. Thus the swarming is begun. Count the leaders, every one
        Perfect as a perfect star
        Till the slow descent is done. Look beyond them, see how far
        Down the vistas dim and gray,
        Multitudes are on the way. Now a sudden brightness
        Dawns within the sombre day,
        Over fields of whiteness;
        And the sky is swiftly alive
        With the flutter and the flight
        Of the shimmering bees, that pour
        From the hidden door of the hive
        Till you can count no more. Now on the branches of hemlock and pine
  Thickly they settle and cluster and swing,
  Bending them low; and the trellised vine
  And the dark elm-boughs are traced with a line
  Of beauty wherever the white bees cling. Now they are hiding the wrecks of the flowers,
      Softly, softly, covering all,
  Over the grave of the summer hours
      Spreading a silver pall. Now they are building the broad roof ledge,
  Into a cornice smooth and fair,
  Moulding the terrace, from edge to edge,
  Into the sweep of a marble stair. Wonderful workers, swift and dumb,
  Numberless myriads, still they come,
  Thronging ever faster, faster, faster! Where is their queen? Who is their master? The gardens are faded, the fields are frore,--
  What is the honey they toil to store
  In the desolate day, where no blossoms gleam? _Forgetfulness and a dream!_

  But now the fretful wind awakes;
  I hear him girding at the trees;
  He strikes the bending boughs, and shakes
  The quiet clusters of the bees
      To powdery drift;
    He tosses them away,
    He drives them like spray;
  He makes them veer and shift
    Around his blustering path. In clouds blindly whirling,
    In rings madly swirling,
    Full of crazy wrath,
  So furious and fast they fly
  They blur the earth and blot the sky
      In wild, white mirk. They fill the air with frozen wings
  And tiny, angry, icy stings;
  They blind the eyes, and choke the breath,
  They dance a maddening dance of death
      Around their work,
  Sweeping the cover from the hill,
  Heaping the hollows deeper still,
  Effacing every line and mark,
  And swarming, storming in the dark
      Through the long night;
  Until, at dawn, the wind lies down
      Weary of fight;
  The last torn cloud, with trailing gown,
  Passes the open gates of light;
  And the white bees are lost in flight. Look how the landscape glitters wide and still,
      Bright with a pure surprise! The day begins with joy, and all past ill,
      Buried in white oblivion, lies
  Beneath the snow-drifts under crystal skies. New hope, new love, new life, new cheer,
    Flow in the sunrise beam,--
    The gladness of Apollo when he sees,
  Upon the bosom of the wintry year,
  The honey-harvest of his wild white bees,
     _Forgetfulness and a dream!_


III

LEGEND

  Listen, my beloved, while the silver morning, like a tranquil vision,
    Fills the world around us and our hearts with peace;
  Quiet is the close of Aristaeus' legend, happy is the ending--
    Listen while I tell you how he found release. Many months he wandered far away in sadness, desolately thinking
    Only of the vanished joys he could not find;
  Till the great Apollo, pitying his shepherd, loosed him from the burden
    Of a dark, reluctant, backward-looking mind. Then he saw around him all the changeful beauty of the changing seasons,
    In the world-wide regions where his journey lay;
  Birds that sang to cheer him, flowers that bloomed beside him, stars that
            shone to guide him,--
    Traveller's joy was plenty all along the way! Everywhere he journeyed strangers made him welcome, listened while he
            taught them
    Secret lore of field and forest he had learned:
  How to train the vines and make the olives fruitful; how to guard the
            sheepfolds;
    How to stay the fever when the dog-star burned. Friendliness and blessing followed in his footsteps; richer were the
            harvests,
    Happier the dwellings, wheresoe'er he came;
  Little children loved him, and he left behind him, in the hour of
            parting,
    Memories of kindness and a god-like name. So he travelled onward, desolate no longer, patient in his seeking,
    Reaping all the wayside comfort of his quest;
  Till at last in Thracia, high upon Mount Haemus, far from human dwelling,
    Weary Aristaeus laid him down to rest. Then the honey-makers, clad in downy whiteness, fluttered soft around
            him,
    Wrapt him in a dreamful slumber pure and deep. This is life, beloved: first a sheltered garden, then a troubled journey,
    Joy and pain of seeking,--and at last we sleep! 1905. NEW YEAR'S EVE


I

  The other night I had a dream, most clear
  And comforting, complete
  In every line, a crystal sphere,
  And full of intimate and secret cheer. Therefore I will repeat
  That vision, dearest heart, to you,
  As of a thing not feigned, but very true,
  Yes, true as ever in my life befell;
  And you, perhaps, can tell
  Whether my dream was really sad or sweet. II

  The shadows flecked the elm-embowered street
  I knew so well, long, long ago;
  And on the pillared porch where Marguerite
  Had sat with me, the moonlight lay like snow. But she, my comrade and my friend of youth,
  Most gaily wise,
  Most innocently loved,--
  She of the blue-gray eyes
  That ever smiled and ever spoke the truth,--
  From that familiar dwelling, where she moved
  Like mirth incarnate in the years before,
  Had gone into the hidden house of Death. I thought the garden wore
  White mourning for her blessed innocence,
  And the syringa's breath
  Came from the corner by the fence
  Where she had made her rustic seat,
  With fragrance passionate, intense,
  As if it breathed a sigh for Marguerite. My heart was heavy with a sense
  Of something good for ever gone. I sought
  Vainly for some consoling thought,
  Some comfortable word that I could say
  To her sad father, whom I visited again
  For the first time since she had gone away. The bell rang shrill and lonely,--then
  The door was opened, and I sent my name
  To him,--but ah! 'twas Marguerite who came! There in the dear old dusky room she stood
  Beneath the lamp, just as she used to stand,
  In tender mocking mood. "You did not ask for me," she said,
  "And so I will not let you take my hand;
  But I must hear what secret talk you planned
  With father. Come, my friend, be good,
  And tell me your affairs of state:
  Why you have stayed away and made me wait
  So long. Sit down beside me here,--
  And, do you know, it seems a year
  Since we have talked together,--why so late?" Amazed, incredulous, confused with joy
  I hardly dared to show,
  And stammering like a boy,
  I took the place she showed me at her side;
  And then the talk flowed on with brimming tide
  Through the still night,
  While she with influence light
  Controlled it, as the moon the flood. She knew where I had been, what I had done,
  What work was planned, and what begun;
  My troubles, failures, fears she understood,
  And touched them with a heart so kind,
  That every care was melted from my mind,
  And every hope grew bright,
  And life seemed moving on to happy ends. (Ah, what self-beggared fool was he
  That said a woman cannot be
  The very best of friends?) Then there were memories of old times,
  Recalled with many a gentle jest;
  And at the last she brought the book of rhymes
  We made together, trying to translate
  The Songs of Heine (hers were always best). "Now come," she said,
  "To-night we will collaborate
  Again; I'll put you to the test. Here's one I never found the way to do,--
  The simplest are the hardest ones, you know,--
  I give this song to you." And then she read:
       _Mein Kind, wir waren Kinder,
        Zwei Kinder, jung und froh._

       *       *       *       *       *

  But all the while, a silent question stirred
  Within me, though I dared not speak the word:
  "Is it herself, and is she truly here,
  And was I dreaming when I heard
  That she was dead last year? Or was it true, and is she but a shade
  Who brings a fleeting joy to eye and ear,
  Cold though so kind, and will she gently fade
  When her sweet ghostly part is played
  And the light-curtain falls at dawn of day?" But while my heart was troubled by this fear
  So deeply that I could not speak it out,
  Lest all my happiness should disappear,
  I thought me of a cunning way
  To hide the question and dissolve the doubt. "Will you not give me now your hand,
  Dear Marguerite," I asked, "to touch and hold,
  That by this token I may understand
  You are the same true friend you were of old?" She answered with a smile so bright and calm
  It seemed as if I saw the morn arise
  In the deep heaven of her eyes;
  And smiling so, she laid her palm
  In mine. Dear God, it was not cold
  But warm with vital heat! "You live!" I cried, "you live, dear Marguerite!" When I awoke; but strangely comforted,
  Although I knew again that she was dead. III

  Yes, there's the dream! And was it sweet or sad? Dear mistress of my waking and my sleep,
  Present reward of all my heart's desire,
  Watching with me beside the winter fire,
  Interpret now this vision that I had. But while you read the meaning, let me keep
  The touch of you: for the Old Year with storm
  Is passing through the midnight, and doth shake
  The corners of the house,--and oh! my heart would break
  Unless both dreaming and awake
  My hand could feel your hand was warm, warm, warm! 1905. THE VAIN KING


  In robes of Tyrian blue the King was drest,
  A jewelled collar shone upon his breast,
  A giant ruby glittered in his crown:
  Lord of rich lands and many a splendid town,
  In him the glories of an ancient line
  Of sober kings, who ruled by right divine,
  Were centred; and to him with loyal awe
  The people looked for leadership and law. Ten thousand knights, the safeguard of the land,
  Were like a single sword within his hand;
  A hundred courts, with power of life and death,
  Proclaimed decrees of justice by his breath;
  And all the sacred growths that men had known
  Of order and of rule upheld his throne. Proud was the King: yet not with such a heart
  As fits a man to play a royal part. Not his the pride that honours as a trust
  The right to rule, the duty to be just:
  Not his the dignity that bends to bear
  The monarch's yoke, the master's load of care,
  And labours like the peasant at his gate,
  To serve the people and protect the State. Another pride was his, and other joys:
  To him the crown and sceptre were but toys,
  With which he played at glory's idle game,
  To please himself and win the wreaths of fame. The throne his fathers held from age to age,
  To his ambition seemed a fitting stage
  Built for King Martin to display at will,
  His mighty strength and universal skill. No conscious child, that, spoiled with praising, tries
  At every step to win admiring eyes,
  No favourite mountebank, whose acting draws
  From gaping crowds the thunder of applause,
  Was vainer than the King: his only thirst
  Was to be hailed, in every race, the first. When tournament was held, in knightly guise
  The King would ride the lists and win the prize;
  When music charmed the court, with golden lyre
  The King would take the stage and lead the choir;
  In hunting, his the lance to slay the boar;
  In hawking, see his falcon highest soar;
  In painting, he would wield the master's brush;
  In high debate,--"the King is speaking! Hush!" Thus, with a restless heart, in every field
  He sought renown, and made his subjects yield. But while he played the petty games of life
  His kingdom fell a prey to inward strife;
  Corruption through the court unheeded crept,
  And on the seat of honour justice slept. The strong trod down the weak; the helpless poor
  Groaned under burdens grievous to endure;
  The nation's wealth was spent in vain display,
  And weakness wore the nation's heart away. Yet think not Earth is blind to human woes--
  Man has more friends and helpers than he knows;
  And when a patient people are oppressed,
  The land that bore them feels it in her breast. Spirits of field and flood, of heath and hill,
  Are grieved and angry at the spreading ill;
  The trees complain together in the night,
  Voices of wrath are heard along the height,
  And secret vows are sworn, by stream and strand,
  To bring the tyrant low and free the land. But little recked the pampered King of these;
  He heard no voice but such as praise and please. Flattered and fooled, victor in every sport,
  One day he wandered idly with his court
  Beside the river, seeking to devise
  New ways to show his skill to wondering eyes. There in the stream a patient angler stood,
  And cast his line across the rippling flood. His silver spoil lay near him on the green:
  "Such fish," the courtiers cried, "were never seen! Three salmon longer than a cloth-yard shaft--
  This man must be the master of his craft!" "An easy art!" the jealous King replied:
  "Myself could learn it better, if I tried,
  And catch a hundred larger fish a week--
  Wilt thou accept the challenge, fellow? Speak!" The angler turned, came near, and bent his knee:
  "'Tis not for kings to strive with such as me;
  Yet if the King commands it, I obey. But one condition of the strife I pray:
  The fisherman who brings the least to land
  Shall do whate'er the other may command." Loud laughed the King: "A foolish fisher thou! For I shall win, and rule thee then as now." Then to Prince John, a sober soul, sedate
  And slow, King Martin left the helm of State,
  While to the novel game with eager zest
  He all his time and all his powers addressed. Sure such a sight was never seen before! In robe and crown the monarch trod the shore;
  His golden hooks were decked with feathers fine,
  His jewelled reel ran out a silken line. With kingly strokes he flogged the crystal stream;
  Far-off the salmon saw his tackle gleam;
  Careless of kings, they eyed with calm disdain
  The gaudy lure, and Martin fished in vain. On Friday, when the week was almost spent,
  He scanned his empty creel with discontent,
  Called for a net, and cast it far and wide,
  And drew--a thousand minnows from the tide! Then came the angler to conclude the match,
  And at the monarch's feet spread out his catch--
  A hundred salmon, greater than before. "I win!" he cried: "the King must pay the score." Then Martin, angry, threw his tackle down:
  "Rather than lose this game I'd lose my crown!" "Nay, thou hast lost them both," the angler said;
  And as he spoke a wondrous light was shed
  Around his form; he dropped his garments mean,
  And in his place the River-god was seen. "Thy vanity has brought thee in my power,
  And thou must pay the forfeit at this hour:
  For thou hast shown thyself a royal fool,
  Too proud to angle, and too vain to rule,
  Eager to win in every trivial strife,--
  Go! Thou shalt fish for minnows all thy life!" Wrathful, the King the magic sentence heard;
  He strove to answer, but he only _chirr-r-ed_:
  His royal robe was changed to wings of blue,
  His crown a ruby crest,--away he flew! So every summer day along the stream
  The vain King-fisher darts, an azure gleam,
  And scolds the angler with a mocking scream. April, 1904. THE FOOLISH FIR-TREE


     _A tale that the poet Rueckert told
      To German children, in days of old;
      Disguised in a random, rollicking rhyme
      Like a merry mummer of ancient time,
      And sent, in its English dress, to please
      The little folk of the Christmas trees._


  A little fir grew in the midst of the wood
  Contented and happy, as young trees should. His body was straight and his boughs were clean;
  And summer and winter the bountiful sheen
  Of his needles bedecked him, from top to root,
  In a beautiful, all-the-year, evergreen suit. But a trouble came into his heart one day,
  When he saw that the other trees were gay
  In the wonderful raiment that summer weaves
  Of manifold shapes and kinds of leaves:
  He looked at his needles so stiff and small,
  And thought that his dress was the poorest of all. Then jealousy clouded the little tree's mind,
  And he said to himself, "It was not very kind
  To give such an ugly old dress to a tree! If the fays of the forest would only ask me,
  I'd tell them how I should like to be dressed,--
  In a garment of gold, to bedazzle the rest!" So he fell asleep, but his dreams were bad. When he woke in the morning, his heart was glad;
  For every leaf that his boughs could hold
  Was made of the brightest beaten gold. I tell you, children, the tree was proud;
  He was something above the common crowd;
  And he tinkled his leaves, as if he would say
  To a pedlar who happened to pass that way,
  "Just look at me! Don't you think I am fine? And wouldn't you like such a dress as mine?" "Oh, yes!" said the man, "and I really guess
  I must fill my pack with your beautiful dress." So he picked the golden leaves with care,
  And left the little tree shivering there. "Oh, why did I wish for golden leaves?" The fir-tree said, "I forgot that thieves
  Would be sure to rob me in passing by. If the fairies would give me another try,
  I'd wish for something that cost much less,
  And be satisfied with glass for my dress!" Then he fell asleep; and, just as before,
  The fairies granted his wish once more. When the night was gone, and the sun rose clear,
  The tree was a crystal chandelier;
  And it seemed, as he stood in the morning light,
  That his branches were covered with jewels bright. "Aha!" said the tree. "This is something great!" And he held himself up, very proud and straight;
  But a rude young wind through the forest dashed,
  In a reckless temper, and quickly smashed
  The delicate leaves. With a clashing sound
  They broke into pieces and fell on the ground,
  Like a silvery, shimmering shower of hail,
  And the tree stood naked and bare to the gale. Then his heart was sad; and he cried, "Alas
  For my beautiful leaves of shining glass! Perhaps I have made another mistake
  In choosing a dress so easy to break. If the fairies only would hear me again
  I'd ask them for something both pretty and plain:
  It wouldn't cost much to grant my request,--
  In leaves of green lettuce I'd like to be dressed!" By this time the fairies were laughing, I know;
  But they gave him his wish in a second; and so
  With leaves of green lettuce, all tender and sweet,
  The tree was arrayed, from his head to his feet. "I knew it!" he cried, "I was sure I could find
  The sort of a suit that would be to my mind. There's none of the trees has a prettier dress,
  And none as attractive as I am, I guess." But a goat, who was taking an afternoon walk,
  By chance overheard the fir-tree's talk. So he came up close for a nearer view;--
  "My salad!" he bleated, "I think so too! You're the most attractive kind of a tree,
  And I want your leaves for my five-o'clock tea." So he ate them all without saying grace,
  And walked away with a grin on his face;
  While the little tree stood in the twilight dim,
  With never a leaf on a single limb. Then he sighed and groaned; but his voice was weak--
  He was so ashamed that he could not speak. He knew at last he had been a fool,
  To think of breaking the forest rule,
  And choosing a dress himself to please,
  Because he envied the other trees. But it couldn't be helped, it was now too late,
  He must make up his mind to a leafless fate! So he let himself sink in a slumber deep,
  But he moaned and he tossed in his troubled sleep,
  Till the morning touched him with joyful beam,
  And he woke to find it was all a dream. For there in his evergreen dress he stood,
  A pointed fir in the midst of the wood! His branches were sweet with the balsam smell,
  His needles were green when the white snow fell. And always contented and happy was he,--
  The very best kind of a Christmas tree. "GRAN' BOULE"

A SEAMAN'S TALE OF THE SEA


  We men hat go down for a livin' in ships to the sea,--
  We love it a different way from you poets that 'bide on the land. We are fond of it, sure! But, you take it as comin' from me,
  There's a fear and a hate in our love that a landsman can't understand. Oh, who could help likin' the salty smell, and the blue
  Of the waves that are lazily breathin' as if they dreamed in the sun? She's a Sleepin' Beauty, the sea,--but you can't tell what she'll do;
  And the seamen never trust her,--they know too well what she's done! She's a wench like one that I saw in a singin'-play,--
  Carmen they called her,--Lord, what a life her lovers did lead! She'd cuddle and kiss you, and sing you and dance you away;
  And then,--she'd curse you, and break you, and throw you down like a
            weed. You may chance it awhile with the girls like that, if you please;
  But you want a woman to trust when you settle down with a wife;
  And a seaman's thought of growin' old at his ease
  Is a snug little house on the land to shelter the rest of his life. So that was old Poisson's dream,--did you know the Cap'? A brown little Frenchman, clever, and brave, and quick as a fish,--
  Had a wife and kids on the other side of the map,--
  And a rose-covered cottage for them and him was his darlin' wish. "I 'ave sail," says he, in his broken-up Frenchy talk,
  "Mos' forty-two year; I 'ave go on all part of de worl' dat ees wet. I'm seeck of de boat and de water. I rader walk
  Wid ma Josephine in one garden; an' eef we get tire', we set! "You see dat _bateau_, _Sainte Brigitte_? I bring 'er dh'are
  From de Breton coas', by gar, jus' feefteen year bifore. She ole w'en she come on Kebec, but _Holloway Freres_
  Dey buy 'er, an' hire me run 'er along dat dam' Nort' Shore. "Dose engine one leetl' bit cranky,--too ole, you see,--
  She roll and peetch in de wave'. But I lak' 'er pretty well;
  An' dat sheep she lak' 'er captaine, sure, dat's me! Wit' forty ton coal in de bunker, I tek' dat sheep t'rou' hell. "But I don' wan' risk it no more; I had _bonne chance_:
  I save already ten t'ousan' dollar', dat's plenty I s'pose! Nex' winter I buy dat house wid de garden on France
  An' I tell _adieu_ to de sea, and I leev' on de lan' in ripose." All summer he talked of his house,--you could see the flowers
  Abloom, and the pear-trees trained on the garden-wall so trim,
  And the Captain awalkin' and smokin' away the hours,--
  He thought he had done with the sea, but the sea hadn't done with him! It was late in the fall when he made the last regular run,
  Clear down to the Esquimault Point and back with his rickety ship;
  She hammered and pounded a lot, for the storms had begun;
  But he drove her,--and went for his season's pay at the end of the trip. Now the Holloway Brothers are greedy and thin little men,
  With their eyes set close together, and money's their only God;
  So they told the Cap' he must run the "Bridget" again,
  To fetch a cargo from Moisie, two thousand quintals of cod. He said the season was over. They said: "Not yet. You finish the whole of your job, old man, or you don't draw a cent!" (They had the "Bridget" insured for all they could get.) And the Captain objected, and cursed, and cried. But he _went_. They took on the cargo at Moisie, and folks beside,--
  Three traders, a priest, and a couple of nuns, and a girl
  For a school at Quebec,--when the Captain saw her he sighed,
  And said: "Ma littl' Fifi got hair lak' dat, all curl!" The snow had fallen a foot, and the wind was high,
  When the "Bridget" butted her way thro' the billows on Moisie bar. The darkness grew with the gale, not a star in the sky,
  And the Captain swore: "We mus' make _Sept Isles_ to-night, by gar!" He couldn't go back, for he didn't dare to turn;
  The sea would have thrown the ship like a mustang noosed with a rope;
  For the monstrous waves were leapin' high astern,
  And the shelter of Seven Island Bay was the only hope. There's a bunch of broken hills half sunk in the mouth
  Of the bay, with their jagged peaks afoam; and the Captain thought
  He could pass to the north; but the sea kept shovin' him south,
  With her harlot hands, in the snow-blind murk, till she had him caught. She had waited forty years for a night like this,--
  Did he think he could leave her now, and live in a cottage, the fool? She headed him straight for the island he couldn't miss;
  And heaved his boat in the dark,--and smashed it against _Gran' Boule_. How the Captain and half of the people clambered ashore,
  Through the surf and the snow in the gloom of that horrible night,
  There's no one ever will know. For two days more
  The death-white shroud of the tempest covered the island from sight. How they suffered, and struggled, and died, will never be told;
  We discovered them all at last when we reached _Gran' Boule_ with a boat;
  The drowned and the frozen were lyin' stiff and cold,
  And the poor little girl with the curls was wrapped in the Captain's
            coat. Go write your song of the sea as the landsmen do,
  And call her your "great sweet mother," your "bride," and all the rest;
  She was made to be loved,--but remember, she won't love you,--
  The men who trust her the least are the sailors who know her the best. HEROES OF THE "TITANIC"


  Honour the brave who sleep
    Where the lost "Titanic" lies,
  The men who knew what a man must do
    When he looks Death in the eyes. "Women and children first,"--
    Ah, strong and tender cry! The sons whom women had borne and nursed,
    Remembered,--and dared to die. The boats crept off in the dark:
    The great ship groaned: and then,--
  O stars of the night, who saw that sight,
    Bear witness, _These were men!_

November 9, 1912. THE STANDARD-BEARER


I

  "How can I tell," Sir Edmund said,
    "Who has the right or the wrong o' this thing? Cromwell stands for the people's cause,
    Charles is crowned by the ancient laws;
  English meadows are sopping red,
  Englishmen striking each other dead,--
    Times are black as a raven's wing. Out of the ruck and the murk I see
      Only one thing! The King has trusted his banner to me,
    And I must fight for the King." II

  Into the thick of the Edgehill fight
    Sir Edmund rode with a shout; and the ring
    Of grim-faced, hard-hitting Parliament men
    Swallowed him up,--it was one against ten! He fought for the standard with all his might,
  Never again did he come to sight--
    Victor, hid by the raven's wing! After the battle had passed we found
      Only one thing,--
  The hand of Sir Edmund gripped around
    The banner-staff of his King. 1914. THE PROUD LADY


  When Staevoren town was in its prime
    And queened the Zuyder Zee,
  Her ships went out to every clime
    With costly merchantry. A lady dwelt in that rich town,
    The fairest in all the land;
  She walked abroad in a velvet gown,
    With many rings on her hand. Her hair was bright as the beaten gold,
    Her lips as coral red,
  Her roving eyes were blue and bold,
    And her heart with pride was fed. For she was proud of her father's ships,
    As she watched them gaily pass;
  And pride looked out of her eyes and lips
    When she saw herself in the glass. "Now come," she said to the captains ten,
    Who were ready to put to sea,
  "Ye are all my men and my father's men,
    And what will ye do for me?" "Go north and south, go east and west,
    And get me gifts," she said. "And he who bringeth me home the best,
    With that man will I wed."

  So they all fared forth, and sought with care
    In many a famous mart,
  For satins and silks and jewels rare,
    To win that lady's heart. She looked at them all with never a thought,
    And careless put them by;
  "I am not fain of the things ye brought,
    Enough of these have I." The last that came was the head of the fleet,
    His name was Jan Borel;
  He bent his knee at the lady's feet,--
    In truth he loved her well. "I've brought thee home the best i' the world,
    A shipful of Danzig corn!" She stared at him long; her red lips curled,
    Her blue eyes filled with scorn. "Now out on thee, thou feckless kerl,
    A loon thou art," she said. "Am I a starving beggar girl? Shall I ever lack for bread?" "Go empty all thy sacks of grain
    Into the nearest sea,
  And never show thy face again
    To make a mock of me." Young Jan Borel, he answered naught,
    But in the harbour cast
  The sacks of golden corn he brought,
    And groaned when fell the last. Then Jan Borel, he hoisted sail,
    And out to sea he bore;
  He passed the Helder in a gale
    And came again no more. But the grains of corn went drifting down
    Like devil-scattered seed,
  To sow the harbour of the town
    With a wicked growth of weed. The roots were thick and the silt and sand
    Were gathered day by day,
  Till not a furlong out from land
    A shoal had barred the way. Then Staevoren town saw evil years,
    No ships could out or in,
  The boats lay rotting at the piers,
    And the mouldy grain in the bin. The grass-grown streets were all forlorn,
    The town in ruin stood,
  The lady's velvet gown was torn,
    Her rings were sold for food. Her father had perished long ago,
    But the lady held her pride,
  She walked with a scornful step and slow,
    Till at last in her rags she died. Yet still on the crumbling piers of the town,
    When the midnight moon shines free,
  A woman walks in a velvet gown
    And scatters corn in the sea. 1917. LYRICS OF LABOUR AND ROMANCE



A MILE WITH ME


  O who will walk a mile with me
    Along life's merry way? A comrade blithe and full of glee,
  Who dares to laugh out loud and free,
  And let his frolic fancy play,
  Like a happy child, through the flowers gay
  That fill the field and fringe the way
    Where he walks a mile with me. And who will walk a mile with me
    Along life's weary way? A friend whose heart has eyes to see
  The stars shine out o'er the darkening lea,
  And the quiet rest at the end o' the day,--
  A friend who knows, and dares to say,
  The brave, sweet words that cheer the way
    Where he walks a mile with me. With such a comrade, such a friend,
  I fain would walk till journeys end,
  Through summer sunshine, winter rain,
  And then?--Farewell, we shall meet again! THE THREE BEST THINGS


I

WORK

  Let me but do my work from day to day,
    In field or forest, at the desk or loom,
    In roaring market-place or tranquil room;
  Let me but find it in my heart to say,
  When vagrant wishes beckon me astray,
    "This is my work; my blessing, not my doom;
    Of all who live, I am the one by whom
  This work can best be done in the right way." Then shall I see it not too great, nor small,
    To suit my spirit and to prove my powers;
    Then shall I cheerful greet the labouring hours,
  And cheerful turn, when the long shadows fall
  At eventide, to play and love and rest,
  Because I know for me my work is best. II

LOVE

  Let me but love my love without disguise,
    Nor wear a mask of fashion old or new,
    Nor wait to speak till I can hear a clue,
  Nor play a part to shine in others' eyes,
  Nor bow my knees to what my heart denies;
    But what I am, to that let me be true,
    And let me worship where my love is due,
  And so through love and worship let me rise. For love is but the heart's immortal thirst
    To be completely known and all forgiven,
    Even as sinful souls that enter Heaven:
  So take me, dear, and understand my worst,
  And freely pardon it, because confessed,
  And let me find in loving thee, my best. III

LIFE

  Let me but live my life from year to year,
    With forward face and unreluctant soul;
    Not hurrying to, nor turning from, the goal;
  Not mourning for the things that disappear
  In the dim past, nor holding back in fear
    From what the future veils; but with a whole
    And happy heart, that pays its toll
  To Youth and Age, and travels on with cheer. So let the way wind up the hill or down,
    O'er rough or smooth, the journey will be joy:
    Still seeking what I sought when but a boy,
  New friendship, high adventure, and a crown,
  My heart will keep the courage of the quest,
  And hope the road's last turn will be the best. RELIANCE


      Not to the swift, the race:
      Not to the strong, the fight:
  Not to the righteous, perfect grace
      Not to the wise, the light. But often faltering feet
      Come surest to the goal;
  And they who walk in darkness meet
      The sunrise of the soul. A thousand times by night
      The Syrian hosts have died;
  A thousand times the vanquished right
      Hath risen, glorified. The truth the wise men sought
      Was spoken by a child;
  The alabaster box was brought
      In trembling hands defiled. Not from my torch, the gleam,
  But from the stars above:
      Not from my heart, life's crystal stream,
      But from the depths of Love. DOORS OF DARING


  The mountains that inclose the vale
    With walls of granite, steep and high,
  Invite the fearless foot to scale
    Their stairway toward the sky. The restless, deep, dividing sea
    That flows and foams from shore to shore,
  Calls to its sunburned chivalry,
    "Push out, set sail, explore!" The bars of life at which we fret,
    That seem to prison and control,
  Are but the doors of daring, set
    Ajar before the soul. Say not, "Too poor," but freely give;
    Sigh not, "Too weak," but boldly try;
  You never can begin to live
    Until you dare to die. THE CHILD IN THE GARDEN


  When to the garden of untroubled thought
    I came of late, and saw the open door,
    And wished again to enter, and explore
  The sweet, wild ways with stainless bloom inwrought,
  And bowers of innocence with beauty fraught,
    It seemed some purer voice must speak before
    I dared to tread that garden loved of yore,
  That Eden lost unknown and found unsought. Then just within the gate I saw a child,--
    A stranger-child, yet to my heart most dear;
  He held his hands to me, and softly smiled
    With eyes that knew no shade of sin or fear:
  "Come in," he said, "and play awhile with me;
  I am the little child you used to be." LOVE'S REASON


  For that thy face is fair I love thee not;
    Nor yet because thy brown benignant eyes
    Have sudden gleams of gladness and surprise,
  Like woodland brooks that cross a sunlit spot:
  Nor for thy body, born without a blot,
    And loveliest when it shines with no disguise
    Pure as the star of Eve in Paradise,--
  For all these outward things I love thee not:

  But for a something in thy form and face,
    Thy looks and ways, of primal harmony;
  A certain soothing charm, a vital grace
    That breathes of the eternal womanly,
  And makes me feel the warmth of Nature's breast,
  When in her arms, and thine, I sink to rest. THE ECHO IN THE HEART


  It's little I can tell
    About the birds in books;
  And yet I know them well,
    By their music and their looks:
        When May comes down the lane,
        Her airy lovers throng
        To welcome her with song,
        And follow in her train:
        Each minstrel weaves his part
        In that wild-flowery strain,
        And I know them all again
        By their echo in my heart. It's little that I care
    About my darling's place
  In books of beauty rare,
    Or heraldries of race:
        For when she steps in view,
        It matters not to me
        What her sweet type may be,
        Of woman, old or new. I can't explain the art,
        But I know her for my own,
        Because her lightest tone
        Wakes an echo in my heart. "UNDINE"


  'Twas far away and long ago,
    When I was but a dreaming boy,
  This fairy tale of love and woe
    Entranced my heart with tearful joy;
  And while with white Undine I wept
    Your spirit,--ah, how strange it seems,--
  Was cradled in some star, and slept,
    Unconscious of her coming dreams. "RENCONTRE"


  Oh, was I born too soon, my dear, or were you born too late,
  That I am going out the door while you come in the gate? For you the garden blooms galore, the castle is _en fete_;
  You are the coming guest, my dear,--for me the horses wait. I know the mansion well, my dear, its rooms so rich and wide;
  If you had only come before I might have been your guide,
  And hand in hand with you explore the treasures that they hide;
  But you have come to stay, my dear, and I prepare to ride. Then walk with me an hour, my dear, and pluck the reddest rose
  Amid the white and crimson store with which your garden glows,--
  A single rose,--I ask no more of what your love bestows;
  It is enough to give, my dear,--a flower to him who goes. The House of Life is yours, my dear, for many and many a day,
  But I must ride the lonely shore, the Road to Far Away:
  So bring the stirrup-cup and pour a brimming draught, I pray,
  And when you take the road, my dear, I'll meet you on the way. LOVE IN A LOOK


  Let me but feel thy look's embrace,
    Transparent, pure, and warm,
  And I'll not ask to touch thy face,
    Or fold thee in mine arm. For in thine eyes a girl doth rise,
    Arrayed in candid bliss,
  And draws me to her with a charm
    More close than any kiss. A loving-cup of golden wine,
    Songs of a silver brook,
  And fragrant breaths of eglantine,
    Are mingled in thy look. More fair they are than any star,
    Thy topaz eyes divine--
  And deep within their trysting-nook
    Thy spirit blends with mine. MY APRIL LADY


  When down the stair at morning
    The sunbeams round her float,
  Sweet rivulets of laughter
    Are rippling in her throat;
  The gladness of her greeting
    Is gold without alloy;
  And in the morning sunlight
    I think her name is Joy. When in the evening twilight
    The quiet book-room lies,
  We read the sad old ballads,
    While from her hidden eyes
  The tears are falling, falling,
    That give her heart relief;
  And in the evening twilight,
    I think her name is Grief. My little April lady,
    Of sunshine and of showers
  She weaves the old spring magic,
    And my heart breaks in flowers! But when her moods are ended,
    She nestles like a dove;
  Then, by the pain and rapture,
    I know her name is Love. A LOVER'S ENVY


  I envy every flower that blows
  Along the meadow where she goes,
    And every bird that sings to her,
    And every breeze that brings to her
      The fragrance of the rose. I envy every poet's rhyme
  That moves her heart at eventime,
    And every tree that wears for her
    Its brightest bloom, and bears for her
      The fruitage of its prime. I envy every Southern night
  That paves her path with moonbeams white,
    And silvers all the leaves for her,
    And in their shadow weaves for her
      A dream of dear delight. I envy none whose love requires
  Of her a gift, a task that tires:
    I only long to live to her,
    I only ask to give to her,
      All that her heart desires. FIRE-FLY CITY


  Like a long arrow through the dark the train is darting,
    Bearing me far away, after a perfect day of love's delight:
  Wakeful with all the sad-sweet memories of parting,
    I lift the narrow window-shade and look out on the night. Lonely the land unknown, and like a river flowing,
    Forest and field and hill are gliding backward still athwart my dream;
  Till in that country strange, and ever stranger growing,
    A magic city full of lights begins to glow and gleam. Wide through the landscape dim the lamps are lit in millions;
    Long avenues unfold clear-shining lines of gold across the green;
  Clusters and rings of light, and luminous pavilions,--
    Oh, who will tell the city's name, and what these wonders mean? Why do they beckon me, and what have they to show me? Crowds in the blazing street, mirth where the feasters meet, kisses and
            wine:
  Many to laugh with me, but never one to know me:
    A cityful of stranger-hearts and none to beat with mine! Look how the glittering lines are wavering and lifting,--
    Softly the breeze of night scatters the vision bright: and, passing
            fair,
  Over the meadow-grass and through the forest drifting,
    The Fire-Fly City of the Dark is lost in empty air! THE GENTLE TRAVELLER


  "Through many a land your journey ran,
    And showed the best the world can boast:
  Now tell me, traveller, if you can,
    The place that pleased you most." She laid her hands upon my breast,
    And murmured gently in my ear,
  "The place I loved and liked the best
    Was in your arms, my dear!" NEPENTHE


  Yes, it was like you to forget,
  And cancel in the welcome of your smile
  My deep arrears of debt,
  And with the putting forth of both your hands
  To sweep away the bars my folly set
  Between us--bitter thoughts, and harsh demands,
  And reckless deeds that seemed untrue
  To love, when all the while
  My heart was aching through and through
  For you, sweet heart, and only you. Yet, as I turned to come to you again,
  I thought there must be many a mile
  Of sorrowful reproach to cross,
  And many an hour of mutual pain
  To bear, until I could make plain
  That all my pride was but the fear of loss,
  And all my doubt the shadow of despair
  To win a heart so innocent and fair;
  And even that which looked most ill
  Was but the fever-fret and effort vain
  To dull the thirst which you alone could still. But as I turned, the desert miles were crossed,
  And when I came, the weary hours were sped! For there you stood beside the open door,
  Glad, gracious, smiling as before,
  And with bright eyes and tender hands outspread
  Restored me to the Eden I had lost. Never a word of cold reproof,
  No sharp reproach, no glances that accuse
  The culprit whom they hold aloof,--
  Ah, 'tis not thus that other women use
  The empire they have won! For there is none like you, beloved,--none
  Secure enough to do what you have done. Where did you learn this heavenly art,--
  You sweetest and most wise of all that live,--
  With silent welcome to impart
  Assurance of the royal heart
  That never questions where it would forgive? None but a queen could pardon me like this! My sovereign lady, let me lay
  Within each rosy palm a loyal kiss
  Of penitence, then close the fingers up,
  Thus--thus! Now give the cup
  Of full nepenthe in your crimson mouth,
  And come--the garden blooms with bliss,
  The wind is in the south,
  The rose of love with dew is wet--
  Dear, it was like you to forget! DAY AND NIGHT


 _How long is the night, brother,
    And how long is the day?_
  Oh, the day's too short for a happy task,
    And the day's too short for play;
  And the night's too short for the bliss of love,
    For look, how the edge of the sky grows gray,
  While the stars die out in the blue above,
    And the wan moon fades away. _How short is the day, brother,
    And how short is the night?_
  Oh, the day's too long for a heavy task,
    And long, long, long is the night,
  When the wakeful hours are filled with pain,
    And the sad heart waits for the thing it fears,
  And sighs for the dawn to come again,--
    The night is a thousand years! _How long is a life, dear God,
    And how fast does it flow?_
  The measure of life is a flame in the soul:
    It is neither swift nor slow. But the vision of time is the shadow cast
    By the fleeting world on the body's wall;
  When it fades there is neither future nor past,
    But love is all in all. HESPER


  Her eyes are like the evening air,
    Her voice is like a rose,
  Her lips are like a lovely song,
    That ripples as it flows,
  And she herself is sweeter than
    The sweetest thing she knows. A slender, haunting, twilight form
    Of wonder and surprise,
  She seemed a fairy or a child,
    Till, deep within her eyes,
  I saw the homeward-leading star
    Of womanhood arise. ARRIVAL


  Across a thousand miles of sea, a hundred leagues of land,
  Along a path I had not traced and could not understand,
  I travelled fast and far for this,--to take thee by the hand. A pilgrim knowing not the shrine where he would bend his knee,
  A mariner without a dream of what his port would be,
  So fared I with a seeking heart until I came to thee. O cooler than a grove of palm in some heat-weary place,
  O fairer than an isle of calm after the wild sea race,
  The quiet room adorned with flowers where first I saw thy face! Then furl the sail, let fall the oar, forget the paths of foam! The fate that made me wander far at last has brought me home
  To thee, dear haven of my heart, and I no more will roam. DEPARTURE


  Oh, why are you shining so bright, big Sun,
    And why is the garden so gay? Do you know that my days of delight are done,
    Do you know I am going away? If you covered your face with a cloud, I'd dream
    You were sorry for me in my pain,
  And the heavily drooping flowers would seem
    To be weeping with me in the rain. But why is your head so low, sweet heart,
    And why are your eyes overcast? Are you crying because you know we must part,
    Do you think this embrace is our last? Then kiss me again, and again, and again,
    Look up as you bid me good-bye! For your face is too dear for the stain of a tear,
    And your smile is the sun in my sky. THE BLACK BIRDS


I

  Once, only once, I saw it clear,--
  That Eden every human heart has dreamed
  A hundred times, but always far away! Ah, well do I remember how it seemed,
  Through the still atmosphere
  Of that enchanted day,
  To lie wide open to my weary feet:
  A little land of love and joy and rest,
  With meadows of soft green,
  Rosy with cyclamen, and sweet
  With delicate breath of violets unseen,--
  And, tranquil 'mid the bloom
  As if it waited for a coming guest,
  A little house of peace and joy and love
  Was nested like a snow-white dove. II

  From the rough mountain where I stood,
  Homesick for happiness,
  Only a narrow valley and a darkling wood
  To cross, and then the long distress
  Of solitude would be forever past,--
  I should be home at last. But not too soon! oh, let me linger here
  And feed my eyes, hungry with sorrow,
  On all this loveliness, so near,
  And mine to-morrow! III

  Then, from the wood, across the silvery blue,
  A dark bird flew,
  Silent, with sable wings. Close in his wake another came,--
  Fragments of midnight floating through
  The sunset flame,--
  Another and another, weaving rings
  Of blackness on the primrose sky,--
  Another, and another, look, a score,
  A hundred, yes, a thousand rising heavily
  From that accursed, dumb, and ancient wood,
  They boiled into the lucid air
  Like smoke from some deep caldron of despair! And more, and more, and ever more,
  The numberless, ill-omened brood
  Flapping their ragged plumes,
  Possessed the landscape and the evening light
  With menaces and glooms. Oh, dark, dark, dark they hovered o'er the place
  Where once I saw the little house so white
  Amid the flowers, covering every trace
  Of beauty from my troubled sight,--
  And suddenly it was night! IV

  At break of day I crossed the wooded vale;
  And while the morning made
  A trembling light among the tree-tops pale,
  I saw the sable birds on every limb,
  Clinging together closely in the shade,
  And croaking placidly their surly hymn. But, oh, the little land of peace and love
  That those night-loving wings had poised above,--
  Where was it gone? Lost, lost, forevermore! Only a cottage, dull and gray,
  In the cold light of dawn,
  With iron bars across the door:
  Only a garden where the drooping head
  Of one sad rose, foreboding its decay,
  Hung o'er a barren bed:
  Only a desolate field that lay
  Untilled beneath the desolate day,--
  Where Eden seemed to bloom I found but these! So, wondering, I passed along my way,
  With anger in my heart, too deep for words,
  Against that grove of evil-sheltering trees,
  And the black magic of the croaking birds. WITHOUT DISGUISE


  If I have erred in showing all my heart,
    And lost your favour by a lack of pride;
    If standing like a beggar at your side
  With naked feet, I have forgot the art
  Of those who bargain well in passion's mart,
    And win the thing they want by what they hide;
    Be mine the fault as mine the hope denied,
  Be mine the lover's and the loser's part. The sin, if sin it was, I do repent,
    And take the penance on myself alone;
  Yet after I have borne the punishment,
    I shall not fear to stand before the throne
  Of Love with open heart, and make this plea:
  "At least I have not lied to her nor Thee!" AN HOUR


  You only promised me a single hour:
    But in that hour I journeyed through a year
    Of life: the joy of finding you,--the fear
  Of losing you again,--the sense of power
  To make you all my own,--the sudden shower
    Of tears that came because you were more dear
    Than words could ever tell you,--then,--the clear
  Soft rapture when I plucked love's crimson flower. An hour,--a year,--I felt your bosom rise
    And fall with mystic tides, and saw the gleam
  Of undiscovered stars within your eyes,--
    A year,--an hour? I knew not, for the stream
  Of love had carried me to Paradise,
    Where all the forms of Time are like a dream. "RAPPELLE-TOI"


  Remember, when the timid light
    Through the enchanted hall of dawn is gleaming;
  Remember, when the pensive night
    Beneath her silver-sprinkled veil walks dreaming;
      When pleasure calls thee and thy heart beats high,
      When tender joys through evening shades draw nigh,
              Hark, from the woodland deeps
              A gentle whisper creeps,
                  Remember! Remember, when the hand of fate
    My life from thine forevermore has parted;
  When sorrow, exile, and the weight
    Of lonely years have made me heavy-hearted;
      Think of my loyal love, my last adieu;
      Absence and time are naught, if we are true;
          Long as my heart shall beat,
          To thine it will repeat,
                  Remember! Remember, when the cool, dark tomb
    Receives my heart into its quiet keeping,
  And some sweet flower begins to bloom
    Above the grassy mound where I am sleeping;
      Ah then, my face thou nevermore shalt see,
      But still my soul will linger close to thee,
          And in the holy place of night,
          The litany of love recite,--
                  Remember! _Freely rendered from the French of Alfred de Musset._



LOVE'S NEARNESS


  I think of thee when golden sunbeams glimmer
            Across the sea;
  And when the waves reflect the moon's pale shimmer
            I think of thee. I see thy form when down the distant highway
            The dust-clouds rise;
  In darkest night, above the mountain by-way
            I see thine eyes. I hear thee when the ocean-tides returning
            Aloud rejoice;
  And on the lonely moor in silence yearning
            I hear thy voice. I dwell with thee; though thou art far removed,
            Yet thou art near. The sun goes down, the stars shine out,--Beloved
            If thou wert here! _From the German of Goethe_, 1898. TWO SONGS OF HEINE


I

"EIN FICHTENBAUM"

  A fir-tree standeth lonely
  On a barren northern height,
  Asleep, while winter covers
  His rest with robes of white. In dreams, he sees a palm-tree
  In the golden morning-land;
  She droops alone and silent
  In burning wastes of sand. II

"DU BIST WIE EINE BLUME"

  Fair art thou as a flower
    And innocent and shy:
  I look on thee and sorrow;
    I grieve, I know not why. I long to lay, in blessing,
    My hand upon thy brow,
  And pray that God may keep thee
    As fair and pure as now. 1872. EIGHT ECHOES FROM THE POEMS OF AUGUSTE ANGELLIER


I

THE IVORY CRADLE

  The cradle I have made for thee
  Is carved of orient ivory,
  And curtained round with wavy silk
  More white than hawthorn-bloom or milk. A twig of box, a lilac spray,
  Will drive the goblin-horde away;
  And charm thy childlike heart to keep
  Her happy dream and virgin sleep. Within that pure and fragrant nest,
  I'll rock thy gentle soul to rest,
  With tender songs we need not fear
  To have a passing angel hear. Ah, long and long I fain would hold
  The snowy curtain's guardian fold
  Around thy crystal visions, born
  In clearness of the early morn. But look, the sun is glowing red
  With triumph in his golden bed;
  Aurora's virgin whiteness dies
  In crimson glory of the skies. The rapid flame will burn its way
  Through these white curtains, too, one day;
  The ivory cradle will be left
  Undone, and broken, and bereft. II

DREAMS

  Often I dream your big blue eyes,
    Though loth their meaning to confess,
  Regard me with a clear surprise
    Of dawning tenderness. Often I dream you gladly hear
    The words I hardly dare to breathe,--
  The words that falter in their fear
    To tell what throbs beneath. Often I dream your hand in mine
    Falls like a flower at eventide,
  And down the path we leave a line
    Of footsteps side by side. 