



Produced by Roy Brown





THE KIPLING READER

SELECTIONS FROM THE BOOKS OF RUDYARD KIPLING

NEW AND REVISED EDITION

MACMILLAN AND CO, LIMITED
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON
1923



COPYRIGHT

First Edition 1900. Reprinted with corrections 1901. Reprinted 1907, 1908, 1910, 1912, 1914, 1916, 1918 (twice),
1919 (twice), 1920, 1921, 1923. PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN




CONTENTS

PROSE

'RIKKI-TIKKI-TAVI'
WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR PART I
WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR PART II
WEE WILLIE WINKIE
A MATTER OF FACT
MOWGLI'S BROTHERS
THE LOST LEGION
NAMGAY DOOLA
A GERM-DESTROYER
'TIGER! TIGER!' TODS' AMENDMENT
THE STORY OF MUHAMMAD DIN
THE FINANCES OF THE GODS
MOTI GUJ--MUTINEER


POETRY

THE NATIVE BORN
THE FLOWERS
MUNICIPAL
THE COASTWISE LIGHTS
THE ENGLISH FLAG
ENGLAND'S ANSWER
THE OVERLAND MAIL
IN SPRING TIME




'RIKKI-TIKKI-TAVI'

          At the hole where he went in
          Red-Eye called to Wrinkle-Skin. Hear what little Red-Eye saith:
          'Nag, come up and dance with death!' Eye to eye and head to head,
             (_Keep the measure, Nag_.) This shall end when one is dead;
             (_At thy pleasure, Nag_.) Turn for turn and twist for twist--
             (_Run and hide thee, Nag_.) Hah! The hooded Death has missed! (_Woe betide thee, Nag!_)

This is the story of the great war that Kikki-tikki-tavi fought
single-handed, through the bath-rooms of the big bungalow in Segowlee
cantonment. Darzee, the tailor-bird, helped him, and Chuchundra, the
musk-rat, who never comes out into the middle of the floor, but
always creeps round by the wall, gave him advice; but Rikki-tikki did
the real fighting. He was a mongoose, rather like a little cat in his fur and his tail,
but quite like a weasel in his head and habits. His eyes and the end
of his restless nose were pink; he could scratch himself anywhere he
pleased, with any leg, front or back, that he chose to use; he could
fluff up his tail till it looked like a bottle-brush, and his
war-cry, as he scuttled through the long grass, was:
'_Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!_'

One day, a high summer flood washed him out of the burrow where he
lived with his father and mother, and carried him, kicking and
clucking, down a roadside ditch. He found a little wisp of grass
floating there, and clung to it till he lost his senses. When he
revived, he was lying in the hot sun on the middle of a garden path,
very draggled indeed, and a small boy was saying: 'Here's a dead
mongoose. Let's have a funeral.' 'No,' said his mother; 'let's take him in and dry him. Perhaps he
isn't really dead.' They took him into the house, and a big man picked him up between his
finger and thumb, and said he was not dead but half choked; so they
wrapped him in cotton-wool, and warmed him and he opened his eyes and
sneezed. 'Now,' said the big man (he was an Englishman who had just moved into
the bungalow); 'don't frighten him and we'll see what he'll do.' It is the hardest thing in the world to frighten a mongoose, because
he is eaten up from nose to tail with curiosity. The motto of all the
mongoose family is 'Run and find out'; and Rikki-tikki was a true
mongoose. He looked at the cotton-wool, decided that it was not good
to eat, ran all round the table, sat up and put his fur in order,
scratched himself, and jumped on the small boy's shoulder. 'Don't be frightened, Teddy,' said his father. 'That's his way of
making friends.' 'Ouch! He's tickling under my chin,' said Teddy. Rikki-tikki looked down between the boy's collar and neck, snuffed at
his ear, and climbed down to the floor, where he sat rubbing his
nose. 'Good gracious,' said Teddy's mother, 'and that's a wild creature! I
suppose he's so tame because we've been kind to him.' 'All mongooses are like that,' said her husband. 'If Teddy doesn't
pick him up by the tail, or try to put him in a cage,  he'll run in
and out of the house all day long. Let's give him something to eat.' They gave him a little piece of raw meat. Rikki tikki liked it
immensely, and when it was finished he went out into the verandah and
sat in the sunshine and fluffed up his fur to make it dry to the
roots. Then he felt better. 'There are more things to find out about in this house,' he said to
himself, 'than all my family could find out in all their lives. I
shall certainly stay and find out.' He spent all that day roaming over the house. He nearly drowned
himself in the bath tubs, put his nose into the ink on a
writing-table, and burnt it on the end of the big man's cigar, for he
climbed up in the big man's lap to see how writing was done. At
nightfall he ran into Teddy's nursery to watch how the kerosene-lamps
were lighted, and when Teddy went to bed Rikki-tikki climbed up too;
but he was a restless companion, because he had to get up and attend
to every noise all through the night, and find out what made it. Teddy's mother and father came in, the last thing, to look at their
boy, and Rikki-tikki was awake on the pillow. 'I don't like that,'
said Teddy's mother; 'he may bite the child.' 'He'll do no such
thing,' said the father. 'Teddy's safer with that little beast than
if he had a bloodhound to watch him. If a snake came into the nursery
now----'

But Teddy's mother wouldn't think of anything so awful. Early in the morning Rikki-tikki came to early breakfast-in the
verandah riding on Teddy's shoulder, and they gave him banana and
some boiled egg; and he sat on all their laps one after the other,
because every well-brought-up mongoose always hopes to be a
house-mongoose some day and have rooms to run about in, and
Rikki-tikki's mother (she used to live in the General's house at
Segowlee) had carefully told Rikki what to do if ever he came across
white men. Then Rikki-tikki went out into the garden to see what was to be seen. It was a large garden, only half cultivated, with bushes as big as
summer-houses of Marshal Niel roses, lime and orange trees, clumps of
bamboos, and thickets of high grass. Rikki-tikki licked his lips. 'This is a splendid hunting-ground,' he said, and his tail grew
bottle-brushy at the thought of it, and he scuttled up and down the
garden, snuffing here and there till he heard very sorrowful voices
in a thorn-bush. It was Darzee, the tailor-bird, and his wife. They had made a
beautiful nest by pulling two big leaves together and stitching them
up the edges with fibres, and had filled the hollow with cotton and
downy fluff. The nest swayed to and fro, as they sat on the rim and
cried. 'What is the matter?' asked Rikki-tikki. 'We are very miserable,' said Darzee. 'One of our babies fell out of
the nest yesterday, and Nag ate him.' 'H'm!' said Rikki-tikki, 'that is very sad--but I am a stranger here. Who is Nag?' Darzee and his wife only cowered down in the nest without answering,
for from the thick grass at the foot of the bush there came a low
hiss--a horrid cold sound that made Rikki-tikki jump back two clear
feet. Then inch by inch out of the grass rose up the head and spread
hood of Nag, the big black cobra, and he was five feet long from
tongue to tail. When he had lifted one-third of himself clear of the
ground, he stayed balancing to and fro exactly as a dandelion-tuft
balances in the wind, and he looked at Rikki-tikki with the wicked
snake's eyes that never change their expression, whatever the snake
may be thinking of. 'Who is Nag?' said he. '_I_ am Nag. The great god Brahm put his mark
upon all our people when the first cobra spread his hood to keep the
sun off Brahm as he slept. Look, and be afraid!' He spread out his hood more than ever, and Rikki-tikki saw the
spectacle-mark on the back of it that looks exactly like the eye part
of a hook-and-eye fastening. He was afraid for the minute; but it is
impossible for a mongoose to stay frightened for any length of time,
and though Rikki-tikki had never met a live cobra before, his mother
had fed him on dead ones, and he knew that all a grown mongoose's
business in life was to fight and eat snakes. Nag knew that too, and
at the bottom of his cold heart he was afraid. 'Well,' said Rikki-tikki, and his tail began to fluff up again,
'marks or no marks, do you think it is right for you to eat
fledglings out of a nest?' Nag was thinking to himself, and watching the least little movement
in the grass behind Rikki-tikki. He knew that mongooses in the garden
meant death sooner or later for him and his family, but he wanted to
get Rikki-tikki off his guard. So he dropped his head a little, and
put it on one side. 'Let us talk,' he said. 'You eat eggs. Why should not I eat birds?' 'Behind you! Look behind you!' sang Darzee. Rikki-tikki knew better than to waste time in staring. He jumped up
in the air as high as he could go, and just under him whizzed by the
head of Nagaina, Nag's wicked wife. She had crept up behind him as he
was talking, to make an end of him; and he heard her savage hiss as
the stroke missed. He came down almost across her back, and if he had
been an old mongoose he would have known that then was the time to
break her back with one bite; but he was afraid of the terrible
lashing return-stroke of the cobra. He bit, indeed, but did not bite
long enough, and he jumped clear of the whisking tail, leaving
Nagaina torn and angry. 'Wicked, wicked Darzee!' said Nag, lashing up as high as he could
reach toward the nest in the thorn-bush; but Darzee had built it out
of reach of snakes, and it only swayed to and fro. Rikki-tikki felt his eyes growing red and hot (when a mongoose's eyes
grow red, he is angry), and he sat back on his tail and hind legs
like a little kangaroo, and looked all round him, and chattered with
rage. But Nag and Nagaina had disappeared into the grass. When a
snake misses its stroke, it never says anything or gives any sign of
what it means to do next. Rikki-tikki did not care to follow them,
for he did not feel sure that he could manage two snakes at once. So
he trotted off to the gravel path near the house, and sat down to
think. It was a serious matter for him. If you read the old books of natural history, you will find they say
that when the mongoose fights the snake and happens to get bitten, he
runs off and eats some herb that cures him. That is not true. The
victory is only a matter of quickness of eye and quickness of
foot,--snake's blow against mongoose's jump,--and as no eye can
follow the motion of a snake's head when it strikes, that makes
things much more wonderful than any magic herb. Rikki-tikki knew he
was a young mongoose, and it made him all the more pleased to think
that he had managed to escape a blow from behind. It gave him
confidence in himself, and when Teddy came running down the path,
Rikki-tikki was ready to be petted. But just as Teddy was stooping, something flinched a little in the
dust, and a tiny voice said: 'Be careful. I am death!' It was Karait,
the dusty brown snakeling that lies for choice on the dusty earth;
and his bite is as dangerous as the cobra's. But he is so small that
nobody thinks of him, and so he does the more harm to people. Rikki-tikki's eyes grew red again, and he danced up to Karait with
the peculiar rocking, swaying motion that he had inherited from his
family. It looks very funny, but it is so perfectly balanced a gait
that you can fly off from it at any angle you please; and in dealing
with snakes this is an advantage. If Rikki-tikki had only known, he
was doing a much more dangerous thing than fighting Nag, for Karait
is so small, and can turn so quickly, that unless Rikki bit him close
to the back of the head, he would get the return-stroke in his eye or
lip. But Rikki did not know: his eyes were all red, and he rocked
back and forth, looking for a good place to hold. Karait struck out. Rikki jumped sideways and tried to run in, but the wicked little
dusty gray head lashed within a fraction of his shoulder, and he had
to jump over the body, and the head followed his heels close. Teddy shouted to the house: 'Oh, look here! Our mongoose is killing a
snake'; and Rikki-tikki heard a scream from Teddy's mother. His
father ran out with a stick, but by the time he came up, Karait had
lunged out once too far, and Rikki-tikki had sprung, jumped on the
snake's back, dropped his head far between his fore-legs, bitten as
high up the back as he could get hold, and rolled away. That bite
paralysed Karait, and Rikki-tikki was just going to eat him up from
the tail, after the custom of his family at dinner, when he
remembered that a full meal makes a slow mongoose, and if he wanted
all his strength and quickness ready, he must keep himself thin. He went away for a dust-bath under the castor-oil bushes, while
Teddy's father beat the dead Karait. 'What is the use of that?' thought Rikki-tikki. 'I have settled it all'; and then Teddy's mother
picked him up from the dust and hugged him, crying that he had saved
Teddy from death, and Teddy's father said that he was a providence,
and Teddy looked on with big scared eyes. Rikki-tikki was rather
amused at all the fuss, which, of course, he did not understand. Teddy's mother might just as well have petted Teddy for playing in
the dust. Rikki was thoroughly enjoying himself. That night, at dinner, walking to and fro among the wine-glasses on
the table, he could have stuffed himself three times over with nice
things; but he remembered Nag and Nagaina, and though it was very
pleasant to be patted and petted by Teddy's mother, and to sit on
Teddy's shoulder, his eyes would get red from time to time, and he
would go off into his long war cry of '_Rikk-tikk-tikki-tikki-tchk!_'

Teddy carried him off to bed, and insisted on Rikki-tikki sleeping
under his chin. Rikki-tikki was too well bred to bite or scratch, but
as soon as Teddy was asleep he went off for his nightly walk round
the house, and in the dark he ran up against Chuchundra, the
musk-rat, creeping round by the wall. Chuchundra is a broken-hearted
little beast, He whimpers and cheeps all the night, trying to make up
his mind to run into the middle of the room, but he never gets there. 'Don't kill me,' said Chuchundra, almost weeping. 'Rikki-tikki, don't
kill me.' 'Do you  think a snake-killer kills musk-rats?' said Rikki-tikki
scornfully. 'Those who kill snakes get killed by snakes,' said Chuchundra, more
sorrowfully than ever. 'And how am I to be sure that Nag won't
mistake me for you some dark night?' 'There's not the least danger,' said Rikki-tikki; 'but Nag is in the
garden, and I know you don't go there.' 'My cousin Chua, the rat, told me----' said Chuchundra, and then he
stopped. 'Told you what?' 'H'sh! Nag is everywhere, Rikki-tikki. You should have talked to Chua
in the garden.' 'I didn't--so you must tell me. Quick, Chuchundra, or I'll bite you!' Chuchundra sat down and cried till the tears rolled off his whiskers. 'I am a very poor man,' he sobbed. 'I never had spirit enough to run
out into the middle of the room. H'sh! I mustn't tell you anything. Can't you _hear_, Rikki-tikki?' Rikki-tikki listened. The house was as still as still, but he thought
he could just catch the faintest _scratch-scratch_ in the world,--a
noise as faint as that of a wasp walking on a window-pane,--the dry
scratch of a snake's scales on brickwork. 'That's Nag or Nagaina,' he said to himself; 'and he's crawling into
the bath-room sluice. You're right, Chuchundra; I should have talked
to Chua.' He stole off to Teddy's bath-room, but there was nothing there, and
then to Teddy's mother's bath-room. At the bottom of the smooth
plaster wall there was a brick pulled out to make a sluice for the
bath-water, and as Rikki-tikki stole in by the masonry curb where the
bath is put, he heard Nag and Nagaina whispering together outside in
the moonlight. 'When the house is emptied of people,' said Nagaina to her husband,
'_he_ will have to go away, and then the garden will be our own
again. Go in quietly, and remember that the big man who killed Karait
is the first one to bite. Then come out and tell me, and we will hunt
for Rikki-tikki together.' 'But are you sure that there is anything to be gained by killing the
people?' said Nag. 'Everything. When there were no people in the bungalow, did we have
any mongoose in the garden? So long as the bungalow is empty, we are
king and queen of the garden; and remember that as soon as our eggs
in the melon-bed hatch (as they may to-morrow), our children will
need room and quiet.' I had not thought of that,' said Nag. 'I will go, but there is no
need that we should hunt for Rikki-tikki afterward. I will kill the
big man and his wife, and the child if I can, and come away quietly. Then the bungalow will be empty, and Rikki-tikki will go.' Rikki-tikki tingled all over with rage and hatred at this, and then
Nag's head came through the sluice, and his five feet of cold body
followed it. Angry as he was, Rikki-tikki was very frightened as he
saw the size of the big cobra. Nag coiled himself up, raised his
head, and looked into the bath-room in the dark, and Rikki could see
his eyes glitter. 'Now, if I kill him here, Nagaina will know; and if I fight him on
the open floor, the odds are in his favour. What am I to do?' said
Rikki-tikki-tavi. Nag waved to and fro, and then Rikki-tikki heard him drinking from
the biggest water-jar that was used to fill the bath. 'That is good,'
said the snake. 'Now, when Karait was killed, the big man had a
stick. He may have that stick still, but when he comes in to bathe in
the morning he will not have a stick. I shall wait here till he
comes. Nagaina--do you hear me?--I shall wait here in the cool till
daytime.' There was no answer from outside, so Rikki-tikki knew Nagaina had
gone away. Nag coiled himself down, coil by coil, round the bulge at
the bottom of the water-jar, and Rikki-tikki stayed still as death. After an hour he began to move, muscle by muscle, toward the jar. Nag
was asleep, and Rikki-tikki looked at his big back, wondering which
would be the best place for a good hold. 'If I don't break his back
at the first jump,' said Rikki, 'he can still fight; and if he
fights--O Rikki!' He looked at the thickness of the neck below the
hood, but that was too much for him; and a bite near the tail would
only make Nag savage. 'It must be the head,' he said at last; 'the head above the hood; and
when I am once there, I must not let go.' Then he jumped. The head was lying a little clear of the water-jar,
under the curve of it; and, as his teeth met, Rikki braced his back
against the bulge of the red earthen-rare to hold down the head. This gave him just one second's purchase, and he made the most of it. Then he was battered to and fro as a rat is shaken by a dog--to and
fro on the floor, up and down, and round in great circles; at his
eyes were red, and he held on as the body cart-whipped over the
floor, upsetting the tin dipper and the soap-dish and the
flesh-brush, and banged against the tin side of the bath. As he held
he closed his jaws tighter and tighter, for he made sure he would be
banged to death, and, for the honour of his family, preferred to be
found with his teeth locked. He was dizzy, aching, and felt shaken to
pieces when something went off like a thunderclap just behind him; a
hot wind knocked him senseless, and red fire singed his fur. The man
had been wakened by the noise, and had fired both barrels of a
shot-gun into Nag just behind the hood. Rikki-tikki held on with his eyes shut, for now he was quite sure he
was dead; but the head did not move, and the big man picked him up
and said: 'It's the mongoose again, Alice; the little chap has saved
_our_ lives now.' Then Teddy's mother came in with a very white face,
and saw what was left of Nag, and Rikki-tikki dragged himself Teddy's
bedroom and spent half the rest of the night shaking  himself
tenderly to find out whether he really broken into forty pieces, as
he fancied. When morning came he was very stiff, but well pleased with his
doings. 'Now I have Nagaina to settle with, and she will be worse
than five Nags, and there's no knowing when the eggs she spoke of
will hatch. Goodness! I must go and see Darzee,' he said. Without waiting for breakfast, Rikki-tikki ran to the thorn-bush
where Darzee was singing a song of triumph at the top of his voice. The news of Nag's death was all over the garden, for the sweeper had
thrown the body on the rubbish-heap. 'Oh, you stupid tuft of feathers!' said Rikki-tikki angrily. 'Is this
the time to sing?' 'Nag is dead--is dead--is dead!' sang Darzee. 'The valiant
Rikki-tikki caught him by the head and held fast. The big man brought
the bang-stick, and Nag fell in two pieces! He will never eat my
babies again.' 'All that's true enough; but where's Nagaina?' said Rikki-tikki,
looking carefully round him. 'Nagaina came to the bath-room sluice and called for Nag,' Darzee
went on; 'and Nag came out on the end of a stick--the sweeper picked
him up on the end of a stick and threw him upon the rubbish-heap. Let
us sing about the great, the red-eyed Rikki-tikki!' and Darzee filled
his throat and sang. 'If I could get up to your nest, I'd roll all your babies out!' said
Rikki-tikki. 'You don't know when to do the right thing at the right
time. You're safe enough in your nest there, but it's war for me down
here. Stop singing a minute, Darzee.' 'For the great, the beautiful Rikki-tikki's sake I will stop,' said
Darzee. 'What is it, O killer of the terrible Nag?' 'Where is Nagaina, for the third time?' 'On the rubbish-heap by the stables, mourning for Nag. Great is
Rikki-tikki with the white teeth.' 'Bother my white teeth! Have you ever heard where she keeps her
eggs?' 'In the melon-bed, on the end nearest the wall, where the sun strikes
nearly all day. She hid them three weeks ago.' 'And you never thought it worth while to tell me? The end nearest the
wall, you said?' 'Rikki-tikki, you are not going to eat her eggs?' 'Not eat exactly; no. Darzee, if you have a grain of sense you will
fly off to the stables and pretend that your wing is broken, and let
Nagaina chase you away to this bush! I must get to the melon-bed, and
if I went there now she'd see me.' Darzee was a feather-brained little fellow who could never hold more
than one idea at a time in his head; and just because he knew that
Nagaina's children were born in eggs like his own, he didn't think at
first that it was fair to kill them. But his wife was a sensible
bird, and she knew that cobra's eggs meant young cobras later on; so
she flew off from the nest, and left Darzee to keep the babies warm,
and continue his song about the death of Nag. Darzee was very like a
man in some ways. She fluttered in front of Nagaina by the rubbish-heap, and cried out,
'Oh, my wing is broken! The boy in the house threw a stone at me and
broke it.' Then she fluttered more desperately than ever. Nagaina lifted up her head and hissed, 'You warned Rikki-tikki when
I would have killed him. Indeed and truly, you've chosen a bad place
to be lame in.' And she moved toward Darzee's wife, slipping along
over the dust. 'The boy broke it with a stone!' shrieked Darzee's wife. 'Well! It may be some consolation to you when you're dead to know
that I shall settle accounts with the boy. My husband lies on the
rubbish-heap this morning, but before night the boy in the house will
lie very still. What is the use of running away? I am sure to catch
you. Little fool, look at me!' Darzee's wife knew better than to do _that_, for a bird who looks at
a snake's eyes gets so frightened that she cannot move. Darzee's wife
fluttered on, piping sorrowfully, and never leaving the ground, and
Nagaina quickened her pace. Rikki-tikki heard them going up the path from the stables, and he
raced for the end of the melon-patch near the wall. There, in the
warm litter about the melons, very cunningly hidden, he found
twenty-five eggs, about the size of a bantam's eggs, but with
whitish skin instead of shell. 'I was not a day too soon,' he said; for he could see the baby cobras
curled up inside the skin, and he knew that the minute they were
hatched they could each kill a man or a mongoose. He bit off the tops
of the eggs as fast as he could, taking care to crush the young
cobras, and turned over the litter from time to time to see whether
he had missed any. At last there were only three eggs left, and
Rikki-tikki began to chuckle to himself, when he heard Darzee's wife
screaming:

'Rikki-tikki, I led Nagaina toward the house, and she has gone into
the verandah, and--oh, come quickly--she means killing!' Rikki-tikki smashed two eggs, and tumbled backward down the melon-bed
with the third egg in his mouth, and scuttled to the verandah as hard
as he could put foot to the ground. Teddy and his mother and father
were there at early breakfast; but Rikki-tikki saw that they were not
eating anything. They sat stone-still, and their faces were white. Nagaina was coiled up on the matting by Teddy's chair, within easy
striking distance of Teddy's bare leg, and she was swaying to and fro
singing a song of triumph. 'Son of the big man that killed Nag,' she hissed, 'stay still. I am
not ready yet. Wait a little. Keep very still, all you three. If you
move I strike, and if you do not move I strike. Oh, foolish people,
who killed my Nag!' Teddy's eyes were fixed on his father, and all his father could do
was to whisper, 'Sit still, Teddy. You mustn't move. Teddy, keep
still.' Then Rikki-tikki came up and cried: 'Turn round, Nagaina; turn and
fight!' 'All in good time,' said she, without moving her eyes. 'I will settle
my account with _you_ presently. Look at your friends, Rikki-tikki. They are still and white; they are afraid. They dare not move, and if
you come a step nearer I strike.' 'Look at your eggs,' said Rikki-tikki, 'in the melon-bed near the
wall. Go and look, Nagaina.' The big snake turned half round, and saw the egg on the verandah. 'Ah-h! Give it to me,' she said. Rikki-tikki put his paws one on each side of the egg, and his eyes
were blood-red. 'What price for a snake's egg? For a young cobra? For
a young king-cobra? For the last--the very last of the brood? The
ants are eating all the others down by the melon-bed.' Nagaina spun clear round, forgetting everything for the sake of the
one egg; and Rikki-tikki saw Teddy's father shoot out a big hand,
catch Teddy by the shoulder, and drag him across the little table
with the tea-cups, safe and out of reach of Nagaina. 'Tricked! Tricked! Tricked! _Rikk-tck-tck!_' chuckled Rikki-tikki. 'The boy is safe, and it was I--I--I that caught Nag by the hood last
night in the bath-room.' Then he began to jump up and down, all four
feet together, his head close to the floor. 'He threw me to and fro,
but he could not shake me off. He was dead before the big man blew
him in two. I did it. _Rikki-tikki-tck-tck!_ Come then, Nagaina. Come
and fight with me. You shall not be a widow long.' Nagaina saw that she had lost her chance of killing Teddy, and the
egg lay between Rikki-tikki's paws. 'Give me the egg, Rikki-tikki. Give me the last of my eggs, and I will go away and never come back,'
she said, lowering her hood. 'Yes, you will go away, and you will never come back; for you will
go to the rubbish-heap with Nag. Fight, widow! The big man has gone
for his gun! Fight!' Rikki-tikki was bounding all round Nagaina, keeping just out of
reach of her stroke, his little eyes like hot coals. Nagaina
gathered herself together, and flung out at him. Rikki-tikki jumped
up and backward. Again and again and again she struck, and each time
her head came with a whack on the matting of the verandah, and she
gathered herself together like a watch-spring. Then Rikki-tikki
danced in a circle to get behind her, and Nagaina spun round to keep
her head to his head, so that the rustle of her tail on the matting
sounded like dry leaves blown along by the wind. He had forgotten the egg. It still lay on the verandah, and Nagaina
came nearer and nearer to it, till at last, while Rikki-tikki was
drawing breath, she caught it in her mouth, turned to the verandah
steps and flew like an arrow down the path, with Rikki-tikki behind
her. When the cobra runs for her life, she goes like a whip-lash
flicked across a horse's neck. Rikki-tikki knew that he must catch her, or all the trouble would
begin again. She headed straight for the long grass by the
thorn-bush, and as he was running Rikki-tikki heard Darzee still
singing his foolish little song of triumph. But Darzee's wife was
wiser. She flew off her nest as Nagaina came along and flapped her
wings about Nagaina's head. If Darzee had helped they might have
turned her; but Nagaina only lowered her hood and went on. Still, the
instant's delay brought Rikki-tikki up to her, and as she plunged
into the rat-hole where she and Nag used to live, his little white
teeth were clenched on her tail, and he went down with her--and very
few mongooses, however wise and old they may be, care to follow a
cobra into its hole. It was dark in the hole; and Rikki-tikki never
knew when it might open out and give Nagaina room to turn and strike
at him. He held on savagely, and struck out his feet to act as brakes
on the dark slope of the hot, moist earth. Then the grass by the mouth of the hole stopped waving, and Darzee
said: 'It is all over with Rikki-tikki! We must sing his death-song. Valiant Rikki-tikki is dead! For Nagaina will surely kill him
underground.' So he sang a very mournful song that he made up on the spur of the
minute, and just as he got to the most touching part the grass
quivered again, and Rikki-tikki, covered with dirt, dragged himself
out of the hole leg by leg, licking his whiskers. Darzee stopped with
a little shout. Rikki-tikki shook some of the dust out of his fur and
sneezed. 'It is all over,' he said. 'The widow will never come out
again.' And the red ants that live between the grass stems heard him,
and began to troop down one after another to see if he had spoken the
truth. Rikki-tikki curled himself up in the grass and slept where he
was--slept and slept till it was late in the afternoon, for he had
done a hard day's work. 'Now,' he said, when he awoke, 'I will go back to the house. Tell the
Coppersmith, Darzee, and he will tell the garden that Nagaina is
dead.' The Coppersmith is a bird who makes a noise exactly like the beating
of a little hammer on a copper pot; and the reason he is always
making it is because he is the town-crier to every Indian garden, and
tells all the news to everybody who cares to listen. As Rikki-tikki
went up the path, he heard his 'attention' notes like a tiny
dinner-gong; and then the steady '_Ding-dong-lock!_ Nag is
dead--_dong!_ Nagaina is dead! _Ding-dong-tock!_' That set all the
birds in the garden singing, and the frogs croaking; for Nag and
Nagaina used to eat frogs as well as little birds. When Rikki got to the house, Teddy and Teddy's mother (she looked
very white still, for she had been fainting) and Teddy's father
came out and almost cried over him; and that night he ate all
that was given him till he could I eat no more, and went to bed on
Teddy's shoulder, where Teddy's mother saw him when she came to look
late at night. 'He saved our lives and Teddy's life,' she said to her husband. 'Just think, he saved all our lives.' Rikki-tikki woke up with a jump, for all the mongooses are light
sleepers. 'Oh, it's you,' said he. 'What are you bothering for? All the cobras
are dead; and if they weren't, I'm here.' Rikki-tikki had a right to be proud of himself; but he did not grow
too proud, and he kept that garden as a mongoose should keep it, with
tooth and jump and spring and bite, till never a cobra dared show its
head inside the walls. DARZEE'S CHAUNT. (SUNG IN HONOUR OF RIKKI-TIKKI-TAVI.) Singer and tailor am I--
          Doubled the joys that I know--
        Proud of my lilt through the sky,
          Proud of the house that I sew--
Over and under, so weave I my music--so weave I the house that I sew. Sing to your fledglings again,
          Mother, oh lift up your head! Evil that plagued us is slain,
          Death in the garden lies dead. Terror that hid  in  the roses is impotent--flung on the dung-hill
   and dead! Who hath delivered us, who? Tell me his nest and his name. Rikki, the valiant, the true,
          Tikki, with eyeballs of flame,
Rik-tikki-tikki, the ivory-fanged, the hunter with eyeballs of flame. Give him the Thanks of the Birds,
          Bowing with tail-feathers spread! Praise him with nightingale words--
          Nay, I will praise him instead. Hear! I will sing you the praise of the bottle-tailed Rikki, with
   eyeballs of red! (_Here Rikki-tikki interrupted, and the rest of the song is lost_.) WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR PART I

       I have done one braver thing
         Than all the worthies did;
       And yet a braver thence doth spring,
         Which is to keep that hid. THE UNDERTAKING. 'Is it officially declared yet?' 'They've gone as far as to admit extreme local scarcity, and they've
started relief-works in one or two districts, the paper says.' 'That means it will be declared as soon as they can make sure of the
men and the rolling-stock. Shouldn't wonder if it were as bad as the
Big Famine.' 'Can't be,' said Scott, turning a little in the long cane chair. 'We've had fifteen-anna crops in the north, and Bombay and Bengal
report more than they know what to do with. They'll be able to check
it before it gets out of hand. It will only be local.' Martyn picked up the _Pioneer_ from the table, read through the
telegrams once more, and put up his feet on the chair-rests. It was a
hot, dark, breathless evening, heavy with the smell of the
newly-watered Mall. The flowers in the Club gardens were dead and
black on their stalks, the little lotus-pond was a circle of caked
mud, and the tamarisk-trees were white with the dust of days. Most of
the men were at the bandstand in the public gardens--from the Club
verandah you could hear the native Police band hammering stale
waltzes--or on the polo-ground or in the high-walled fives-court,
hotter than a Dutch oven. Half a dozen grooms, squatted at the heads
of their ponies, waited their masters' return. From time to time a
man would ride at a foot-pace into the Club compound, and listlessly
loaf over to the whitewashed barracks beside the main building. These
were supposed to be chambers. Men lived in them, meeting the same
faces night after night at dinner, and drawing out their office-work
till the latest possible hour, that they might escape that doleful
company. 'What are you going to do?' said Martyn, with a yawn. 'Let's have a
swim before dinner.' 'Water's hot,' said Scott. 'I was at the bath to-day.' 'Play you game o' billiards--fifty up.' 'It's a hundred and five in the hall now. Sit still and don't be so
abominably energetic.' A grunting camel swung up to the porch, his badged and belted rider
fumbling a leather pouch. '_Kubber-kargaz--ki--yektraaa_,' the man whined, handing down the
newspaper extra--a slip printed on one side only, and damp from the
press. It was pinned on the green baize-board, between notices of
ponies for sale and fox-terriers missing. Martyn rose lazily, read it, and whistled. 'It's declared!' he cried. 'One, two, three--eight districts go under the operation of the
Famine Code _ek dum_. They've put Jimmy Hawkins in charge.' 'Good business!' said Scott, with the first sign of interest he had
shown. 'When in doubt hire a Punjabi. I worked under Jimmy when I
first came out and he belonged to the Punjab. He has more _bundobust_
than most men.' 'Jimmy's a Jubilee Knight now,' said Martyn. 'He was a good chap,
even though he is a thrice-born civilian and went to the Benighted
Presidency. What unholy names these Madras districts rejoice in--all
_ungas_ or _rungas_ or _pillays_ or _polliums_.' A dog-cart drove up, and a man entered, mopping his head. He was
editor of the one daily paper at the capital of a province of
twenty-five million natives and a few hundred white men, and as his
staff was limited to himself and one assistant, his office hours ran
variously from ten to twenty a day. 'Hi, Raines; you're supposed to know everything,' said Martyn,
stopping him. 'How's this Madras "scarcity" going to turn out?' 'No one knows as yet. There's a message as long as your arm coming in
on the telephone. I've left my cub to fill it out. Madras has owned
she can't manage it alone, and Jimmy seems to have a free hand in
getting all the men he needs. Arbuthnot's warned to hold himself in
readiness.' '"Badger" Arbuthnot?' 'The Peshawur chap. Yes, and the _Pi_ wires that Ellis and Clay have
been moved from the North-West already, and they've taken half a
dozen Bombay men, too. It's pukka famine, by the looks of it.' 'They're nearer the scene of action than we are; but if it comes to
indenting on the Punjab this early, there's more in this than meets
the eye,' said Martyn. 'Here to-day and gone to-morrow. Didn't come to stay for ever,' said
Scott, dropping one of Marryat's novels, and rising to his feet. 'Martyn, your sister's waiting for you.' A rough gray horse was backing and shifting at the edge of the
verandah, where the light of a kerosene-lamp fell on a brown calico
habit and a white face under a gray felt hat. 'Right, O,' said Martyn. 'I'm ready. Better come and dine with us if
you've nothing to do, Scott. William, is there any dinner in the
house?' 'I'll go home first and see,' was the rider's answer. 'You can drive
him over--at eight, remember.' Scott moved leisurely to his room, and changed into the evening-dress
of the season and the country: spotless white linen from head to
foot, with a broad silk cummerbund. Dinner at the Martyns' was a
decided improvement on the goat-mutton, twiney-tough fowl, and
tinned entrees of the Club. But it was a great pity Martyn could not
afford to send his sister to the Hills for the hot weather. As an
Acting District Superintendent of Police, Martyn drew the magnificent
pay of six hundred depreciated silver rupees a month, and his little
four-roomed bungalow said just as much. There were the usual
blue-and-white striped jail-made rugs on the uneven floor; the usual
glass studded Amritsar _phulkaris_ draped to nails driven into the
flaking whitewash of the walls; the usual half-dozen chairs that did
not match, picked up at sales of dead men's effects; and the usual
streaks of black grease where the leather punka-thong ran through the
wall. It was as though everything had been unpacked the night before
to be repacked next morning. Not a door in the house was true on its
hinges. The little windows, fifteen feet up, were darkened with
wasp-nests, and lizards hunted flies between the beams of the
wood-ceiled roof. But all this was part of Scott's life. Thus did
people live who had such an income; and in a land where each man's
pay, age, and position are printed in a book, that all may read, it
is hardly worth while to play at pretences in word or deed. Scott
counted eight years' service in the Irrigation Department, and drew
eight hundred rupees a month, on the understanding that if he served
the State faithfully for another twenty-two years he could retire on
a pension of some four hundred rupees a month. His working life,
which had been spent chiefly under canvas or in temporary shelters
where a man could sleep, eat, and write letters, was bound up with
the opening and guarding of irrigation canals, the handling of two or
three thousand workmen of all castes and creeds, and the payment of
vast sums of coined silver. He had finished that spring, not without
credit, the last section of the great Mosuhl Canal, and--much against
his will, for he hated office work--had been sent in to serve during
the hot weather on the accounts and supply side of the Department,
with sole charge of the sweltering sub-office at the capital of the
Province. Martyn knew this; William, his sister, knew it; and
everybody knew it. Scott knew, too, as well as the rest of the world, that Miss Martyn
had come out to India four years before, to keep house for her
brother, who, as everyone, again, knew, had borrowed the money to pay
for her passage, and that she ought, as all the world said, to have
married long ago. Instead of this, she had refused some half a dozen
subalterns, a civilian twenty years her senior, one major, and a man
in the Indian Medical Department. This, too, was common property. She
had 'stayed down three hot weathers,' as the saying is, because her
brother was in debt and could not afford the expense of her keep at
even a cheap hill-station. Therefore her face was white as bone, and
in the centre of her forehead was a big silvery scar about the size
of a shilling--the mark of a Delhi sore, which is the same as a
'Bagdad date.' This comes from drinking bad water, and slowly eats
into the flesh till it is ripe enough to be burned out with acids. None the less William had enjoyed herself hugely in her four years. Twice she had been nearly drowned while fording a river on horseback;
once she had been run away with on a camel; had witnessed a midnight
attack of thieves on her brother's camp; had seen justice
administered with long sticks, in the open under trees; could speak
Urdu and even rough Punjabi with a fluency that was envied by her
seniors; had altogether fallen out of the habit of writing to her
aunts in England, or cutting the pages of the English magazines; had
been through a very bad cholera year, seeing sights unfit to be told;
and had wound up her experiences by six weeks of typhoid fever,
during which her head had been shaved; and hoped to keep her
twenty-third birthday that September. It is conceivable that her
aunts would not have approved of a girl who never set foot on the
ground if a horse were within hail; who rode to dances with a shawl
thrown over her skirt; who wore her hair cropped and curling all over
her head; who answered indifferently to the name of William or Bill;
whose speech was heavy with the flowers of the vernacular; who could
act in amateur theatricals, play on the banjo, rule eight servants
and two horses, their accounts and their diseases, and look men
slowly and deliberately between the eyes--yea, after they had
proposed to her and been rejected. 'I like men who do things,' she had confided to a man in the
Educational Department, who was teaching the sons of cloth merchants
and dyers the beauty of Wordsworth's 'Excursion' in annotated
cram-books; and when he grew poetical, William explained that she
'didn't understand poetry very much; it made her head ache,' and
another broken heart took refuge at the Club. But it was all
William's fault. She delighted in hearing men talk of their own work,
and that is the most fatal way of bringing a man to your feet. Scott had known her more or less for some three years, meeting her,
as a rule, under canvas when his camp and her brother's joined for a
day on the edge of the Indian Desert. He had danced with her several
times at the big Christmas gatherings, when as many as five hundred
white people came into the station; and he had always a great
respect for her housekeeping and her dinners. She looked more like a boy than ever when, after their meal, she sat,
one foot tucked under her, on the leather camp-sofa, rolling
cigarettes for her brother, her low forehead puckered beneath the
dark curls as she twiddled the papers. She stuck out her rounded
chin when the tobacco stayed in place, and, with a gesture as true as
a school-boy's throwing a stone, tossed the finished article across
the room to Martyn, who caught it with one hand, and continued his
talk with Scott. It was all 'shop,'--canals and the policing of
canals; the sins of villagers who stole more water than they had paid
for, and the grosser sin of native constables who connived at the
thefts; of the transplanting bodily of villages to newly-irrigated
ground, and of the coming fight with the desert in the south when the
Provincial funds should warrant the opening of the long-surveyed Luni
Protective Canal System. And Scott spoke openly of his great desire
to be put on one particular section of the work where he knew the
land and the people, and Martyn sighed for a billet in the Himalayan
foot-hills, and spoke his mind of his superiors, and William rolled
cigarettes and said nothing, but smiled gravely on her brother
because he was happy. At ten Scott's horse came to the door, and the evening was ended. The lights of the two low bungalows in which the daily paper was
printed showed bright across the road. It was too early to try to
find sleep, and Scott drifted over to the editor. Raines, stripped
to the waist like a sailor at a gun, lay in a long chair, waiting
for night telegrams. He had a theory that if a man did not stay by
his work all day and most of the night he laid himself open to fever;
so he ate and slept among his files. 'Can you do it?' he said drowsily. 'I didn't mean to bring you over.' 'About what? I've been dining at the Martyns'.' 'The famine, of course, Martyn's  warned for it, too. They're taking
men where they can find 'em. I sent a note to you at the Club just
now, asking if you could do us a letter once a week from the
south--between two and three columns, say. Nothing sensational, of
course, but just plain facts about who is doing what, and so forth. Our regular rates--ten rupees a column.' 'Sorry, but it's out of my line,' Scott answered, staring absently at
the map of India on the wall. 'It's rough on Martyn--very. Wonder
what he'll do with his sister. Wonder what the deuce they'll do with
me? I've no famine experience. This is the first I've heard of it. _Am_ I ordered?' 'Oh, yes. Here's the wire. They'll put you on relief-works,' Raines
went on, 'with a horde of Madrassis dying like flies; one native
apothecary and half a pint of cholera-mixture among the ten thousand
of you. It comes of your being idle for the moment. Every man who
isn't doing two men's work seems to have been called upon. Hawkins
evidently believes in Punjabis. It's going to be quite as bad as
anything they have had in the last ten years.' 'It's all in the day's work, worse luck. I suppose I shall get my
orders officially some time to morrow. I'm glad I happened to drop
in. Better go and pack my kit now. Who relieves me here--do you
know?' Raines turned over a sheaf of telegrams. 'McEuan,' said he, 'from
Murree.' Scott chuckled. 'He thought he was going to be cool all summer. He'll
be very sick about this. Well, no good talking. Night.' Two hours later, Scott, with a clear conscience, laid himself down to
rest on a string cot in a bare room. Two worn bullock-trunks, a
leather water-bottle, a tin ice-box, and his pet saddle sewed up in
sacking were piled at the door, and the Club secretary's receipt for
last month's bill was under his pillow. His orders came next morning,
and with them an unofficial telegram from Sir James Hawkins, who did
not forget good men, bidding him report himself with all speed at
some unpronounceable place fifteen hundred miles to the south, for
the famine was sore in the land, and white men were needed. A pink and fattish youth arrived in the red-hot noonday, whimpering a
little at fate and famines, which never allowed any one three months'
peace. He was Scott's successor--another cog in the machinery, moved
forward behind his fellow, whose services, as the official
announcement ran, 'were placed at the disposal of the Madras
Government for famine duty until further orders.' Scott handed over
the funds in his charge, showed him the coolest corner in the office,
warned him against excess of zeal, and, as twilight fell, departed
from the Club in a hired carriage, with his faithful body servant,
Faiz Ullah, and a mound of disordered baggage atop, to catch the
Southern Mail at the loopholed and bastioned railway-station. The
heat from the thick brick walls struck him across the face as if it
had been a hot towel, and he reflected that there were at least five
nights and four days of travel before him. Faiz Ullah, used to the
chances of service, plunged into the crowd on the stone platform,
while Scott, a black cheroot between his teeth, waited till his
compartment should be set away. A dozen native policemen, with their
rifles and bundles, shouldered into the press of Punjabi farmers,
Sikh craftsmen, and greasy-locked Afreedee pedlars, escorting with
all pomp Martyn's uniform case, water-bottles, ice-box, and
bedding-roll. They saw Faiz Ullah's lifted hand, and steered for it. 'My Sahib and your Sahib,' said Faiz Ullah to Martyn's man, 'will
travel together. Thou and I, O brother, will thus secure the
servants' places close by, and because of our masters' authority none
will dare to disturb us.' When Faiz Ullah reported all things ready, Scott settled down
coatless and bootless on the broad leather-covered bunk. The heat
under the iron-arched roof of the station might have been anything
over a hundred degrees. At the last moment Martyn entered, hot and
dripping. 'Don't swear,' said Scott, lazily; 'it's too late to change your
carriage; and we'll divide the ice.' 'What are you doing here?' said the policeman. 'Lent to the Madras Government, same as you. By Jove, it's a bender
of a night! Are you taking any of your men down?' 'A dozen. Suppose I'll have to superintend relief distributions. Didn't know you were under orders too.' 'I didn't till after I left you last night. Raines had the news
first. My orders came this morning. McEuan relieved me at four, and
I got off at once. Shouldn't wonder if it wouldn't be a good
thing--this famine--if we come through it alive.' 'Jimmy ought to put you and me to work together,' said Martyn; and
then, after a pause: 'My sister's here.' 'Good business,' said Scott, heartily. 'Going to get off at Umballa,
I suppose, and go up to Simla. Who'll she stay with there?' 'No-o; that's just the trouble of it. She's going down with me.' Scott sat bolt upright under the oil lamp as the train jolted past
Tarn-Taran station. 'What! You don't mean you couldn't afford--'

'Oh, I'd have scraped up the money somehow.' 'You might have come to me, to begin with,' said Scott, stiffly; 'we
aren't altogether strangers.' 'Well, you needn't be stuffy about it. I might, but--you don't know
my sister. I've been explaining and exhorting and entreating and
commanding and all the rest of it all day--lost my temper since seven
this morning, and haven't got it back yet--but she wouldn't hear of
any compromise, A woman's entitled to travel with her husband if she
wants to, and William says she's on the same footing. You see, we've
been together all our lives, more or less, since my people died. It
isn't as if she were an ordinary sister.' 'All the sisters I've ever heard of would have stayed where they were
well off.' 'She's as clever as a man, confound her,' Martyn went on. 'She broke
up the bungalow over my head while I was talking at her. Settled the
whole _subchiz_ [outfit] in three hours--servants, horses, and all. I
didn't get my orders till nine. 'Jimmy Hawkins won't be pleased,' said Scott. 'A famine's no place
for a woman.' 'Mrs. Jim--I mean Lady Jim's in camp with him. At any rate, she says
she will look after my sister. William wired down to her on her own
responsibility, asking if she could come, and knocked the ground from
under me by showing me her answer.' Scott laughed aloud. 'If she can do that she can take care of
herself, and Mrs. Jim won't let her run into any mischief. There
aren't many women, sisters or wives, who would walk into a famine
with their eyes open. It isn't as if she didn't know what these
things mean. She was through the Jaloo cholera last year.' The train stopped at Amritsar, and Scott went back to the ladies'
compartment, immediately behind their carriage. William, a cloth
riding-cap on her curls, nodded affably. 'Come in and have some tea,' she said. 'Best thing in the world for
heat-apoplexy.' 'Do I look as if I were going to have heat-apoplexy?' 'Never can tell,' said William, wisely. 'It's always best to be
ready.' She had arranged her belongings with the knowledge of an old
campaigner. A felt-covered water-bottle hung in the draught of one
of the shuttered windows; a tea-set of Russian china, packed in a
wadded basket, stood ready on the seat: and a travelling spirit-lamp
was clamped against the woodwork above it. William served them generously, in large cups, hot tea, which saves
the veins of the neck from swelling inopportunely on a hot night. It
was characteristic of the girl that, her plan of action once settled,
she asked for no comments on it. Life with men who had a great deal
of work to do, and very little time to do it in, had taught her the
wisdom of effacing as well as of fending for herself. She did not by
word or deed suggest that she would be useful, comforting, or
beautiful in their travels, but continued about her business
serenely: put the cups back without clatter when tea was ended, and
made cigarettes for her guests. 'This time last night,' said Scott, 'we didn't expect--er--this kind
of thing, did we?' 'I've learned to expect anything,' said William. 'You know, in our
service, we live at the end of the telegraph; but, of course, this
ought to be a good thing for us all, departmentally--if we live.' 'It knocks us out of the running in our own Province,' Scott replied,
with equal gravity. 'I hoped to be put on the Luni Protective Works
this cold weather; but there's no saying how long the famine may keep
us.' 'Hardly beyond October I should think,' said Martyn. 'It will be
ended, one way or the other, then.' 'And we've nearly a week of this,' said William. 'Sha'n't we be dusty
when it's over?' For a night and a day they knew their surroundings; and for a night
and a day, skirting the edge of the great Indian Desert on a
narrow-gauge line, they remembered how in the days of their
apprenticeship they had come by that road from Bombay. Then the
languages in which the names of the stations were written changed,
and they launched south into a foreign land, where the very
smells were new. Many long and heavily-laden grain trains were in
front of them, and they could feel the hand of Jimmy Hawkins from
far off. They waited in extemporised sidings blocked by processions
of empty trucks returning to the north, and were coupled on to
slow, crawling trains, and dropped at midnight, Heaven knew where;
but it was furiously hot; and they walked to and fro among sacks,
and dogs howled. Then they came to an India more strange to them than to the
untravelled Englishman--the flat, red India of palm-tree,
palmyra-palm, and rice, the India of the picture-books, of _Little
Henry and His Bearer_--all dead and dry in the baking heat. They had
left the incessant passenger-traffic of the north and west far and
far behind them. Here the people crawled to the side of the train,
holding their little ones  in  their  arms; and a loaded truck would
be left behind, men and women clustering round and above it like ants
by spilled honey. Once in the twilight they saw on a dusty plain a
regiment of little brown men, each bearing a body over his shoulder;
and when the train stopped to leave yet another truck, they perceived
that the burdens were not corpses, but only foodless folk picked up
beside their dead oxen by a corps of Irregular troops. Now they met
more white men, here one and there two, whose tents stood close to
the line, and who came armed with written authorities and angry words
to cut off a truck. They were too busy to do more than nod at Scott
and Martyn, and stare curiously at William, who could do nothing
except make tea, and watch how her men staved off the rush of
wailing, walking skeletons, putting them down three at a time in
heaps, with their own hands uncoupling the marked trucks, or taking
receipts from the hollowed-eyed, weary white men, who spoke another
argot than theirs. They ran out of ice, out of soda-water, and out of tea; for they were
six days and seven nights on the road, and it seemed to them like
seven times seven years. At last, in a dry, hot dawn, in a land of death, lit by long red
fires of railway sleepers, where they were burning the dead, they
came to their destination, and were met by Jim Hawkins, the Head of
the Famine, unshaven, unwashed, but cheery, and entirely in command
of affairs. Martyn, he decreed, then and there, was to live on trains till
further orders; was to go back with empty trucks, filling them with
starving people as he found them, and dropping them at a famine-camp
on the edge of the Eight Districts. He would pick up supplies and
return, and his constables would guard the loaded grain-cars, also
picking up people, and would drop them at a camp a hundred miles
south. Scott--Hawkins was very glad to see Scott again--would, that
same hour, take charge of a convoy of bullock-carts, and would go
south, feeding as he went, to yet another famine-camp, far from the
rail, where he would leave his starving--there would be no lack of
starving on the route--and wait for orders by telegraph. Generally,
Scott was in all small things to do what he thought best. William bit her under lip. There was no one in the wide world like
her one brother, but Martyn's orders gave him no discretion. She came
out, masked with dust from head to foot, a horse-shoe wrinkle on her
forehead, put here by much thinking during the past week, but as
self-possessed as ever. Mrs. Jim--who should have been Lady Jim, but
that no one remembered to call her aright--took possession of her
with a little gasp. 'Oh, I'm so glad you're here,' she almost sobbed. 'You oughtn't to,
of course, but there--there isn't another woman in the place, and we
must help each other, you know; and we've all the wretched people and
the little babies they are selling.' 'I've seen some,' said William. 'Isn't it ghastly? I've bought twenty; they're in our camp; but won't
you have something to eat first? We've more than ten people can do
here; and I've got a horse for you. Oh, I'm so glad you've come! You're a Punjabi too, you know.' 'Steady, Lizzie,' said Hawkins, over his shoulder. 'We'll look after
you, Miss Martyn. Sorry I can't ask you to breakfast, Martyn. You'll
have to eat as you go. Leave two of your men to help Scott. These
poor devils can't stand up to load carts. Saunders' (this to the
engine-driver, half asleep in the cab), 'back down and get those
empties away.' You've 'line clear' to Anundrapillay; they'll give you
orders north of that. Scott, load up your carts from that B.P.P. truck, and be off as soon as you can. The Eurasian in the pink shirt
is your interpreter and guide. You'll find an apothecary of sorts
tied to the yoke of the second wagon. He's been trying to bolt;
you'll have to look after him. Lizzie, drive Miss Martyn to camp, and
tell them to send the red horse down here for me.' Scott, with Faiz Ullah and two policemen, was already busy on the
carts, backing them up to the truck and unbolting the sideboards
quietly, while the others pitched in the bags of millet and wheat. Hawkins watched him for as long as it took to fill one cart. 'That's a good man,' he said. 'If all goes well I shall work
him--hard.' This was Jim Hawkins's notion of the highest compliment
one human being could pay another. An hour later Scott was under way; the apothecary threatening him
with the penalties of the law for that he, a member of the
Subordinate Medical Department, had been coerced and bound against
his will and all laws governing the liberty of the subject; the
pink-shirted Eurasian begging leave to see his mother, who happened
to be dying some three miles, away: 'Only verree, verree short leave
of absence, and will presently return, sar--'; the two constables,
armed with staves, bringing up the rear; and Faiz Ullah, a
Mohammedan's contempt for all Hindoos and foreigners in every line of
his face, explaining to the drivers that though Scott Sahib was a man
to be feared on all fours, he, Faiz Ullah, was Authority itself. The procession creaked past Hawkins's camp--three stained tents under
a clump of dead trees; behind them the famine-shed where a crowd of
hopeless ones tossed their arms around the cooking-kettles. 'Wish to Heaven William had kept out of it,' said Scott to himself,
after a glance. 'We'll have cholera, sure as a gun, when the Rains
come.' But William seemed to have taken kindly to the operations of the
Famine Code, which, when famine is declared, supersede the workings
of the ordinary law. Scott saw her, the centre of a mob of weeping
women, in a calico riding-habit and a blue-gray felt hat with a gold
puggaree. 'I want fifty rupees, please. I forgot to ask Jack before he went
away. Can you lend it me? It's for condensed milk for the babies,'
said she. Scott took the money from his belt, and handed it over without a
word. 'For goodness sake take care of yourself,' he said. 'Oh, I shall be all right. We ought to get the milk in two days. By
the way, the orders are, I was to tell you, that you're to take one
of Sir Jim's horses. There's a gray Cabuli here that I thought would
be just your style, so I've said you'd take him. Was that right?' 'That's awfully good of you. We can't either of us talk much about
style, I'm afraid.' Scott was in a weather-stained drill shooting-kit, very white at the
seams and a little frayed at the wrists. William regarded him
thoughtfully, from his pith helmet to his greased ankle-boots. 'You
look very nice, I think. Are you sure you've everything you'll
need--quinine, chlorodyne, and so on?' 'Think so,' said Scott, patting three or four of his shooting pockets
as the horse was led up, and he mounted and rode alongside his
convoy. 'Good-bye,' he cried. 'Good-bye, and good luck,' said William. 'I'm awfully obliged for the
money.' She turned on a spurred heel and disappeared into the tent,
while the carts pushed on past the famine-sheds, past the roaring
lines of the thick, fat fires, down to the baked Gehenna of the
South. WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR

PART II

       So let us melt and make no noise,
         No tear-floods nor sigh-tempests move;
       'Twere profanation of our joys
         To tell the laity our love. A VALEDICTION. It was punishing work, even though he travelled by night and camped
by day; but within the limits of his vision there was no man whom
Scott could call master. He was as free as Jimmy Hawkins--freer, in
fact, for the Government held the Head of the Famine tied neatly to a
telegraph-wire, and if Jimmy had ever regarded telegrams seriously,
the death-rate of that famine would have been much higher than it
was. At the end of a few days' crawling Scott learned something of the
size of the India which he served; and it astonished him. His carts,
as you know, were loaded with wheat, millet, and barley, good
food-grains needing only a little grinding. But the people to whom he
brought the life-giving stuffs were rice eaters. They knew how to
hull rice in their mortars, but they knew nothing of the heavy stone
querns of the North, and less of the material that the white man
convoyed so laboriously. They clamoured for rice--unhusked paddy,
such as they were accustomed to--and, when they found that there was
none, broke away weeping from the sides of the cart. What was the use
of these strange hard grains that choked their throats? They would
die. And then and there were many of them kept their word. Others
took their allowance, and bartered enough millet to feed a man
through a week for a few handfuls of rotten rice saved by some less
unfortunate. A few put their shares into the rice-mortars, pounded
it, and made a paste with foul water; but they were very few. Scott
understood dimly that many people in the India of the South ate rice,
as a rule, but he had spent his service in a grain Province, had
seldom seen rice in the blade or the ear, and least of all would
have believed that, in time of deadly need, men would die at arm's
length of plenty, sooner than touch food they did not know. In vain
the interpreters interpreted; in vain his two policemen showed by
vigorous pantomime what should be done. The starving crept away to
their bark and weeds, grubs, leaves, and clay, and left the open
sacks untouched. But sometimes the women laid their phantoms of
children at Scott's feet, looking back as they staggered away. Faiz Ullah opined it was the will of God that these foreigners should
die, and therefore it remained only to give orders to burn the dead. None the less there was no reason why the Sahib should lack his
comforts, and Faiz Ullah, a campaigner of experience, had picked up a
few lean goats and had added them to the procession. That they might
give milk for the morning meal, he was feeding them on the good grain
that these imbeciles rejected. 'Yes,' said Faiz Ullah; 'if the Sahib
thought fit, a little milk might be given to some of the babies';
but, as the Sahib well knew, babies were cheap, and, for his own
part, Faiz Ullah held that there was no Government order as to
babies. Scott spoke forcefully to Faiz Ullah and the two policemen,
and bade them capture goats where they could find them. This they
most joyfully did, for it was a recreation, and many ownerless goats
were driven in. Once fed, the poor brutes were willing enough to
follow the carts, and a few days' good food--food such as human
beings died for lack of--set them in milk again. 'But I am no goatherd,' said Faiz Ullah. 'It is against my _izzat_
[my honour].' 'When we cross the Bias River again we will talk of _izzat_,' Scott
replied. 'Till that day thou and the policemen shall be sweepers to
the camp, if I give the order.' 'Thus, then, it is done,' grunted Faiz Ullah, 'if the Sahib will have
it so'; and he showed how a goat should be milked, while Scott stood
over him. 'Now we will feed them,' said Scott; 'thrice a day we will feed
them'; and he bowed his back to the milking, and took a horrible
cramp. When you have to keep connection unbroken between a restless mother
of kids and a baby who is at the point of death, you suffer in all
your system. But the babies were fed. Morning, noon and evening Scott
would solemnly lift them out one by one from their nest of gunny-bags
under the cart-tilts. There were always many who could do no more
than breathe, and the milk was dropped into their toothless mouths
drop by drop, with due pauses when they choked. Each morning, too,
the goats were fed; and since they would struggle without a leader,
and since the natives were hirelings, Scott was forced to give up
riding, and pace slowly at the head of his flocks, accommodating
his step to their weaknesses. All this was sufficiently absurd, and
he felt the absurdity keenly; but at least he was saving life, and
when the women saw that their children did not die, they made shift
to eat a little of the strange foods, and crawled after the carts,
blessing the master of the goats. 'Give the women something to live for,' said Scott to himself, as
he sneezed in the dust of a hundred little feet, 'and they'll hang
on somehow. But this beats William's condensed milk trick all to
pieces. I shall never live it down, though.' He reached his destination very slowly, found that a rice-ship had
come in from Burmah, and that stores of paddy were available; found
also an overworked Englishman in charge of the shed, and, loading the
carts, set back to cover the ground he had already passed. He left
some of the children and half his goats at the famine-shed. For this
he was not thanked by the Englishman, who had already more stray
babies than he knew what to do with. Scott's back was suppled to
stooping now, and he went on with his wayside ministrations in
addition to distributing the paddy. More babies and more goats were
added unto him; but now some of the babies wore rags, and beads round
their wrists or necks. '_That_,' said the interpreter, as though
Scott did not know, 'signifies that their mothers hope in eventual
contingency to resume them offeecially.' 'The sooner the better,' said Scott; but at the same time he marked,
with the pride of ownership, how this or that little Ramasawmy was
putting on flesh like a bantam. As the paddy carts were emptied he
headed for Hawkins's camp by the railway, timing his arrival to fit
in with the dinner-hour, for it was long since he had eaten at a
cloth. He had no desire to make any dramatic entry, but an accident
of the sunset ordered it that, when he had taken off his helmet to
get the evening breeze, the low light should fall across his
forehead, and he could not see what was before him; while one
waiting at the tent door beheld, with new eyes, a young man,
beautiful as Paris, a god in a halo of golden dust, walking slowly
at the head of his flocks, while at his knee ran small naked Cupids. But she laughed--William, in a slate-coloured blouse, laughed
consumedly till Scott, putting the best face he could upon the
matter, halted his armies and bade her admire the kindergarten. It
was an unseemly sight, but the proprieties had been left ages ago,
with the tea-party at Amritsar Station, fifteen hundred miles to the
northward. 'They are coming on nicely,' said William. 'We've only
five-and-twenty here now. The women are beginning to take them away
again.' 'Are you in charge of the babies, then?' 'Yes--Mrs. Jim and I. We didn't think of goats, though. We've been
trying condensed milk and water.' 'Any losses?' 'More than I care to think of,' said William, with a shudder. 'And
you?' Scott said nothing. There had been many little burials along his
route--many mothers who had wept when they did not find again the
children they had trusted to the care of the Government. Then Hawkins came out carrying a razor, at which Scott looked
hungrily, for he had a beard that he did not love. And when they
sat down to dinner in the tent he told his tale in few words, as it
might have been an official report. Mrs. Jim snuffled from time to
time, and Jim bowed his head judicially; but William's gray eyes were
on the clean-shaven face, and it was to her that Scott seemed to
speak. 'Good for the Pauper Province!' said William, her chin in her hand,
as she leaned forward among the wine-glasses. Her cheeks had fallen
in, and the scar on her forehead was more prominent than ever, but
the well-turned neck rose roundly as a column from the ruffle of the
blouse which was the accepted evening-dress in camp. 'It was awfully absurd at times,' said Scott. 'You see I didn't know
much about milking or babies. They'll chaff my head off, if the tale
goes north.' 'Let 'em,' said William, haughtily. 'We've all done coolie-work
since we came. I know Jack has.' This was to Hawkins's address, and
the big man smiled blandly. 'Your brother's a highly efficient officer, William,' said he, and
I've done him the honour of treating him as he deserves. Remember, I
write the confidential reports.' 'Then you must say that William's worth her weight in gold,' said
Mrs. Jim. 'I don't know what we should have done without her. She has
been everything to us.' She dropped her hand upon William's, which
was rough with much handling of reins, and William patted it softly. Jim beamed on the company. Things were going well with his world. Three of his more grossly incompetent men had died, and their places
had been filled by their betters. Every day brought the rains nearer. They had put out the famine in five of the Eight Districts, and,
after all, the death-rate had not been too heavy--things considered. He looked Scott over carefully, as an ogre looks over a man, and
rejoiced in his thews and iron-hard condition. 'He's just the least bit in the world tucked up,' said Jim to
himself, 'but he can do two men's work yet.' Then he was aware that
Mrs. Jim was telegraphing to him, and according to the domestic code
the message ran: 'A clear case. Look at them!' He looked and listened. All that William was saying was: 'What can
you expect of a country where they call a _bhistee_ [a water-carrier]
a _tunni-cutch?_' and all that Scott answered was: 'I shall be
precious glad to get back to the Club. Save me a dance at the
Christmas ball, won't you?' 'It's a far cry from here to the Lawrence Hall,' said Jim. 'Better
turn in early, Scott. It's paddy-carts to-morrow; you'll begin
loading at five.' 'Aren't you going to give Mr. Scott one day's rest?' 'Wish I could, Lizzie. 'Fraid I can't. As long as he can stand up we
must use him.' 'Well, I've had one Europe evening, at least ... By Jove, I'd nearly
forgotten! What do I do about those babies of mine?' 'Leave them here,' said William--'we are in charge of that--and as
many goats as you can spare. I must learn how to milk now.' 'If you care to get up early enough to-morrow I'll show you. I have
to milk, you see; and, by the way, half of em have beads and things
round their necks. You must be careful not to take 'em off, in case
the mothers turn up.' 'You forget I've had some experience here.' 'I hope to goodness you won't overdo.' Scott's voice was unguarded. 'I'll take care of her,' said Mrs. Jim, telegraphing hundred-word
messages as she carried William off, while Jim gave Scott his orders
for the coming campaign. It was very late--nearly nine o'clock. 'Jim, you're a brute,' said his wife, that night; and the Head of the
Famine chuckled. 'Not a bit of it, dear I remember doing the first Jandiala Settlement
for the sake of a girl in a crinoline; and she was slender, Lizzie. I've never done as good a piece of work since. _He_'ll work like a
demon.' 'But you might have given him one day.' 'And let things come to a head now? No, dear; it's their happiest
time.' 'I don't believe either of the dears know what's the matter with
them. Isn't it beautiful? Isn't it lovely?' 'Getting up at three to learn to milk, bless her heart! Ye gods, why
must we grow old and fat?' 'She's a darling. She has done more work under me--'

'Under _you!_ The day after she came she was in charge and you were
her subordinate, and you've stayed there ever since. She manages you
almost as well as you manage me.' 'She doesn't, and that's why I love her. She's as direct as a man-as
her brother.' 'Her brother's weaker than she is. He's always coming to me for
orders; but he's honest, and a glutton for work. I confess I'm
rather fond of William, and if I had a daughter--'

The talk ended there. Far away in the Derajat was a child's grave
more than twenty years old, and neither Jim nor his wife spoke of it
any more. 'All the same, you're responsible,' Jim added, after a moment's
silence. 'Bless 'em,' said Mrs. Jim, sleepily. Before the stars paled, Scott, who slept in an empty cart, waked and
went about his work in silence; it seemed at that hour unkind to
rouse Faiz Ullah and the interpreter. His head being close to the
ground, he did not hear William till she stood over him in the dingy
old riding-habit, her eyes still heavy with sleep, a cup of tea and a
piece of toast in her hands. There was a baby on the ground,
squirming on a piece of blanket, and a six-year-old child peered over
Scott's shoulder. 'Hai, you little rip,' said Scott, 'how the deuce do you expect to
get your rations if you aren't quiet?' A cool white hand steadied the brat, who forthwith choked as the milk
gurgled into his mouth. 'Mornin',' said the milker. 'You've no notion how these little
fellows can wriggle.' 'Oh, yes, I have.' She whispered, because the world was asleep. 'Only
I feed them with a spoon or a rag. Yours are fatter than mine....
And you've been doing this day after day, twice a day?' The voice was
almost lost. 'Yes; it was absurd. Now you try,' he said, giving place to the girl. 'Look out! A goat's not a cow.' The goat protested against the amateur, and there was a scuffle, in
which Scott snatched up the baby. Then it was all to do over again,
and William laughed softly and merrily. She managed, however, to feed
two babies, and a third. 'Don't the little beggars take it well!' said Scott. 'I trained 'em.' They were very busy and interested, when, lo! it was broad daylight,
and before they knew, the camp was awake, and they kneeled among the
goats, surprised by the day, both flushed to the temples. Yet all the
round world rolling up out of the darkness might have heard and seen
all that had passed between them. 'Oh,' said William, unsteadily, snatching up the tea and toast, 'I
had this made for you. It's stone-cold now. I thought you mightn't
have anything ready so early. Better not drink it. It's--it's
stone-cold.' 'That's awfully kind of you. It's just right. It's awfully good of
you, really. I'll leave my kids and goats with you and Mrs. Jim; and,
of course, any one in camp can show you about the milking.' 'Of course,' said William; and she grew pinker and pinker and
statelier and more stately, as she strode back to her tent, fanning
herself vigorously with the saucer. There were shrill lamentations through the camp when the elder
children saw their nurse move off without them. Faiz Ullah unbent so
far as to jest with the policemen, and Scott turned purple with shame
because Hawkins, already in the saddle, roared. A child escaped from the care of Mrs. Jim, and, running like a
rabbit, clung to Scott's boot, William pursuing with long, easy
strides. 'I will not go--I will not go!' shrieked the child, twining his feet
round Scott's ankle. 'They will kill me here. I do not know these
people.' 'I say,' said Scott, in broken Tamil, 'I say, she will do you no
harm. Go with her and be well fed.' 'Come!' said William, panting, with a wrathful glance at Scott, who
stood helpless and, as it were, hamstrung. 'Go back,' said Scott quickly to William. 'I'll send the little
chap over in a minute.' The tone of authority had its effect, but in a way Scott did not
exactly intend. The boy loosened his grasp, and said with gravity,
'I did not know the woman was thine. I will go.' Then he cried to
his companions, a mob of three-, four-, and five-year-olds waiting
on the success of his venture ere they stampeded: 'Go back and eat. It is our man's woman. She will obey his orders.' Jim collapsed where he sat; Faiz Ullah and the two policemen grinned;
and Scott's orders to the cartmen flew like hail. 'That is the custom of the Sahibs when truth is told in their
presence,' said Faiz Ullah. 'The time comes that I must seek new
service. Young wives, especially such as speak our language and have
knowledge of the ways of the Police, make great trouble for honest
butlers in the matter of weekly accounts.' What William thought of it all she did not say, but when her brother,
ten days later, came to camp for orders, and heard of Scott's
performances, he said, laughing: 'Well, that settles it. He'll be
_Bakri_ Scott to the end of his days' (_Bakri_, in the northern
vernacular, means a goat). 'What a lark! I'd have given a month's pay
to have seen him nursing famine babies. I fed some with _conjee_
[rice-water], but that was all right.' 'It's perfectly disgusting,' said his sister, with blazing eyes. 'A
man does something like--like that--and all you other men think of is
to give him an absurd nickname, and then you laugh and think it's
funny.' 'Ah,' said Mrs. Jim, sympathetically. 'Well, _you_ can't talk, William. You christened little Miss Demby
the Button-quail last cold weather; you know you did. India's the
land of nicknames.' That's different,' William replied. 'She was only a girl, and she
hadn't done anything except walk like a quail, and she _does_. But it
isn't fair to make fun of a man.' 'Scott won't care,' said Martyn. 'You can't get a rise out of old
Scotty. I've been trying for eight years, and you've only known him
for three. How does he look?' 'He looks very well,' said William, and went away with a flushed
cheek. '_Bakri_ Scott, indeed!' Then she laughed to herself, for she
knew the country of her service. 'But it will be _Bakri_ all the
same'; and she repeated it under her breath several times slowly,
whispering it into favour. When he returned to his duties on the railway, Martyn spread the name
far and wide among his associates, so that Scott met it as he led his
paddy-carts to war. The natives believed it to be some English title
of honour, and the cart-drivers used it in all simplicity till Faiz
Ullah, who did not approve of foreign japes, broke their heads. There
was very little time for milking now, except at the big camps, where
Jim had extended Scott's idea, and was feeding large flocks on the
useless northern grains. Enough paddy had come into the Eight
Districts to hold the people safe, if it were only distributed
quickly; and for that purpose no one was better than the big Canal
officer, who never lost his temper, never gave an unnecessary order,
and never questioned an order given. Scott pressed on, saving his
cattle, washing their galled necks daily, so that no time should be
lost on the road; reported himself with his rice at the minor
famine-sheds, unloaded, and went back light by forced night-march to
the next distributing centre, to find Hawkins's unvarying telegram:
'Do it again.' And he did it again and again, and yet again, while
Jim Hawkins, fifty miles away, marked off on a big map the tracks of
his wheels gridironing the stricken lands. Others did well--Hawkins
reported at the end that they all did well--but Scott was the most
excellent, for he kept good coined rupees by him, and paid for his
own cart-repairs on the spot, and ran to meet all sorts of
unconsidered extras, trusting to be recouped later. Theoretically,
the Government should have paid for every shoe and linchpin, for
every hand employed in the loading; but Government vouchers cash
themselves slowly, and intelligent and efficient clerks write at
great length, contesting unauthorised expenditures of eight annas. The man who wishes to make his work a success must draw on his own
bank-account of money or other things as he goes. 'I told you he'd work,' said Jimmy to his wife at the end of six
weeks. 'He's been in sole charge of a couple of thousand men up north
on the Mosuhl Canal for a year, and he gives one less trouble than
young Martyn with his ten constables; and I'm morally certain--only
Government doesn't recognise moral obligations--that he's spent about
half his pay to grease his wheels. Look at this, Lizzie, for one
week's work! Forty miles in two days with twelve carts; two days'
halt building a famine-shed for young Rogers (Rogers ought to have
built it himself, the idiot!). Then forty miles back again, loading
six carts on the way, and distributing all Sunday. Then in the
evening he pitches in a twenty-page demi-official to me, saying that
the people where he is might be "advantageously employed on
relief-work," and suggesting that he put 'em to work on some
broken-down old reservoir he's discovered, so as to have a good
water-supply when the Rains come. He thinks he can caulk the dam in a
fortnight. Look at his marginal sketches--aren't they clear and good? I knew he was _pukka_, but I didn't know he was as _pukka_ as this!' 'I must show these to William,' said Mrs. Jim. 'The child's wearing
herself out among the babies.' 'Not more than you are, dear. Well, another two months ought to see
us out of the wood. I'm sorry it's not in my power to recommend you
for a V.C.' William sat late in her tent that night, reading through page after
page of the square handwriting, patting the sketches of proposed
repairs to the reservoir, and wrinkling her eyebrows over the columns
of figures of estimated water-supply. 'And he finds time to do all this,' she cried to herself,
'and ... well, I also was present. I've saved one or two babies.' She dreamed for the twentieth time of the god in the golden dust, and
woke refreshed to feed loathsome black children, scores of them,
wastrels picked up by the wayside, their bones almost breaking their
skin, terrible and covered with sores. Scott was not allowed to leave his cart work, but his letter was duly
forwarded to the Government, and he had the consolation, not rare in
India, of knowing that another man was reaping where he had sown. That also was discipline profitable to the soul. 'He's much too good to waste on canals,' said Jimmy. 'Any one can
oversee coolies. You needn't be angry, William: he can--but I need my
pearl among bullock-drivers, and I've transferred him to the Khanda
district, where he'll have it all to do over again. He should be
marching now.' 'He's _not_ a coolie,' said William furiously. 'He ought to be doing
his regulation work.' 'He's the best man in his service, and that's saying a good deal; but
if you _must_ use razors to cut grindstones, why, I prefer the best
cutlery.' 'Isn't it almost time we saw him again?' said Mrs. Jim. 'I'm sure the
poor boy hasn't had a respectable meal for a month. He probably sits
on a cart and eats sardines with his fingers.' 'All in good time, dear. Duty before decency--wasn't it Mr. Chucks
said that?' 'No; it was Midshipman Easy,' William laughed. 'I sometimes wonder
how it will feel to dance or listen to a band again, or sit under a
roof. I can't believe that I ever wore a ball-frock in my life.' 'One minute,' said Mrs. Jim, who was thinking. 'If he goes to Khanda,
he passes within five miles of us. Of course he'll ride in.' 'Oh, no, he won't,' said William. 'How do you know, dear?' 'It'll take him off his work. He won't have time.' 'He'll make it,' said Mrs. Jim, with a twinkle. 'It depends on his own judgment. There's absolutely no reason why he
shouldn't, if he thinks fit,' said Jim. 'He won't see fit,' William replied, without sorrow or emotion. 'It
wouldn't be him if he did.' 'One certainly gets to know people rather well in times like these,'
said Jim, drily; but William's face was serene as ever, and, even as
she prophesied, Scott did not appear. The Rains fell at last, late, but heavily; and the dry, gashed earth
was red mud, and servants killed snakes in the camp, where every one
was weather-bound for a fortnight--all except Hawkins, who took horse
and splashed about in the wet, rejoicing. Now the Government decreed
that seed-grain should be distributed to the people, as well as
advances of money for the purchase of new oxen; and the white men
were doubly worked for this new duty, while William skipped from
brick to brick laid down on the trampled mud, and dosed her charges
with warming medicines that made them rub their little round
stomachs; and the milch-goats throve on the rank grass. There was
never a word from Scott in the Khanda district, away to the
south-east, except the regular telegraphic report to Hawkins. The
rude country roads had disappeared; his drivers were half mutinous;
one of Martyn's loaned policemen had died of cholera; and Scott was
taking thirty grains of quinine a day to fight the fever that comes
if one works hard in heavy rain; but those were things he did not
consider necessary to report. He was, as usual, working from a base
of supplies on a railway line, to cover a circle of fifteen miles
radius, and since full loads were impossible, he took  quarter-loads,
and toiled four times as hard by consequence; for he did not choose
to risk an epidemic which might have grown uncontrollable by
assembling villagers in thousands at the relief-sheds. It was cheaper
to take Government bullocks, work them to death, and leave them to
the crows in the wayside sloughs. That was the time when eight years of clean living and hard condition
told, though a man's head were ringing like a bell from the cinchona,
and the earth swayed under his feet when he stood and under his bed
when he slept. If Hawkins had seen fit to make him a bullock-driver,
that, he thought, was entirely Hawkins's own affair. There were men
in the North who would know what he had done; men of thirty years'
service in his own department who would say that it was 'not half
bad'; and above, immeasurably above all men of all grades, there was
William in the thick of the fight, who would approve because she
understood. He had so trained his mind that it would hold fast to the
mechanical routine of the day, though his own voice sounded strange
in his own ears, and his hands, when he wrote, grew large as pillows
or small as peas at the end of his wrists. That steadfastness bore
his body to the telegraph-office at the railway-station, and dictated
a telegram to Hawkins, saying that the Khanda district was, in his
judgment, now safe, and he 'waited further orders.' The Madrassee telegraph-clerk did not approve of a large, gaunt man
falling over him in a dead faint, not so much because of the weight,
as because of the names and blows that Faiz Ullah dealt him when he
found the body rolled under a bench. Then Faiz Ullah took blankets
and quilts and coverlets where he found them, and lay down under them
at his master's side, and bound his arms with a tent-rope, and filled
him with a horrible stew of herbs, and set the policeman to fight him
when he wished to escape from the intolerable heat of his coverings,
and shut the door of the telegraph-office to keep out the curious for
two nights and one day; and when a light engine came down the line,
and Hawkins kicked in the door, Scott hailed him weakly, but in a
natural voice, and Faiz Ullah stood back and took all the credit. 'For two nights, Heaven-born, he was _pagal_' said Faiz Ullah. 'Look
at my nose, and consider the eye of the policeman. He beat us with
his bound hands; but we sat upon him, Heaven-born, and though his
words were _tez_, we sweated him. Heaven-born, never has been such a
sweat! He is weaker now than a child; but the fever has gone out of
him, by the grace of God. There remains only my nose and the eye of
the constabeel. Sahib, shall I ask for my dismissal because my Sahib
has beaten me?' And Faiz Ullah laid his long thin hand carefully on
Scott's chest to be sure that the fever was all gone, ere he went out
to open tinned soups and discourage such as laughed at his swelled
nose. 'The district's all right,' Scott whispered. 'It doesn't make any
difference. You got my wire? I shall be fit in a week. 'Can't
understand how it happened. I shall be fit in a few days.' 'You're coming into camp with us,' said Hawkins. 'But look here--but--'

'It's all over except the shouting. We sha'n't need you Punjabis any
more. On my honour, we sha'n't. Martyn goes back in a few weeks;
Arbuthnot's returned already; Ellis and Clay are putting the last
touches to a new feeder-line the Government's built as relief-work. Morten's dead--he was a Bengal man, though; you wouldn't know him. 'Pon my word, you and Will--Miss Martyn--seem to have come through it
as well as anybody.' 'Oh, how is she?' The voice went up and down as he spoke. 'She was in great form when I left her. The Roman Catholic Missions
are adopting the unclaimed babies to turn them into little priests;
the Basil Mission is taking some, and the mothers are taking the
rest. You should hear the little beggars howl when they're sent away
from William. She's pulled down a bit, but so are we all. Now, when
do you suppose you'll be able to move?' 'I can't come into camp in this state. I won't,' he replied
pettishly. 'Well, you _are_ rather a sight, but from what I gathered there it
seemed to me they'd be glad to see you under any conditions. I'll
look over your work here, if you like, for a couple of days, and you
can pull yourself together while Faiz Ullah feeds you up.' Scott could walk dizzily by the time Hawkins's inspection vas ended,
and he flushed all over when Jim said of his work in the district
that it was 'not half bad,' and volunteered, further, that he had
considered Scott his right-hand man through the famine, and would
feel it his duty to say as much officially. So they came back by rail to the old camp; but there were no crowds
near it, the long fires in the trenches were dead and black, and the
famine-sheds stood almost empty. 'You see!' said Jim. 'There isn't much more for us to do. Better ride
up and see the wife. They've pitched a tent for you. Dinner's at
seven. I'll see you then.' Riding at a foot-pace, Faiz Ullah by his stirrup, Scott came to
William in the brown-calico riding-habit, sitting at the dining-tent
door, her hands in her lap, white as ashes, thin and worn, with no
lustre in her hair. There did not seem to be any Mrs. Jim on the
horizon, and all that William could say was: 'My word, how pulled
down you look!' 'I've had a touch of fever. You don't look very well yourself.' 'Oh, I'm fit enough. We've stamped it out. I suppose you know?' Scott nodded. 'We shall all be returned in a few weeks. Hawkins told
me.' 'Before Christmas, Mrs. Jim says. Sha'n't you be glad to go back? I
can smell the wood-smoke already'; William sniffed. 'We shall be in
time for all the Christmas doings. I don't suppose even the Punjab
Government would be base enough to transfer Jack till the new year?' 'It seems hundreds of years ago--the Punjab and all that--doesn't it? 