



Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Taavi Kalju and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. [Illustration: HEAD OF HOMER. _British Museum._]


ECLECTIC SCHOOL READINGS


THE STORY OF TROY

BY

M. CLARKE


NEW YORK--CINCINNATI--CHICAGO
AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY

COPYRIGHT, 1897, BY
AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY




CONTENTS. PAGE
INTRODUCTION--HOMER, THE FATHER OF POETRY                              7

              THE GODS AND GODDESSES                                  11


          I. TROY BEFORE THE SIEGE                                   19

         II. THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS                                   33

        III. THE LEAGUE AGAINST TROY                                 46

         IV. BEGINNING OF THE WAR                                    63

          V.  THE WRATH OF ACHILLES                                   76

         VI. THE DREAM OF AGAMEMNON                                  92

        VII. THE COMBAT BETWEEN MENELAUS AND PARIS                  109

       VIII. THE FIRST GREAT BATTLE                                 124

         IX. THE SECOND BATTLE--EXPLOIT OF DIOMEDE AND ULYSSES      149

          X. THE BATTLE AT THE SHIPS--DEATH OF PATROCLUS            166

         XI. END OF THE WRATH OF ACHILLES--DEATH OF HECTOR          193

        XII. DEATH OF ACHILLES--FALL AND DESTRUCTION OF TROY        220

       XIII. THE GREEK CHIEFS AFTER THE WAR                         240




INTRODUCTION. I. HOMER, THE FATHER OF POETRY. In this book we are to tell the story of Troy, and particularly of the
famous siege which ended in the total destruction of that renowned city. It is a story of brave warriors and heroes of 3000 years ago, about
whose exploits the greatest poets and historians of ancient times have
written. Some of the wonderful events of the memorable siege are related
in a celebrated poem called the Ilʹi-ad, written in the Greek language. The author of this poem was Hoʹmer, who was the author of another great
poem, the Odʹys-sey, which tells of the voyages and adventures of the
Greek hero, U-lysʹses, after the taking of Troy. Homer has been called the Father of Poetry, because he was the first and
greatest of poets. He lived so long ago that very little is known about
him. We do not even know for a certainty when or where he was born. It
is believed, however, that he lived in the ninth century before Christ,
and that his native place was Smyrʹna, in Asia Minor. But long after
his death several other cities claimed the honor of being his
birthplace. Seven Grecian cities vied for Homer dead,
    Through which the living Homer begged his bread. LEONIDAS. It is perhaps not true that Homer was so poor as to be obliged to beg
for his bread; but it is probable that he earned his living by traveling
from city to city through many parts of Greece and Asia Minor, reciting
his poems in the palaces of princes, and at public assemblies. This was
one of the customs of ancient times, when the art of writing was either
not known, or very little practiced. The poets, or bards, of those days
committed their compositions to memory, and repeated them aloud at
gatherings of the people, particularly at festivals and athletic games,
of which the ancient Greeks were very fond. At those games prizes and
rewards were given to the bards as well as to the athletes. It is said that in the latter part of his life the great poet became
blind, and that this was why he received the name of Homer, which
signified a blind person. The name first given to him, we are told, was
Mel-e-sigʹe-nes, from the river Meʹles, a small stream on the banks of
which his native city of Smyrna was situated. So little being known of Homer's life, there has been much difference of
opinion about him among learned men. Many have believed that Homer never
existed. Others have thought that the Iliad and Odyssey were composed
not by one author, but by several. "Some," says the English poet, Walter
Savage Landor, "tell us that there were twenty Homers, some deny that
there was ever one." Those who believe that there were "twenty Homers"
think that different parts of the two great poems--the Iliad and
Odyssey--were composed by different persons, and that all the parts were
afterwards put together in the form in which they now appear. The
opinion of most scholars at present, however, is that Homer did really
exist, that he was a wandering bard, or minstrel, who sang or recited
verses or ballads composed by himself, about the great deeds of heroes
and warriors, and that those ballads, collected and arranged in after
years in two separate books, form the poems known as the Iliad and
Odyssey. Homer's poetry is what is called epic poetry, that is, it tells about
heroes and heroic actions. The Iliad and Odyssey are the first and
greatest of epic poems. In all ages since Homer's time, scholars have
agreed in declaring them to be the finest poetic productions of human
genius. No nation in the world has ever produced poems so beautiful or
so perfect. They have been read and admired by learned men for more than
2000 years. They have been translated into the languages of all
civilized countries. In this book we make many quotations from the fine
translation of the Iliad by our American poet, William Cullen Bryant. We
quote also from the well-known translation by the English poet,
Alexander Pope. The ancients had a very great admiration for the poetry of Homer. We are
told that every educated Greek could repeat from memory any passage in
the Iliad or Odyssey. Alexander the Great was so fond of Homer's poems
that he always had them under his pillow while he slept. He kept the
Iliad in a richly ornamented casket, saying that "the most perfect work
of human genius ought to be preserved in a box the most valuable and
precious in the world." So great was the veneration the Greeks had for Homer, that they erected
temples and altars to him, and worshiped him as a god. They held
festivals in his honor, and made medals bearing the figure of the poet
sitting on a throne and holding in his hands the Iliad and Odyssey. One
of the kings of Eʹgypt built in that country a magnificent temple, in
which was set up a statue of Homer, surrounded with a beautiful
representation of the seven cities that contended for the honor of being
the place of his birth. Great bard of Greece, whose ever-during verse
    All ages venerate, all tongues rehearse;
    Could blind idolatry be justly paid
    To aught of mental power by man display'd,
    To thee, thou sire of soul-exalting song,
    That boundless worship might to thee belong. HAYLEY. II. THE GODS AND GODDESSES. To understand the Story of Troy it is necessary to know something about
the gods and goddesses, who played so important a part in the events we
are to relate. We shall see that in the Troʹjan War nearly everything
was ordered or directed by a god or goddess. The gods, indeed, had much
to do in the causing of the war, and they took sides in the great
struggle, some of them helping the Greeks and some helping the Trojans. The ancient Greeks believed that there were a great many gods. According
to their religion all parts of the universe,--the heavens and the earth,
the sun and the moon, the ocean, seas, and rivers, the mountains and
forests, the winds and storms,--were ruled by different gods. The gods,
too, it was supposed, controlled all the affairs of human life. There
were a god of war and a god of peace, and gods of music, and poetry, and
dancing, and hunting, and of all the other arts or occupations in which
men engaged. The gods, it was believed, were in some respects like human beings. In
form they usually appeared as men and women. They were passionate and
vindictive, and often quarreled among themselves. They married and had
children, and needed food and drink and sleep. Sometimes they married
human beings, and the sons of such marriages were the heroes of
antiquity, men of giant strength who performed daring and wonderful
feats. The food of the gods was Am-broʹsia, which conferred immortality
and perpetual youth on those who partook of it; their drink was a
delicious wine called Necʹtar. The gods, then, were immortal beings. They never died; they never grew
old, and they possessed immense power. They could change themselves, or
human beings, into any form, and they could make themselves visible or
invisible at pleasure. They could travel through the skies, or over
earth or ocean, with the rapidity of lightning, often riding in gorgeous
golden chariots drawn by horses of immortal breed. They were greatly
feared by men, and when any disaster occurred,--if lives were lost by
earthquake, or shipwreck, or any other calamity,--it was attributed to
the anger of some god. Though immortal beings, however, the gods were subject to some of the
physical infirmities of humanity. They could not die, but they might be
wounded and suffer bodily pain the same as men. They often took part in
the quarrels and wars of people on earth, and they had weapons and armor
like human warriors. The usual place of residence of the principal gods was on the top of
Mount O-lymʹpus in Greece. Here they dwelt in golden palaces, and they
had a Council Chamber where they frequently feasted together at grand
banquets, celestial music being rendered by A-polʹlo, the god of
minstrelsy, and the Muses, who were the divinities of poetry and song. In all the chief cities grand temples were erected for the worship of
the gods. One of the most famous was the Parʹthe-non, at Athens. At the
shrines of the gods costly gifts in gold and silver were presented, and
on their altars, often built in the open air, beasts were killed and
burned as sacrifices, which were thought to be very pleasing to the
divine beings to whom they were offered. [Illustration: THE PARTHENON. _From model in Metropolitan Museum, New York._]

The greatest and most powerful of the gods was Juʹpi-ter, also called
Jove or Zeus. To him all the rest were subject. He was the king of the
gods, the mighty Thunderer, at whose nod Olympus shook, and at whose
word the heavens trembled. From his great power in the regions of the
sky he was sometimes called the "cloud-compelling Jove." He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
    The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold. High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
    And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes. POPE, _Iliad_, Book VIII. The wife of Jupiter, and the queen of heaven, was Juʹno, who, as we
shall see, was the great enemy of Troy and the Trojans. One of the
daughters of Jupiter, called Veʹnus, or Aph-ro-diʹte, was the goddess of
beauty and love. Nepʹtune was the god of the sea. He usually carried in
his hand a trident, or three-pronged scepter, the emblem of his
authority. His sumptuous palace-halls were built
    Deep down in ocean, golden, glittering, proof
    Against decay of time. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book XIII. Mars was the god of war, and Pluʹto, also called Dis and Haʹdes, was god
of the regions of the dead. One of the most glorious and powerful of the
gods was Apollo, or Phœʹbus, or Sminʹtheus, for he had many names. He
was god of the sun, and of medicine, music, and poetry. He is
represented as holding in his hand a bow, and sometimes a lyre. Homer
calls him the "god of the silver bow," and the "far-darting Apollo," for
the ancients believed that with the dart of his arrow he sent down
plagues upon men whenever they offended him. The other principal deities mentioned by Homer are Mi-nerʹva, or
Palʹlas, the goddess of wisdom; Vulʹcan, the god of fire; and Merʹcu-ry,
or Herʹmes, the messenger of Jupiter. Vulcan was also the patron, or
god, of smiths. He had several forges; one was on Mount Olympus, and
another was supposed to be under Mount Ætʹna in Sicʹi-ly. Here, with his
giant workmen, the Cyʹclops, he made thunderbolts for Jupiter, and
sometimes armor and weapons of war for earthly heroes. The gods, it was believed, made their will known to men in various
ways,--sometimes by the flight of birds, frequently by dreams, and
sometimes by appearing on earth under different forms, and speaking
directly to kings and warriors. Very often men learned the will of the
gods by consulting seers and soothsayers, or augurs,--persons who were
supposed to have the power of foretelling events. There were temples
also where the gods gave answers through priests. Such answers were
called Orʹa-cles, and this name was also given to the priests. The most
celebrated oracle of ancient times was in the temple of Apollo at
Delʹphi, in Greece. To this place people came from all parts of the
world to consult the god, whose answers were given by a priestess called
Pythʹi-a. The ancients never engaged in war or any other important undertaking
without sacrificing to the gods or consulting their oracles or
soothsayers. Before going to battle they made sacrifices to the gods. If
they were defeated in battle they regarded it as a sign of the anger of
Jupiter, or Juno, or Minerva, or Apollo, or some of the other great
beings who dwelt on Olympus. When making leagues or treaties of peace,
they called the gods as witnesses, and prayed to Father Jupiter to send
terrible punishments on any who should take false oaths, or break their
promises. In the story of the Trojan War we shall find many examples of
such appeals to the gods by the chiefs on both sides. "O Father Jove, who rulest from the top
    Of Ida, mightiest one and most august! Whichever of these twain has done the wrong,
    Grant that he pass to Pluto's dwelling, slain,
    While friendship and a faithful league are ours. "O Jupiter most mighty and august! Whoever first shall break these solemn oaths,
    So may their brains flow down upon the earth,--
    Theirs and their children's." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. [Illustration: OFFERING TO MINERVA. _Painting by Gaudemaris._]




THE STORY OF TROY. I. TROY BEFORE THE SIEGE. [Illustration: _Design by Burne-Jones._]

That part of Asia Minor which borders the narrow channel now known as
the Dar-da-nellesʹ, was in ancient times called Troʹas. Its capital was
the city of Troy, which stood about three miles from the shore of the
Æ-geʹan Sea, at the foot of Mount Ida, near the junction of two rivers,
the Simʹo-is, and the Sca-manʹder or Xanʹthus. The people of Troy and
Troas were called Trojans. Some of the first settlers in northwestern Asia Minor, before it was
called Troas, came from Thrace, a country lying to the north of Greece. The king of these Thraʹcian colonists was Teuʹcer. During his reign a
prince named Darʹdanus arrived in the new settlement. He was a son of
Jupiter, and he came from Samʹo-thrace, one of the many islands of the
Ægean Sea. It is said that he escaped from a great flood which swept
over his native island, and that he was carried on a raft of wood to the
coast of the kingdom of Teucer. Soon afterwards he married Teucer's
daughter. He then built a city for himself amongst the hills of Mount
Ida, and called it Dar-daʹni-a; and on the death of Teucer he became
king of the whole country, to which he gave the same name, Dardania. Jove was the father, cloud-compelling Jove,
    Of Dardanus, by whom Dardania first
    Was peopled, ere our sacred Troy was built
    On the great plain,--a populous town; for men
    Dwelt still upon the roots of Ida fresh
    With Qiany springs. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book XX. Dardanus was the ancestor of the Trojan line of kings. He had a grandson
named Tros, and from him the city Troy, as well as the country Troas,
took its name. The successor of King Tros was his son Iʹlus. By him Troy
was built, and it was therefore also called Ilʹi-um or Ilʹi-on; hence
the title of Homer's great poem,--the Iliad. From the names Dardanus
and Teucer the city of Troy has also been sometimes called Dardania and
Teuʹcri-a, and the Trojans are often referred to as Dardanians and
Teucrians. Ilus was succeeded by his son La-omʹe-don, and Laomedon's son
Priʹam was king of Troy during the famous siege. The story of the founding of Troy is a very interesting one. Ilus went
forth from his father's city of Dardania, in search of adventures, as
was the custom of young princes and heroes in those days; and he
traveled on until he arrived at the court of the king of Phrygʹi-a, a
country lying east of Troas. Here he found the people engaged in
athletic games, at which the king gave valuable prizes for competition. Ilus took part in a wrestling match, and he won fifty young men and
fifty maidens,--a strange sort of prize we may well think, but not at
all strange or unusual in ancient times, when there were many slaves
everywhere. During his stay in Phrygia the young Dardanian prince was
hospitably entertained at the royal palace. When he was about to depart,
the king gave him a spotted heifer, telling him to follow the animal,
and to build a city for himself at the place where she should first lie
down to rest. Ilus did as he was directed. With his fifty youths and fifty maidens he
set out to follow the heifer, leaving her free to go along at her
pleasure. She marched on for many miles, and at last lay down at the
foot of Mount Ida on a beautiful plain watered by two rivers, and here
Ilus encamped for the night. Before going to sleep he prayed to Jupiter
to send him a sign that that was the site meant for his city. In the
morning he found standing in front of his tent a wooden statue of the
goddess Minerva, also called Pallas. The figure was three cubits high. In its right hand it held a spear, and in the left, a distaff and
spindle. This was the Pal-laʹdi-um of Troy, which afterwards became very famous. The Trojans believed that it had been sent down from heaven, and that
the safety of their city depended upon its preservation. Hence it was
guarded with the greatest care in a temple specially built for the
purpose. Ilus, being satisfied that the statue was the sign for which he had
prayed, immediately set about building his city, and thus Troy was
founded. It soon became the capital of Troas and the richest and most
powerful city in that part of the world. During the reign of Laomedon,
son of Ilus, its mighty walls were erected, which in the next reign
withstood for ten years all the assaults of the Greeks. These walls were
the work of no human hands. They were built by the ocean god Neptune. This god had conspired against Jupiter and attempted to dethrone him,
and, as a punishment, his kingdom of the sea was taken away from him for
one year, and he was ordered to spend that time in the service of the
king of Troy. In building the great walls, Neptune was assisted by Apollo, who had
also been driven from Olympus for an offense against Jupiter. Apollo had
a son named Æs-cu-laʹpi-us, who was so skilled a physician that he
could, and did, raise people from death to life. Jupiter was very angry
at this. He feared that men might forget him and worship Æsculapius. He
therefore hurled a thunderbolt at the great physician and killed him. Enraged at the death of his son, Apollo threatened to destroy the
Cyclops, the giant workmen of Vulcan, who had forged the terrible
thunderbolt. Before he could carry out his threat, however, Jupiter
expelled him from heaven. He remained on earth for several years, after
which he was permitted to return to his place among the gods on the top
of Mount Olympus. [Illustration: NEPTUNE. _National Museum, Athens._]

Though Neptune was bound to serve Laomedon for one year, there was an
agreement between them that the god should get a certain reward for
building the walls. But when the work was finished the Trojan king
refused to keep his part of the bargain. Apollo had assisted by his
powers of music. He played such tunes that he charmed even the huge
blocks of stone, so that they moved themselves into their proper places,
after Neptune had wrenched them from the mountain sides and had hewn
them into shape. Moreover, Apollo had taken care of Laomedon's numerous
flocks on Mount Ida. During the siege, Neptune, in a conversation with
Apollo before the walls of Troy, spoke of their labors in the service of
the Trojan king:

    "Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarch's prayer,
    We shared the lengthen'd labors of a year? Troy walls I raised (for such were Jove's commands),
    And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands:
    Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves
    Along fair Ida's vales and pendant groves." POPE, _Iliad_, Book XXI. Long before this, however, the two gods had punished Laomedon very
severely for breaking his promise. Apollo, after being restored to
heaven, sent a plague upon the city of Troy, and Neptune sent up from
the sea an enormous serpent which killed many of the people. A great serpent from the deep,
    Lifting his horrible head above their homes,
    Devoured the children. LEWIS MORRIS. In this terrible calamity the king asked an oracle in what way the anger
of the two gods might be appeased. The answer of the oracle was that a
Trojan maiden must each year be given to the monster to be devoured. Every year, therefore, a young girl, chosen by lot, was taken down to
the seashore and chained to a rock to become the prey of the serpent. And every year the monster came and swallowed up a Trojan maiden, and
then went away and troubled the city no more until the following year,
when he returned for another victim. At last the lot fell on He-siʹo-ne,
the daughter of the king. Deep was Laomedon's grief at the thought of
the awful fate to which his child was thus doomed. But help came at an unexpected moment. While, amid the lamentations of
her family and friends, preparations were being made to chain Hesione to
the rock, the great hero, Herʹcu-les, happened to visit Troy. He was on
his way home to Greece, after performing in a distant eastern country
one of those great exploits which made him famous in ancient story. The
hero undertook to destroy the serpent, and thus save the princess, on
condition that he should receive as a reward certain wonderful horses
which Laomedon just then had in his possession. These horses were given
to Laomedon's grandfather, Tros, on a very interesting occasion. Tros
had a son named Ganʹy-mede, a youth of wonderful beauty, and Jupiter
admired Ganymede so much that he had him carried up to heaven to be
cupbearer to the gods--to serve the divine nectar at the banquets on
Mount Olympus. Godlike Ganymede, most beautiful
    Of men; the gods beheld and caught him up
    To heaven, so beautiful was he, to pour
    The wine to Jove, and ever dwell with them. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book XX. To compensate Tros for the loss of his son, Jupiter gave him four
magnificent horses of immortal breed and marvelous fleetness. These were
the horses which Hercules asked as his reward for destroying the
serpent. As there was no other way of saving the life of his daughter,
Laomedon consented. Hercules then went down to the seashore, bearing in
his hand the huge club which he usually carried, and wearing his
lion-skin over his shoulders. This was the skin of a fierce lion he had
strangled to death in a forest in Greece, and he always wore it when
going to perform any of his heroic feats. When Hesione had been bound to the rock, the hero stood beside her and
awaited the coming of the serpent. In a short time its hideous form
emerged from beneath the waves, and darting forward it was about to
seize the princess, when Hercules rushed upon it, and with mighty
strokes of his club beat the monster to death. Thus was the king's
daughter saved and all Troy delivered from a terrible scourge. But when
the hero claimed the reward that had been agreed upon, and which he had
so well earned, Laomedon again proved himself to be a man who was
neither honest nor grateful. Disregarding his promise, and forgetful,
too, of what he and his people had already suffered as a result of his
breach of faith with the two gods, he refused to give Hercules the
horses. The hero at once went away from Troy, but not without resolving to
return at a convenient time and punish Laomedon. This he did, not long
afterwards, when he had completed the celebrated "twelve labors" at
which he had been set by a Grecian king, whom Jupiter commanded him to
serve for a period of years because of an offense he had committed. One
of these labors was the killing of the lion. Another was the destroying
of the Lerʹnæ-an hydra, a frightful serpent with many heads, which for a
long time had been devouring man and beast in the district of Lerʹna in
Greece. Having accomplished his twelve great labors and ended his term of
service, Hercules collected an army and a fleet, and sailed to the
shores of Troas. He then marched against the city, took it by surprise,
and slew Laomedon and all his sons, with the exception of Po-darʹces,
afterwards called Priam. This prince had tried to persuade his father to
fulfill the engagement with Hercules, for which reason his life was
spared. He was made a slave, however, as was done in ancient times with
prisoners taken in war. But Hesione ransomed her brother, giving her
gold-embroidered veil as the price of his freedom. From this time he was
called Priam, a word which in the Greek language means "purchased." Hesione also prevailed upon Hercules to restore Priam to his right as
heir to his father's throne, and so he became king of Troy. Hesione
herself was carried off to Greece, where she was given in marriage to
Telʹa-mon, king of Salʹa-mis, a friend of Hercules. Priam reigned over his kingdom of Troas many years in peace and
prosperity. His wife and queen, the virtuous Hecʹu-ba, was a daughter of
a Thracian king. They had nineteen children, many of whom became famous
during the great siege. Their eldest son, Hecʹtor, was the bravest of
the Trojan heroes. Their son Parʹis it was, as we shall see, who brought
upon his country the disastrous war. Another son, Helʹe-nus, and his
sister Cas-sanʹdra, were celebrated soothsayers. Cassandra was a maiden of remarkable beauty. The god Apollo loved her so
much that he offered to grant her any request if she would accept him as
her husband. Cassandra consented and asked for the power of foretelling
events, but when she received it, she slighted the god and refused to
perform her promise. Apollo was enraged at her conduct, yet he could not
take back the gift he had bestowed. He decreed, however, that no one
should believe or pay any attention to her predictions, true though they
should be. And so when Cassandra foretold the evils that were to come
upon Troy, even her own people would not credit her words. They spoke of
her as the "mad prophetess." Cassandra cried, and cursed the unhappy hour;
    Foretold our fate; but by the god's decree,
    All heard, and none believed the prophecy. VERGIL. The first sorrow in the lives of King Priam and his good queen came a
short time before the birth of Paris, when Hecuba dreamed that her next
child would bring ruin upon his family and native city. This caused the
deepest distress to Priam and Hecuba, especially when the soothsayer
Æsʹa-cus declared that the dream would certainly be fulfilled. Then,
though they were tender and loving parents, they made up their minds to
sacrifice their own feelings rather than that such a calamity should
befall their country. When the child was born, the king, therefore,
ordered it to be given to Ar-che-laʹus, one of the shepherds of Mount
Ida, with instructions to expose it in a place where it might be
destroyed by wild beasts. The shepherd, though very unwilling to do so
cruel a thing, was obliged to obey, but on returning to the spot a few
days afterwards he found the infant boy alive and unhurt. Some say that
the child had been nursed and carefully tended by a she-bear. Archelaus
was so touched with pity at the sight of the innocent babe smiling in
his face, that he took the boy to his cottage, and, giving him the name
Paris, brought him up as one of his own family. With the herdsmen on Mount Ida, Paris spent his early years, not knowing
that he was King Priam's son. He was a brave youth, and of exceeding
beauty. "His sunny hair
    Cluster'd about his temples like a god's." TENNYSON, _Œnone_. He was skilled, too, in all athletic exercises, he was a bold huntsman,
and so brave in defending the shepherds against the attacks of robbers
that they called him Alexander, a name which means a protector of men. Thus the young prince became a favorite with the people who lived on
the hills. Very happy he was amongst them, and amongst the flocks which
his good friend and foster father, Archelaus, gave him to be his own. He
was still more happy in the company of the charming nymph Œ-noʹne, the
daughter of a river god; and he loved her and made her his wife. But
this happiness was destined not to be of long duration. The Fates[A] had
decreed it otherwise. Œnone the beautiful, whose sorrows have been the
theme of many poets, was to lose the love of the young shepherd prince,
and the dream of Hecuba was to have its fulfillment. The Fate
    That rules the will of Jove had spun the days
    Of Paris and Œnone. QUINTUS SMYRNÆUS. [Footnote A: The Fates were the three sisters, Cloʹtho, Lachʹe-sis, and
Atʹro-pos, powerful goddesses who controlled the birth and life of
mankind, Clotho, the youngest, presided over the moment of birth, and
held a distaff in her hand; Lachesis spun out the thread of human
existence (all the events and action's of man's life); and Atropos, with
a pair of shears which she always carried, cut this thread at the moment
of death.] II. THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS. It was through a quarrel among the three goddesses, Juno, Venus, and
Minerva, that Œnone, the fair nymph of Mount Ida, met her sad fate, and
that the destruction of Troy was brought about. The strife arose on the
occasion of the marriage of Peʹleus and Theʹtis. Peleus was a king of
Thesʹsa-ly, in Greece, and one of the great heroes of those days. Thetis
was a daughter of the sea god Neʹre-us, who had fifty daughters, all
beautiful sea nymphs, called "Ne-reʹi-des," from the name of their
father. Their duty was to attend upon the greater sea gods, and
especially to obey the orders of Neptune. Thetis was so beautiful that Jupiter himself wished to marry her, but
the Fates told him she was destined to have a son who would be greater
than his father. The king of heaven having no desire that a son of his
should be greater than himself, gave up the idea of wedding the fair
nymph of the sea, and consented that she should be the wife of Peleus,
who had long loved and wooed her. But Thetis, being a goddess, was
unwilling to marry a mortal man. However, she at last consented, and
all the gods and goddesses, with one exception, were present at the
marriage feast. For in the elder time, when truth and worth
    Were still revered and cherished here on earth,
    The tenants of the skies would oft descend
    To heroes' spotless homes, as friend to friend;
    There meet them face to face, and freely share
    In all that stirred the hearts of mortals there. CATULLUS (Martin's tr.). The one exception was Eʹris, or Dis-corʹdi-a, the goddess of discord. This evil-minded deity had at one time been a resident of Olympus, but
she caused so much dissension and quarreling there that Jupiter banished
her forever from the heavenly mansions. The presence of such a being as
a guest on so happy an occasion was not very desirable, and therefore no
invitation was sent to her. Thus slighted, the goddess of discord resolved to have revenge by doing
all that she could to disturb the peace and harmony of the marriage
feast. With this evil purpose she suddenly appeared in the midst of the
company, and threw on the table a beautiful golden apple, on which were
inscribed the words, "Let it be given to the fairest." "This was cast upon the board,
    When all the full-faced presence of the gods
    Ranged in the halls of Peleus; whereupon
    Rose feud, with question unto whom 'twere due." TENNYSON, _Œnone_. At once all the goddesses began to claim the glittering prize of beauty. Each contended that she was the "fairest," and therefore should have the

        "fruit of pure Hesperian gold
    That smelt ambrosially." But soon the only competitors were Juno, Venus, and Minerva, the other
goddesses having withdrawn their claims. The contest then became more
bitter, and at last Jupiter was called upon to act as judge in the
dispute. This delicate task the king of heaven declined to undertake. He
knew that whatever way he might decide, he would be sure to offend two
of the three goddesses, and thereby destroy the peace of his own
household. It was necessary, however, that an umpire should be chosen to
put an end to the strife, and doubtless it was the decree of the Fates
that the lot should fall on the handsome young shepherd of Mount Ida. His wisdom and prudence were well known to the gods, and all seemed to
agree that he was a fit person to decide so great a contest. Paris was therefore appointed umpire. By Jupiter's command the golden
apple was sent to him, to be given to that one of the three goddesses
whom he should judge to be the most beautiful. The goddesses themselves
were directed to appear before him on Mount Ida, so that, beholding
their charms, he might be able to give a just decision. The English
poet, Tennyson, in his poem "Œnone," gives a fine description of the
three contending deities standing in the presence of the Trojan prince,
each in her turn trying, by promise of great reward, to persuade him to
declare in her favor. Juno spoke first, and she offered to bestow kingly
power and immense wealth upon Paris, if he would award the prize to her. "She to Paris made
    Proffer of royal power, ample rule
    Unquestion'd. . . . . . . . 'Honor,' she said, 'and homage, tax and toll,
    From many an inland town and haven large.'" Minerva next addressed the judge, and she promised him great wisdom and
knowledge, as well as success in war, if he would give the apple to her. Then Venus approached the young prince, who all the while held the
golden prize in his hand. She had but few words to say, for she was
confident in the power of her beauty and the tempting bribe she was
about to offer. "She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes,
    The herald of her triumph, drawing nigh
    Half-whisper'd in his ear, 'I promise thee
    The fairest and most loving wife in Greece.' She spoke and laugh'd." The subtle smile and the whispered promise won the heart of Paris. Forgetful of Œnone, and disregarding the promises of the other
goddesses, he awarded the prize to Venus. He consign'd
    To her soft hand the fruit of burnished rind;
    And foam-born Venus grasp'd the graceful meed,
    Of war, of evil war, the quickening seed. COLUTHUS (Elton's tr.). Such was the famous judgment of Paris. It was perhaps a just decision,
for it may be supposed that Venus, being the goddess of beauty, was
really the most beautiful of the three. But the story does not give us a
very high idea of the character of Paris, who now no longer took
pleasure in the company of Œnone. All his thoughts and affections were
turned away from her by the promise of Venus. He had grown weary, too,
of his simple and innocent life among his flocks and herds on the
mountain. He therefore wished much for some adventure that would take
him away from scenes which had become distasteful to him. [Illustration: PARIS. _Vatican, Rome._]

The opportunity soon came. A member of King Priam's family having died,
it was announced that the funeral would be celebrated by athletic
games, as was the custom in ancient times. Paris resolved to go down to
the city and take part in these games. Prizes were to be offered for
competition, and one of the prizes was to be the finest bull that could
be picked from the herds on Mount Ida. Now it happened that the bull
selected belonged to Paris himself, but it could not be taken without
his consent. He was willing, however, to give it for the games on
condition that he should be permitted to enter the list of competitors. The condition was agreed to, and so the shepherd prince parted from
Œnone and went to the funeral games at Troy. He intended, perhaps, to
return sometime, but it was many years before he saw the fair nymph of
Mount Ida again,--not until he was about to die of a wound received from
one of the Greeks in the Trojan War. Œnone knew what was to happen, for
Apollo had conferred upon her the gift of prophecy, and she warned Paris
that if he should go away from her he would bring ruin on himself and
his country, telling him also that he would seek for her help when it
would be too late to save him. These predictions, as we shall see, were
fulfilled. Œnone's grief and despair in her loneliness after the
departure of Paris are touchingly described in Tennyson's poem:

    "O happy Heaven, how canst thou see my face? O happy earth, how canst thou bear my weight? O death, death, death, thou ever-floating cloud,
    There are enough unhappy on this earth,
    Pass by the happy souls, that love to live:
    I pray thee, pass before my light of life,
    And shadow all my soul, that I may die. Thou weighest heavy on the heart within,
    Weigh heavy on my eyelids: let me die." At the athletic games in Troy everybody admired the noble appearance of
Paris, but nobody knew who he was. In the competitions he won all the
first prizes, for Venus had given him godlike strength and swiftness. He
defeated even Hector, who was the greatest athlete of Troy. Hector,
angry at finding himself and all the highborn young men of the city
beaten by an unknown stranger, resolved to put him to death, and Paris
would probably have been killed, had he not fled for safety into the
temple of Jupiter. Cassandra, who happened to be in the temple at the
time, noticed Paris closely, and observing that he bore a strong
resemblance to her brothers, she asked him about his birth and age. From
his answers she was satisfied that he was her brother, and she at once
introduced him to the king. Further inquiries were then made. The old
shepherd, Archelaus, to whom Paris had been delivered in his infancy to
be exposed on Mount Ida, was still living, and he came and told his
story. Then King Priam and Queen Hecuba joyfully embraced and welcomed
their son, never thinking of the terrible dream or of the prophecy of
Æsacus. Hector, no longer angry or jealous, was glad to see his brother,
and proud of his victories in the games. Everybody rejoiced except
Cassandra. She knew the evil which was to come to Troy through Paris,
but nobody would give credit to what the "mad prophetess" said. Thus restored to his high position as a prince of the royal house of
Troy, Paris now resided in his father's palace, apparently contented and
happy. But the promise made to him on Mount Ida, which he carefully
concealed from his family, was always in his mind. His thoughts were
ever turned toward Greece, where dwelt the fairest woman of those times. This was Helen, wife of Men-e-laʹus, king of Sparʹta, celebrated
throughout the ancient world for her matchless beauty. Paris had been
promised the fairest woman for his wife, and he felt sure that it could
be no other than the far-famed Helen. To Greece therefore he resolved to
go, as soon as there should be an excuse for undertaking what was then a
long and dangerous voyage of many weeks, though in our day it is no more
than a few hours' sail. The occasion was found when King Priam resolved to send ambassadors to
the island of Salamis to demand the restoration of his sister Hesione,
whom Hercules had carried off many years before. Her husband, Telamon,
was now dead, but his son Aʹjax still held her as a prisoner at his
court. Priam had never forgotten his sister's love for himself, for she
it was, as will be remembered, who redeemed him from slavery and placed
him on his father's throne. He now determined that she should be brought
back to her native country, and Paris earnestly begged permission to
take charge of the expedition which was to be sent to Salamis for that
purpose. Priam consented, and a fleet worthy to convey the son of the
king of Troy and his retinue to Greece was built by Pherʹe-clus, a
skillful Trojan craftsman, whom the goddess Minerva (Pallas) had
instructed in all kinds of workmanship. For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart
    To him the shipwright's and the builder's art. Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,
    The fatal cause of all his country's woes. POPE, _Iliad_, Book V.

Before the departure of the fleet, Cassandra raised her voice of
warning, but as usual her words were not heeded, and so Paris set sail. He reached the shores of Greece in safety; but instead of proceeding to
Salamis to demand Hesione from King Ajax, he steered his vessels to the
coast of Sparta. This he did under the guidance and direction of Venus,
who was now about to fulfill the promise by which she had won the golden
prize on Mount Ida. Landing in Sparta, Paris hastened to the court of Menelaus, where he was
hospitably received. The king gave banquets in his honor and invited him
to prolong his stay in Sparta, and the beautiful Queen Helen joined in
her husband's kind attentions to their guest. Soon after the arrival of Paris, the king of Sparta received an
invitation to take part in a hunting expedition in the island of Crete. Having no suspicion of the evil design of Paris, he accepted the
invitation. He departed for Crete, leaving to his queen the duty of
entertaining the Trojan prince until his return. Then Paris, taking
advantage of the absence of Menelaus, induced Helen to desert her
husband and her home, and go with him to Troy. He told her of the
promise of Venus, and assured her that she would be received with great
honor in his father's palace, and protected against the anger of
Menelaus. From her husband's stranger-sheltering home
    He tempted Helen o'er the ocean foam. COLUTHUS (Elton's tr.). [Illustration: ABDUCTION OF HELEN. _Painting by Deutsch._]

Helen having consented, Paris carried her off in his fleet. At the same
time he carried away a vast quantity of treasure in gold and other
costly things which belonged to King Menelaus. On the voyage homeward
the ships were driven by a storm to the shores of the island of
Cranʹa-e, where Paris and Helen remained for some time. When at last
they reached the Trojan capital they were cordially welcomed by King
Priam and Queen Hecuba, and in a short time they were married, and the
event was celebrated with great rejoicing. But all the people of Troy did not take part in this rejoicing. Hector,
the son of Priam, and others of his wisest counselors, strongly censured
the conduct of Paris, and they advised the king to send Helen back to
Sparta. But Priam would not listen to their prudent advice, and so she
remained in Troy. The great beauty of Helen has been celebrated by poets in ancient and
modern times. Tennyson, in his "Dream of Fair Women," introduces her as
one of the forms of the vision he describes:

          "I saw a lady within call,
      Stiller than chisell'd marble, standing there;
    A daughter of the gods, divinely tall,
      And most divinely fair." III. THE LEAGUE AGAINST TROY. The carrying off of Helen was the cause of the Trojan War. Menelaus,
upon hearing what Paris had done, immediately returned to Sparta, and
began to make preparations to avenge the wrong. He called upon the other
kings and princes of Greece to join him with their armies and fleets in
a war against Troy. They were bound to do this by an oath they had taken
at the time of the marriage of Helen and Menelaus. Helen was the daughter of Tynʹda-rus, who was king of Sparta before
Menelaus. Some say that she was the daughter of Jupiter, and that
Tyndarus was her stepfather. But from her infancy she was brought up at
the royal palace of Sparta as the daughter of Tyndarus and his wife,
Leʹda. When she became old enough to marry, the fame of her great beauty
drew many of the young princes of Greece to Sparta, all competing for
her favor, and each hoping to win her for his wife. This placed Tyndarus
in a difficulty. He was alarmed at the sight of so many suitors for the
hand of his daughter, for he knew that he could not give her to one
without offending all the rest. He therefore resolved to adopt the
advice of Ulysses, the prince of Ithʹa-ca (an island on the west coast
of Greece). Ulysses, also named O-dysʹseus, was famed for great wisdom
as well as valor in war. Ulysses, man of many arts,
    Son of Laertes, reared in Ithaca,
    That rugged isle, and skilled in every form
    Of shrewd device and action wisely planned. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. Ulysses had himself been one of the suitors for Helen, but he saw that
among so many competitors he had little chance of success. Besides, he
had fallen in love with Pe-nelʹo-pe, the niece of Tyndarus. He therefore
withdrew from the contest, and he offered to suggest a plan for settling
the difficulty about Helen, if Tyndarus would give him Penelope to be
his wife. Tyndarus consented. Ulysses then advised that Helen should
choose for herself which of the princes she would have for her husband,
but that before she did so, all the suitors should pledge themselves by
oath to submit to her decision, and engage that if any one should take
her away from the husband of her choice, they would all join in
punishing the offender. If any dared to seize and bear her off,
    All would unite in arms, and lay his town
    Level with the ground. EURIPIDES (Potter's tr.). The Grecian princes consented to this proposal. They all, including
Ulysses himself, took the required oath. Helen then made choice of
Menelaus, to whom she was immediately married with great pomp and
popular rejoicing. On the death of Tyndarus, Menelaus became king of
Sparta, and he and his beautiful queen lived and reigned together in
prosperity and happiness until the ill-fated visit of Paris. Menelaus was the brother of Ag-a-memʹnon, king of My-ceʹnæ, one of the
most powerful and wealthy of the kings of Helʹlas, as Greece was
anciently called. Their father, Aʹtreus, was a son of the hero Peʹlops,
who conquered the greater part of the peninsula named from him the
Pel-oponneʹsus, and who was the grandson of Jupiter. Agamemnon, or
A-triʹdes (son of Atreus), as he is often called, was commander in chief
of all the Greek armies during the siege of Troy. From his high rank and
authority Homer calls him the "king of men" and the "king of kings." He
is sometimes also called "king of all Arʹgos," a powerful kingdom near
Mycenæ, and from this name the Greeks are sometimes called "Arʹgives." The royal scepter which Agamemnon bore in his hands when addressing his
soldiers was made by Vulcan for Jupiter. The king of kings his awful figure raised;
    High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;
    The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,
    By Vulcan formed, from Jove to Hermes came:
    To Pelops he the immortal gift resign'd;
    The immortal gift great Pelops left behind. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. The kings and princes of Hellas, who met at the call of Menelaus,
decided, after some discussion of the matter, that before declaring war
against Troy it would be well to try to obtain satisfaction by peaceful
means. They therefore sent ambassadors to Troy to demand the restoration
of Helen and the treasures which Paris had carried off. Diʹo-mede, king
of Æ-toʹlia, and the wise Ulysses, were chosen for this mission. Menelaus volunteered to accompany them, thinking that he might be able
to persuade his wife to return to her home. When the Greek ambassadors arrived in the Trojan capital they were
respectfully received by the king. During their stay in the city they
were entertained at the residence of An-teʹnor, one of Priam's ministers
of state, who had the wisdom to disapprove of the action of Paris, and
to advise that the Spartan queen should be given back to her husband. Antenor much admired the appearance and eloquence of Ulysses, which are
thus described in the Iliad:

    "But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,
    His modest eyes he fixed upon the ground;
    As one unskilled or dumb, he seem'd to stand,
    Nor raised his head, nor stretch'd his sceptred hand;
    But, when he speaks, what elocution flows! Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,
    The copious accents fall, with easy art;
    Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!" POPE, _Iliad_, Book III. But the eloquence of Ulysses was of no avail. King Priam, blinded by his
love for his son, saw not the threatened danger, and he refused the
demand of the ambassadors. Menelaus was not even permitted to see his
wife. Ulysses and his companions then returned to Greece, and at once
preparations for war with Troy were commenced. These preparations occupied a very long time. Ten years were spent in
getting together the vast force, which in more than a thousand ships was
carried across the Ægean Sea to the Trojan shores, from the port of
Auʹlis on the east coast-of Greece. Some of the Hel-lenʹic (Greek)
princes were very unwilling to join the expedition, as they knew that
the struggle would be a tedious and perilous one. Even Ulysses, who, as
we have seen, had first proposed the suitors' oath at Sparta, was at the
last moment unwilling to go. He had now become king of Ithaca, his
father, La-erʹtes, having retired from the cares of government, and he
would gladly have remained in his happy island home with his young wife,
Penelope, and his infant son, Te-lemʹa-chus, both of whom he tenderly
loved. But the man of many arts could not be spared from the Trojan War. He
paid no heed, however, to the messages sent to him asking him to join
the army at Aulis. Agamemnon resolved, therefore, to go himself to
Ithaca to persuade Ulysses to take part in the expedition. He was
accompanied by his brother Menelaus, and by a chief named Pal-a-meʹdes,
a very wise and learned man as well as a brave warrior. As soon as
Ulysses heard of their arrival in Ithaca, he pretended to be insane, and
he tried by a very amusing stratagem to make them believe that he was
really mad. Dressing himself in his best clothes, and going down to the
seashore, he began to plow the beach with a horse and an _ox_ yoked
together, and to scatter salt upon the sand instead of seed. [Illustration: ULYSSES FEIGNING MADNESS. _Heywood Hardy._]

Palamedes, however, was more than a match in artifice for the Ithacan
king. Taking Telemachus from the arms of his nurse, he placed the
infant on the sand in front of the plowing team. Ulysses quickly turned
the animals aside to avoid injuring his child, thus proving that he was
not mad but in full possession of his senses. The king of Ithaca was
therefore obliged to join the expedition to Troy. With twelve ships well
manned he sailed from his rugged island, which he did not again see for
twenty years. Ten years he spent at the siege, and ten on his homeward
voyage, during which he met with the wonderful adventures that Homer
describes in the Odyssey. Ulysses had his revenge upon Palamedes in a manner very unworthy of a
brave man. In the camp before Troy, during the siege, he bribed one of
the servants of Palamedes to conceal a sum of money in his master's
tent. He then forged a letter, which he read before a council of the
Greek generals, saying that Palamedes had taken it from a Trojan
prisoner. This letter was written as if by King Priam to Palamedes,
thanking him for the information he had given regarding the plans of the
Greeks, and mentioning money as having been sent him in reward for his
services. The Greek generals at once ordered a search to be made in the
tent of Palamedes, and the money being found where it had been hidden by
direction of Ulysses, the unfortunate Palamedes was immediately put to
death as a traitor. Palamedes, not unknown to fame,
    Who suffered from the malice of the times,
    Accused and sentenced for pretended crimes. VERGIL. It is said that Palamedes was the inventor of weights and measures, and
of the games of chess and backgammon, and that it was he who first
placed sentinels round a camp and gave them a watchword. There was another of the Greek princes whose help in the Trojan War was
obtained only by an ingenious trick. This was the famous A-chilʹles. He
was the son of Peleus and Thetis, at whose marriage feast Eris threw the
apple of discord on the table. The prophecy that Thetis would have a son
greater than his father was fulfilled in Achilles, the bravest of the
Greeks at the Trojan War, and the principal hero of Homer's Iliad. Thetis educated her son with great care. She had him instructed in all
the accomplishments fitting for princes of those times. When he was an
infant she dipped him in the river Styx, which, it was believed, made it
impossible for any weapon wielded by mortal hands to wound him. But the
water did not touch the child's heel by which his mother held him when
she plunged him in the river, and it was in this part that he received
the wound of which he died. Notwithstanding his being dipped in the Styx, Thetis was afraid to let
Achilles go to the Trojan War, for Jupiter had told her that he would be
killed if he took part in it. For this reason, as soon as she heard that
the Grecian princes were gathering their forces, she secretly sent the
youth to the court of Lyc-o-meʹdes, king of the island of Scyʹros. Here
Achilles, dressed like a young girl, resided as a companion of the
king's daughters. But Calʹchas, the soothsayer of the Grecian army, told
the chiefs that without the help of Achilles Troy could not be taken. Calchas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
    That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
    The past, the present, and the future knew. POPE, _Iliad_, Book I.

Calchas, however, could not tell where Achilles was to be found, and
when they applied to Peleus, he too was unable or unwilling to tell
them. In this difficulty the wily king of Ithaca did good service. After
much inquiry he discovered that Achilles was at Scyros with the king's
daughters. He soon made his way to the island, but here there was a new
difficulty. He had never seen the young prince, and how was he to know
him? But he devised a scheme which proved entirely successful. Equipping
himself as a peddler, he went to the royal palace, exhibiting jewelry
and other fancy articles to attract the attention of the ladies of the
family. He also had some beautiful weapons of war among his wares. [Illustration: ACHILLES AT THE COURT OF LYCOMEDES. _Painting by Battoni._]

As soon as he appeared, the maidens gathered about him and began
examining the jewels. But one of the group eagerly seized a weapon, and
handled it with much skill and pleasure. Satisfied that this was the
young prince of whom he was in search, the pretended peddler announced
his name and told why he had come. Achilles, for it was he, gladly
agreed to take part with his countrymen in their great expedition, and
he immediately returned to Phthiʹa, the capital of his father's kingdom
of Thessaly. There he lost no time in making all necessary preparations. Soon afterwards he sailed for Aulis with the brave Myrʹmi-dons, as his
soldiers were called, accompanied also by his devoted friend and
constant companion, Pa-troʹclus. Full fifty ships beneath Achilles' care,
    The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear;
    Thessalians all, though various in their name;
    The same their nation, and their chief the same. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. Agamemnon, the commander in chief of the great host, sailed with a
hundred ships from his kingdom of Mycenæ, and his brother Menelaus,
eager for vengeance upon the Trojans, sailed with sixty ships and a
strong force of brave Spartans. Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,
    A hundred vessels in long order stand,
    And crowded nations wait his dread command. High on the deck the king of men appears,
    And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;
    Proud of his host, unrivall'd in his reign,
    In silent pomp he moves along the main. His brother follows, and to vengeance warms,
    The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:
        . . . . . . These, o'er the bending ocean, Helen's cause,
    In sixty ships with Menelaus draws. POPE, _Iliad_ Book II. Among the other great warriors of Hellas who joined the expedition was
Nesʹtor, the venerable king of Pyʹlos, distinguished for his eloquence,
wisdom, and prudence. In ninety sail, from Pylos' sandy coast,
    Nestor the sage conducts his chosen host. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. The ancients believed that Nestor outlived three generations of men,
which some suppose to have been three hundred years. From this it was a
custom of the ancient Greeks and Romans, when wishing a long and happy
life to their friends, to wish them to live as long as Nestor. Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
    Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd;
    Two generations now had pass'd away,
    Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
    Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
    And now the example of the third remain'd. POPE, _Iliad_, Book I. The two Ajaxes were also renowned warriors of the Grecian army,--Ajax
Telamon and Ajax O-iʹleus, so called from the names of their fathers. Telamon was the king of Salamis, to whom, as has been told, Hercules
gave Laomedon's daughter, Hesione. His son Ajax, a man of huge stature
and giant strength, was, next to Achilles, the bravest of all the Greeks
who went to the Trojan War. With these appear the Salaminian bands,
    Whom the gigantic Telamon commands;
    In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course,
    And with the great Athenians join their force. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. Ajax Oileus, king of Loʹcris, was less in stature than his namesake, but
few excelled him in the use of the spear or in swiftness of foot. He
commanded forty ships in the great expedition. Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on,
    Ajax the less, Oileus' valiant son;
    Skill'd to direct the flying dart aright;
    Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II

Two other valiant warriors, who led eighty ships each to the great
muster, were Diomede, king of Argos, and I-domʹe-neus, king of
Crete,--the "spear-renowned Idomeneus." Crete's hundred cities pour forth all her sons. These march'd, Idomeneus, beneath thy care. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. When at length all the kings and princes were assembled at Aulis, the
vast fleet numbered 1185 ships, according to the account given by Homer. The total number of men which the ships carried is not known, but it is
probable that it was not less than 100,000, as the largest of the
vessels contained about 120, and the smallest 50 men each. Such was the mighty host that Hellas marshaled to punish Troy for the
crime committed by Paris. Before setting out on so important an
expedition the Greek chiefs deemed it proper, according to the custom of
the ancients, to offer sacrifices to the gods, that their undertaking
might have the favor of heaven. Altars were therefore erected, and the
sacred services were carried out in due order. On these occasions
animals--very frequently oxen--were killed, and portions of their flesh
consumed by fire, such sacrifices being supposed to be very pleasing to
the gods. While the Grecian chiefs were engaged in their religious ceremonies, the
greater part of the army having already gone aboard the ships, they were
startled at beholding a serpent dart out from beneath one of the altars,
and, gliding along the ground, ascend a plane tree which grew close by. At the top of the tree was a nest containing eight young birds. The
serpent devoured them, and immediately afterwards seized and devoured
the mother bird, which had been fluttering around the nest. Then
suddenly, before the eyes of the astonished Greeks, the reptile turned
into stone. Amazed at this occurrence, and believing it to have some
connection with their expedition, the assembled chiefs asked the
soothsayer Calchas to explain what it meant. The seer replied, telling
them that it was a sign that the war upon which they were about to enter
would last ten years. "For us, indeed," said he, "Jupiter has shown a great sign. As this
serpent has devoured the young of the sparrow, eight in number, and
herself, the mother of the brood, was the ninth, so must we for as many
years wage war, but in the tenth year we shall take the city." This story was eloquently told by Ulysses in the Greek camp before Troy,
when in the tenth year of the siege, many of the troops, having grown
weary of the war, desired to return to their homes. [Illustration]




IV. BEGINNING OF THE WAR. The Greek chiefs, nothing daunted by the words of Calchas, now set sail
with their immense fleet. Though the war was to be a long one, they were
encouraged by the prophecy that they were to be the conquerors. Their first experience was not very fortunate. They safely crossed the
Ægean Sea, but instead of steering for Troy, the pilots, through either
ignorance or mistake, brought the vessels to the shore on the coast of
Teu-thra'ni-a, a district in the kingdom of Mys'i-a, lying southeast of
Troas. Here the Greeks landed, but they were at once attacked by
Tel'e-phus, the king of that country, who came down upon them with a
strong force, and drove them back to their ships after a battle in which
many of them were killed. They would probably have fared much worse had
it not been for the friendly aid of Bacʹchus, the god of wine. While
Telephus was fighting at the head of his men he tripped and fell over a
vine, which the god had caused to spring up suddenly from the earth at
his feet. As he lay flat on the ground Achilles rushed forward and
severely wounded him with a thrust of his spear. The Greeks, however, were obliged to take to the sea, and soon afterward
a great storm arose, which destroyed many of their vessels. Owing to
this misfortune they had to return to Aulis, where they set about
repairing their damaged ships and getting ready to start again. While
the Greeks were thus engaged, they were surprised by the appearance of
King Telephus, who came to their camp to beg Achilles to cure his wound,
an oracle he had consulted having told him that he could be cured only
by the person who had wounded him. Achilles was at first unwilling to comply with the request of Telephus,
but Ulysses advised him to do so. Telephus was one of the sons of
Hercules, and it had been decreed that without the help of a son of that
hero Troy could not be taken. Moreover, he was a son-in-law of Priam,
and his country lay close to where the war was to be carried on. For
these reasons Ulysses wished to make him friendly to the Greeks, and so
he persuaded Achilles to cure the Teuthranian king. Achilles did this by
dropping into the wound portions of the rust from the point of his
spear. Telephus was so grateful that he joined the expedition against
Troy, and undertook to pilot the Grecian fleet to the Trojan coast. But another difficulty now stood in the way of the Greeks. Their fleet
was once more ready for departure, but the winds were unfavorable. In
ancient times they could not make a sea voyage when the winds were
against them. Their ships were very small, and were moved only by oars
and sails. Homer gives us a good idea of the ancient system of
navigation, where he tells, in the Odyssey, about young Telemachus
setting out on a voyage in search of his father, Ulysses:

                        Telemachus went up
    The vessel's side, but Pallas first embarked,
    And at the stern sat down, while next to her
    Telemachus was seated. Then the crew
    Cast loose the fastenings and went all on board,
    And took their places on the rowers' seats,
    While blue-eyed Pallas sent a favoring breeze,
    A fresh wind from the west, that murmuring swept
    The dark-blue main. Telemachus gave forth
    The word to wield the tackle; they obeyed,
    And raised the fir-tree mast, and, fitting it
    Into its socket, bound it fast with cords,
    And drew and spread with firmly twisted ropes
    The shining sails on high. The steady wind
    Swelled out the canvas in the midst; the ship
    Moved on, the dark sea roaring round her keel,
    As swiftly through the waves she cleft her way. BRYANT, _Odyssey_, Book II. For many days the Greek chiefs at Aulis waited for favoring breezes, but
none came. "The troops
    Collected and embodied, here we sit
    Inactive, and from Aulis wish to sail
    In vain." EURIPIDES (Potter's tr.). At last the soothsayer Calchas told them that the easterly winds which
prevented them from sailing were caused by the anger of Di-anʹa. Diana
was the goddess of hunting, and there was one of her sacred groves in
the neighborhood of Aulis. In this grove King Agamemnon went hunting
during the time the ships were being repaired after the storm, and he
killed one of Diana's favorite deer. He even boasted that he was a
greater hunter than Diana herself. This enraged the goddess, and Calchas
said that her anger could be appeased only by the offering up of
Agamemnon's daughter, Iph-i-ge-niʹa, as a sacrifice. [Illustration: DIANA HUNTING. _Painting by Makart._ (_Fragment_.)] The feelings of the father may be easily imagined. He heard the
announcement of the soothsayer with the utmost horror, and he declared
that he would withdraw from the expedition rather than permit his child
to be put to death. But Ulysses and the other princes begged him to
remember that the honor of their country was at stake. They said that if
he should withdraw, the great cause for which they had labored for ten
years would be lost, and the Trojan insult to his own family and to all
Greece would remain unpunished. At last Agamemnon consented, and messengers were sent to Mycenæ to bring
Iphigenia to Aulis. The king was even persuaded to deceive his wife,
Clyt-em-nesʹtra. Knowing that she would not allow her daughter to be
taken away for such a purpose, he wrote a letter to the queen, saying
that Iphigenia had been chosen to be the wife of Achilles, and that he
wished the marriage ceremony to be performed before the departure of the
young prince for Troy. "I wrote, I seal'd
    A letter to my wife, that she should send
    Her daughter to Achilles as a bride
    Affianc'd." EURIPIDES (Potter's tr.). Clytemnestra agreed to the proposal, happy at the thought of her
daughter being married to so great a prince as Achilles. Iphigenia
accordingly accompanied the messengers to the Greek camp at Aulis. When
she learned of the terrible fate to which she had been doomed, she threw
herself at her father's feet and piteously implored his protection. But
her tears and entreaties were in vain. The agonized father had now no
power to save her, for the whole army demanded that the will of the
goddess should be obeyed. Preparations for the awful sacrifice were
therefore made, and when everything was ready, the beautiful young
princess was led to the altar. Tennyson, in his "Dream of Fair Women,"
has these lines about Iphigenia at Aulis:

    "I was cut off from hope in that sad place,
      Which men called Aulis in those iron years:
    My father held his hand upon his face;
      I, blinded with my tears,

    Still strove to speak: my voice was thick with sighs
      As in a dream. Dimly I could descry
    The stern, black-bearded kings with wolfish eyes,
      Waiting to see me die." But Iphigenia was not sacrificed after all. Her innocence excited the
pity even of Diana, and at the last moment the goddess snatched the
weeping maiden away in a cloud, and left in her place a beautiful deer
to be offered up as a sacrifice. She carried the princess off to
Tauʹri-ca, a country bordering the Black Sea, and there Iphigenia
remained for many years, serving as a priestess in Diana's temple. The anger of Diana being appeased, favorable winds now began to blow,
and the Greeks again set sail. This time they had a more fortunate
voyage. Piloted by Telephus, the fleet crossed the Ægean Sea, and safely
reached the coast of Troas. But here Calchas made another discouraging
prophecy. He declared that the first Greek who stepped on Trojan soil
would be killed in the first fight with the enemy. This the oracle at
Delphi had also foretold. There was some hesitation, therefore, about
landing, for the army of King Priam was ranged along the beach prepared
for battle with the invaders. This was the occasion of an heroic act by Pro-tes-i-laʹus, king of
Phylʹa-ce in Thessaly, who boldly leaped ashore as soon as the vessels
touched the land. The prediction of Calchas was soon fulfilled. Protesilaus was struck dead in the first fight by a spear launched by
the hands of the Trojan leader, Hector. The bravery of the Thessalian
king, and the grief of his queen, La-od-a-miʹa, when she heard of his
death, have been much celebrated in song and story. Protesilaus the brave,
    Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:
    The first who boldly touch'd the Trojan shore,
    And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore;
    There lies, far distant from his native plain;
    And his sad consort beats her breast in vain. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. Laodamia in her sorrow prayed to the gods that she might see her husband
again on earth. Jupiter heard her prayer, and he ordered Mercury to
conduct Protesilaus from Hades, the land of the dead, to Thessaly, to
remain with Laodamia for the space of three hours. Laodamia was happy for the brief time allowed her to enjoy again the
companionship of her beloved Protesilaus, and she listened with pride to
the story of his brave deed on the Trojan shore. "Thou know'st, the Delphic oracle foretold
    That the first Greek who touched the Trojan strand
    Should die; but me the threat could not withhold:
    A generous cause a victim did demand;
    And forth I leapt upon the sanely plain;
    A self-devoted chief--by Hector slain." WORDSWORTH, _Laodamia_. But the happy moments flew swiftly by, and when the three hours had
passed, Mercury returned to take the hero back to the world of shades. The parting was too much for the fond Laodamia. She died of grief as her
husband disappeared from her sight. Protesilaus was buried on the Trojan shore, and around his grave, it is
said, there grew very wonderful trees. These trees withered away as
soon as their tops reached high enough to be seen from the city of Troy. Then fresh trees sprang up from their roots, and withered in like manner
when they reached the same height, and so this marvelous growth and
decay continued for ages. Upon the side
    Of Hellespont (such faith was entertained)
    A knot of spiry trees for ages grew
    From out the tomb of him for whom she died;
    And ever, when such stature they had gained
    That Ilium's walls were subject to their view,
    The trees' tall summits withered at the sight;
    A constant interchange of growth and blight! WORDSWORTH, _Laodamia_. The heroic act of Protesilaus was the beginning of the great war. Before
he fell himself he slew many of the enemy, and hosts of his countrymen,
encouraged by his example, poured from their ships and encountered the
Trojans in fierce conflict. In this first battle the Greeks were
victorious. Though Hector and his brave troops fought valiantly they
were driven back from the shore, and compelled to take refuge within the
strong walls of the city. The Trojans were well prepared for the war. King Priam had not been idle
while the Greek leaders were mustering their forces. From all parts of
his kingdom he had gathered immense supplies of provisions, and the
princes and chiefs of Troas came with large armies to defend their king
and country. The most celebrated of these chiefs was the hero Æ-neʹas,
son of An-chiʹses and the goddess Venus. He commanded the Dardanian
forces, and had as his lieutenants the two brave warriors, Acʹa-mas and
Ar-chilʹo-chus. Divine Æneas brings the Dardan race. Archilochus and Acamas divide
    The warrior's toils, and combat by his side. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. The Trojans had numerous and powerful allies. Troops were sent to them
from the neighboring countries of Phrygia, Mysia, Lycʹi-a and Caʹri-a. The Lycian forces were led by Sar-peʹdon, a son of Jupiter, and a
renowned warrior. A chief, who led to Troy's beleaguer'd wall
    A host of heroes, and outshined them all. POPE, _Iliad_, Book XVI. But the greatest of the heroes who defended Troy, and, with the
exception of Achilles, the greatest and bravest of all who took part in
the Trojan War, was the famous Hector. The boast of nations, the defense of Troy! To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
    Her chief, her hero, and almost her god! POPE, _Iliad_, Book XXII. So long as Hector lived Troy was safe. When he died, his great rival,
Achilles, by whose hand he was slain, rejoiced with the Greeks as if
Troy had already fallen. "Ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring
    The corpse of Hector, and your pæans sing. Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,
    'Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more.'" POPE, _Iliad_, Book XXII. But though led by the great Hector, the Trojans, after their first
defeat, were unable to keep up the fight in the open field against the
vast numbers of the Greeks. Seeing, therefore, that they must depend for
safety on the strong walls which Neptune had built, they drew all their
forces into the city, leaving the enemy in possession of the surrounding
country. Then the famous siege of ten years began. The Greeks hauled their ships
out of the water, and fixed them on the beach in an upright position
supported by props. Close to the vessels, on the land side, they erected
their tents, which extended in a long line, one wing, or end, of which
was guarded by Achilles, and the other by Ajax Telamon. Between this
encampment and the walls of Troy--a distance of three or four
miles--many a fierce conflict took place, and many a brave warrior fell
during the great contest. For the Trojans, headed by Hector or some
other of their chiefs, often came out from the city through the
principal gate, called the Scæʹan Gate, which faced the Grecian camp,
and fought the enemy in the open plain, on the bank of the celebrated
river Simois. And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy,
    When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
    Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
    To see their youthful son's bright weapons wield;
    And to their hope they such odd action yield,
      That through their light joy seemed to appear,
      Like bright things stain'd, a kind of heavy fear. And from the strond of Dardan, where they fought,
    To Simois' reedy banks the red blood ran,
    Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
    With swelling ridges; and their ranks began
    To break upon the galled shore, and then
      Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
      They join and shoot their foam at Simois' banks. SHAKESPEARE, _Lucrece_. V. THE WRATH OF ACHILLES. For over nine years the siege was carried on without one side or the
other gaining any important victory. The Trojans were protected by their
walls, which the Greeks were unable to break down, for the ancients had
no such powerful engines of war as those used in armies of the present
day. The strongest buildings may now be easily destroyed by cannon; but
in those days they had no cannon or gunpowder or dynamite. Success in
war in ancient times depended almost entirely on the bravery of the
soldiers or on strategy and artifice, in which, as we shall see, the
king of Ithaca was much skilled. The Greek and Trojan warriors fought with swords, axes, bows and arrows,
and javelins, or long spears tipped with sharp iron points. Sometimes
they used huge stones which the heroes hurled at the foe with the full
strength of their powerful arms. They had shields of circular or oval
shape, which they wore on the arm to ward off blows, and which could be
moved at pleasure so as to cover almost any part of the body. Their
chests were protected by corselets or breastplates made of metal, and
metal greaves, or boots, incased their legs from the knees to the feet. On their heads they wore helmets, usually of brass. The chiefs fought in chariots, from which they darted their spears at
the enemy with such force and so true an aim as to wound or kill at a
considerable distance. The chariots were two-wheeled, open at the back,
and often drawn by three horses. They usually carried two warriors, both
standing, and the charioteer, or driver, was generally the companion or
friend, and not the servant, of the fighters who stood behind him. Sometimes the warriors came down from their chariots and fought hand to
hand at close quarters with the enemy. The common soldiers always fought
on foot. There were no horse soldiers. But in the Trojan War success or defeat did not always depend on the
bravery of the soldiers or on the skill or strategy of the generals. Very much depended on the gods. We have seen how those divine beings had
to do with the events that led to the war. We shall also see them taking
part in the battles, sometimes giving victory to one side and sometimes
to the other. The Trojan War was in fact as much a war of the gods as of
men, and in Homer's story we find Jupiter and Juno and Apollo and
Neptune and Venus and Minerva mentioned almost as frequently as the
Greek and Trojan heroes. In the beginning of the Iliad we find Apollo
sending a plague among the Greeks because of an insult offered to his
priest, Chryʹses; for the daughter of Chryses, a beautiful maiden named
Chry-seʹis, was carried off by Achilles after the taking of Theʹbe, a
town of Mysia. During the long siege the Grecian chiefs extended the war into the
surrounding districts. While part of their forces was left at the camp
to protect the ships and keep the Trojans cooped up within their walls,
expeditions were sent out against many of the towns of Troas, or of the
neighboring countries which were allies and supporters of Troy. When the
Greeks captured a town they carried off not only the provisions and
riches it contained, but also many of its inhabitants, whom they sold as
slaves, according to the custom of the time, or kept as slaves in their
own service. In one of these expeditions Priam's youngest son,
Troʹi-lus, the hero of Shakespeare's play of "Troilus and Cresʹsi-da,"
was slain by Achilles. It was in the tenth year of the war that Thebe was taken, and the maiden
Chryseis was captured. About the same time the town of Lyr-nesʹsus was
seized by an expedition, also led by Achilles, and among the prisoners
was a beautiful woman named Bri-seʹis. In the division of the spoils
among the chiefs, Chryseis fell to the share of Agamemnon, and the
maiden Briseis was given to Achilles, who took her to his tent with the
intention of making her his wife. But the priest Chryses was deeply
grieved at the taking away of his daughter, and he came to the Grecian
camp to beg the chiefs to restore her to him. In his hand he bore a
golden scepter bound with fillets, or green branches, the emblems of his
priestly office, and he also carried with him valuable gifts for King
Agamemnon. Being admitted to the presence of the warrior chiefs
assembled in council, he begged them to release his child. He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
    The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race. "Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
    And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground. May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
    Safe to the pleasures of your native shore. But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
    And give Chryseis to these arms again." POPE, _Iliad_, Book I. Hearing the prayer of the venerable priest, many of the chiefs were
moved to pity, and they advised that his request should be granted, but
Agamemnon angrily refused. [Illustration: APOLLO. _Berlin Museum._]


                                He dismissed
    The priest with scorn, and added threatening words:--
      "Old man, let me not find thee loitering here,
    Beside the roomy ships, or coming back
    Hereafter, lest the fillet thou dost bear
    And scepter of thy god protect thee not. This maiden I release not till old age
    Shall overtake her in my Argive home,
    Far from her native country." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I.

Chryses then departed from the Grecian camp, and as he returned home in
sorrow, walking along the shores of the sea, he prayed to Apollo to
punish the insult thus offered to his priest. "O Smintheus! if I ever helped to deck
    Thy glorious temple, if I ever burned
    Upon thy altar the fat thighs of goats
    And bullocks, grant my prayer, and let thy shafts
    Avenge upon the Greeks the tears I shed." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I.

Apollo heard the prayer of Chryses, and he sent a deadly plague upon the
Grecian army. With his silver bow, every clang of which was heard
throughout the camp, the archer god darted his terrible arrows among the
Greeks, smiting them down in great numbers. He came as comes the night,
    And, seated from the ships aloof, sent forth
    An arrow; terrible was heard the clang
    Of that resplendent bow. At first he smote
    The mules and the swift dogs, and then on man
    He turned the deadly arrow. All around
    Glared evermore the frequent funeral piles. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. For nine days the arrows of death were sent upon the Greek army, and the
funeral piles of the victims were continually burning, for it was the
custom in those times to burn the bodies of the dead. On the tenth day
of the plague Achilles called a council of the chiefs to consider how
the anger of the god might be appeased, and he spoke before them,
saying:

"Let us consult some prophet or priest who will tell us why Phœbus
Apollo is so much enraged with us, and whether he may, when we shall
have offered sacrifices upon his altar, take away this pestilence which
is destroying our people." Then Calchas, the soothsayer, arose and said:

"O Achilles, I can tell why the god is wroth against us, and willing I
am to tell it, but perhaps I may irritate the king who rules over all
the Argives, and in his anger he may do evil to me. Promise me,
therefore, your protection, and I will declare why this plague has come
upon the Greeks." "Fear nothing, O Calchas," answered Achilles. "While I am alive not one
of all the Greeks, not even Agamemnon himself, shall harm you." "Fear nothing, but speak boldly out whate'er
    Thou knowest, and declare the will of heaven. For by Apollo, dear to Jove, whom thou,
    Calchas, dost pray to, when thou givest forth
    The sacred oracles to men of Greece,
    No man, while yet I live, and see the light
    Of day, shall lay a violent hand on thee." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. Thus encouraged, Calchas announced to the chiefs that Apollo was angry
because his priest had been dishonored and insulted by Agamemnon. This
was why the people were perishing, and the wrath of the god could be
appeased only by restoring Chryseis to her father, and sending a hundred
victims to be offered in sacrifice to the god. Upon hearing these words
Agamemnon was filled with anger against Calchas. "Prophet of evil," he exclaimed, "never have you spoken anything good
for me. And now you say I must give up the maiden. I shall do so, since
I wish not the destruction of the people, but another I must have, for
it is not fitting that I alone of all the Argives shall be without a
prize." To this Achilles answered that there was no prize just then that
Agamemnon could have. "How can we give you a prize," said he, "since
all the spoils have already been divided? We cannot ask the people to
return what has been given to them. Be satisfied then to let the maiden
go. When we have taken the strong city of Troy we will compensate you
fourfold." "Not so," replied Agamemnon. "If the Greeks give me a suitable prize, I
shall be content, but if not, I will seize yours or that of Ajax or
Ulysses. This matter, however, we will attend to afterwards. For the
present let the maid be sent back to her father, that the wrath of the
Far-darter may be appeased." At this Achilles was very angry, and he said:

"Impudent and greedy man, how can the Greeks fight bravely under your
command? As for me, I did not come here to make war against the Trojans
because of any quarrel of my own. The Trojans have done no wrong to me. It is to get satisfaction for your brother we have come here in our
ships, and we do most of the fighting while to you is given most of the
spoils. But now I will return home to Phthia. Perhaps you will then have
little treasure to share." Greatly enraged at this speech, Agamemnon replied in wrathful words: "Go
home, by all means, with your ships and your Myrmidons. Other chiefs
there are here who will honor me, and I care not for your anger." "Thus, in turn,
    I threaten thee; since Phœbus takes away
    Chryseis, I will send her in my ship
    And with my friends, and, coming to thy tent,
    Will bear away the fair-cheeked maid, thy prize,
    Briseis, that thou learn how far I stand
    Above thee, and that other chiefs may fear
    To measure strength with me, and brave my power." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. Furious at this threat, Achilles put his hand to his sword with the
intention of slaying Agamemnon, and he had half drawn the weapon from
its scabbard, but just at that moment the goddess Minerva stood behind
him and caught him by his yellow hair. She had been sent down from
heaven by Juno to pacify the hero, for Juno and Minerva were friendly to
the Greeks. Ever since the judgment on Mount Ida they hated Paris, and
the city and country to which he belonged, and therefore they wished
that there should be no strife amongst the Greek chiefs, which would
prevent them from taking and destroying the hated city. Achilles was astonished when he beheld the goddess, who appeared to him
alone, being invisible to all the rest. He instantly knew who she was,
and he said to her: "O goddess, have you come to witness the insolence
of the son of Atreus? You shall also witness the punishment I shall
inflict upon him for his haughtiness." But Minerva spoke soothing words to the hero:

    "I came from heaven to pacify thy wrath,
    If thou wilt heed my counsel. I am sent
    By Juno the white-armed, to whom ye both
    Are dear, who ever watches o'er you both. Refrain from violence; let not thy hand
    Unsheath the sword, but utter with thy tongue
    Reproaches, as occasion may arise,
    For I declare what time shall bring to pass;
    Threefold amends shall yet be offered thee,
    In gifts of princely cost, for this day's wrong. Now calm thy angry spirit, and obey." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. Thus Minerva spoke, and Achilles, answering her, said: "Willingly, O
goddess, shall I observe your command, though in my soul much enraged,
for so it is better, since the gods are ever favorable to those who obey
them." So speaking he put his sword back into its scabbard, while the goddess
swiftly returned to Olympus. Then the hero again addressed Agamemnon in
bitter words, and he took a solemn oath on the scepter he held in his
hand, that he would refuse to help the Greeks when they next should seek
his aid for battle with the Trojans. "Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings;
    By this I swear:--when bleeding Greece again
    Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain." POPE, _Iliad_, Book I. The venerable Nestor then arose to speak, and he begged the two chiefs
to cease quarreling with each other, for the Trojans, he said, would
greatly rejoice to hear of strife between the bravest men of the Greeks. He advised Achilles, though of a goddess-mother born, not to contend
against his superior in authority, and he entreated Agamemnon not to
dishonor Achilles, the bulwark of the Greeks, by taking away the prize
which had been allotted to him. "Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost,
    The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host." POPE, _Iliad_, Book I. But the wise Nestor advised and entreated in vain. Agamemnon would not
yield from his purpose of taking away the prize of Achilles, and so the
council of the chiefs came to an end. Rising from that strife of words, the twain
    Dissolved the assembly at the Grecian fleet. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. [Illustration: ACHILLES DEPRIVED OF BRISEIS. _Drawn by Hubbell._]

Immediately afterwards, by order of the king, the maiden Chryseis was
conducted to her father's home, and sacrifices were offered to Apollo. The anger of the god being thus appeased, the army was relieved from
the plague. Then Agamemnon proceeded to carry out his threat against
Achilles. Calling two of his officers, or heralds, Tal-thybʹi-us and
Eu-rybʹa-tes, he commanded them thus:

      "Go ye to where Achilles holds his tent,
    And take the fair Briseis by the hand,
    And bring her hither. If he yield her not,
    I shall come forth to claim her with a band
    Of warriors, and it shall be worse for him." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I.

Achilles received the heralds respectfully. He had no blame for them,
since they were but messengers. Nor did he refuse to obey the command of
the king. He delivered Briseis to the heralds, and they conducted her to
the tent of Agamemnon. Thus was committed the deed which brought
countless woes upon the Greeks, for Achilles, in deep grief and anger,
vowed that he would no more lead his Myrmidons to battle for a king who
had so dishonored and insulted him. "Let these heralds," said he, "be the witnesses before gods and men of
the insult offered to me by this tyrant king, and when there shall be
need of me again to save the Greeks from destruction, appeal to me shall
be in vain." Such was the origin of the wrath of Achilles, which is the subject of
Homer's Iliad. The Iliad is not a complete story of the Trojan War, but
an account of the disasters which happened to the Greeks through the
anger of Achilles. The poem, indeed, relates the events of only
fifty-eight days, but they were events of the highest interest and they
were very numerous. It is remarked by Pope that the subject of the Iliad
is the shortest and most single ever chosen by any poet. Yet Homer has
supplied a vaster variety of incidents, a greater number of councils,
speeches, battles, and events of all kinds, than are to be found in any
other poem. The Iliad begins with the wrath of Achilles, which in the first line of
the first book is announced as the poet's theme:

    Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
    Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing! That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
    The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
    Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
    Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore:
    Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
    Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove! POPE, _Iliad_, Book I. The heavenly goddess here invoked was Calliʹope, the patroness of epic
song, and one of the nine Muses. These were sister deities, daughters of
Jupiter, who presided over poetry, science, music, and dancing. Apollo,
as god of music and the fine arts, was their leader. They held their
meetings on the top of Mount Par-nas'sus in Greece. On the slope of this
mount was the celebrated spring or fountain of Cas-taʹli-a, whose waters
were supposed to give the true poetic spirit to all who drank of them. The epic poets usually began their poems by invoking the aid of the
Muse. Homer does this in the very first line of the Iliad, the word for
word translation of which is: "O goddess, sing the wrath of Achilles,
the son of Peleus." So also the English poet, Milton, begins his great epic poem, "Paradise
Lost," which tells about the disobedience of Adam and Eve in the Garden
of Eden:

    Of man's first disobedience, and the fruit
    Of that forbidden tree whose mortal taste
    Brought death into the world, and all our woe,
    With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
    Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
    _Sing, heavenly Muse_, that, on the secret top
    Of Oreb or of Sinai, didst inspire
    That shepherd who first taught the chosen seed
    In the beginning how the heavens and earth
    Rose out of Chaos; or, if Sion hill
    Delight thee more, and Siloa's brook that flow'd
    Fast by the oracle of God, _I thence_
    _Invoke thy aid_ to my advent'rous song. VI. THE DREAM OF AGAMEMNON. Very soon great evils came upon the Greeks because of the strife between
the chiefs. When Chryseis was restored to her father, Apollo stopped the
plague; but the wrong done to Achilles provoked the anger of another
deity. This was Thetis, who, having much power with Jupiter, was able to
persuade him to take up the cause of her injured son. For as soon as the heralds departed from his tent, leading away the
fair-cheeked Briseis, Achilles withdrew from his friends, retired to the
seashore, and sitting there alone he bitterly wept, and with
outstretched hands prayed to his mother, Thetis. The goddess heard his
voice, and ascending from the depths of the ocean, where she dwelt in
the palace of her aged father, Nereus, she sat down beside the hero, and
soothing him with her hand, she inquired the cause of his distress. "Why
do you weep, my son? What grief has come upon thy mind?" Then Achilles related to his mother what Agamemnon had done, and he
begged her to go to Mount Olympus and entreat Jupiter to punish the
insult that had been offered to her son. He spoke of the service she had
done for Jupiter long before, when Juno, Neptune, and Minerva had made a
plot to bind him, and cast him from the throne of heaven. They might
have succeeded in doing this if Thetis had not called Briʹa-reus up from
Pluto's kingdom to help Jupiter. Briareus was a mighty giant who had a
hundred hands, and his appearance in Olympus so terrified the
conspirators that they did not attempt to carry out their wicked plot. "Now," said Achilles to his mother, "remind Jupiter of this, and beg him
to aid the Trojans and give them victory in battle, so that Agamemnon
may feel the effects of his folly in dishonoring me." "Ascend to heaven and bring thy prayer to Jove,
    If e'er by word or act thou gav'st him aid. For I remember, in my father's halls
    I often heard thee, glorying, tell how thou,
    Alone of all the gods, didst interpose
    To save the cloud-compeller, Saturn's son,
    From shameful overthrow, when all the rest
    Who dwell upon Olympus had conspired
    To bind him,--Juno, Neptune, and with them
    Pallas Athene. Thou didst come and loose
    His bonds, and call up to the Olympian heights
    The hundred-handed, whom the immortal gods
    Have named Briareus." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I.

Thetis readily consented to do as her son desired. "Not now, however!" said she, "for yesterday Jupiter went to
E-thi-oʹpi-a to a banquet, and all the gods went with him. But in twelve
days he will return. Then I will go to Olympus and tell your words to
thunder-delighting Jove, and I think I shall be able to persuade him to
grant your request." "Thou, meanwhile, abide
    By thy swift ships, incensed against the Greeks,
    And take no part in all their battles more." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I.

Thetis did not forget her promise. On the twelfth day, at the dawn of
morning, she emerged from beneath the waves, and went up to Olympus. There she threw herself at the feet of Jupiter, as he sat on the summit
of the mount apart from the other gods, and earnestly prayed him to
grant victory to the Trojans until the Greeks should make amends to her
son for the injury that had been done him. Now it may seem that it was not just to ask that the whole Greek army
should be punished for the act of their general. But the other chiefs
and their people were hardly less to blame than Agamemnon, for they did
not try to prevent him from doing the wrong. If they had opposed him
very much, he would not perhaps have dared to insult their greatest
warrior, the man without whose help they knew Troy could not be taken. Therefore Thetis begged Jupiter to punish all the Greeks by giving
victory to the Trojans. "O Jupiter, my father, if among
    The immortals I have ever given thee aid
    By word or act, deny not my request. Honor my son whose life is doomed to end
    So soon; for Agamemnon, king of men,
    Hath done him shameful wrong: he takes from him
    And keeps the prize he won in war. But thou,
    Olympian Jupiter, supremely wise,
    Honor him thou, and give the Trojan host
    The victory, until the humbled Greeks
    Heap large increase of honors on my son." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I.

Jupiter hesitated for some time before consenting to grant the prayer of
Thetis. "This," said he, "is a serious matter, for by doing as you desire I may
give offense to Juno, who has already been blaming me among the gods,
saying that I aid the Trojans in battle. However, since you will have it
so, I shall grant your request." "And that thou
    Mayst be assured, behold, I give the nod;
    For this, with me, the immortals know, portends
    The highest certainty; no word of mine
    Which once my nod confirms can be revoked,
    Or prove untrue, or fail to be fulfilled." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. The awful nod was then given, and mighty Olympus trembled. Thetis,
rejoicing at the success of her mission, departed from the heavenly
regions and plunged into the depths of the sea, while Jupiter went to
his golden palace where the other gods were sitting around the
banqueting table. As he entered all rose up to do him honor, and met him
as he advanced to his throne. But his talk with Thetis had not escaped
the notice of Juno, and suspecting what it was about, she addressed her
spouse in harsh words. "Thou art ever," said she, "plotting secret things apart from me, and
now I greatly fear that the silver-footed Thetis has persuaded thee to
do some evil to the Greeks." "Thou hast promised her, I cannot doubt,
    To give Achilles honor and to cause
    Myriads of Greeks to perish by their fleet." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book I. "You are always suspecting," answered Jupiter, "but now it will avail
you nothing. Even though I have done what you say, such is my sovereign
pleasure. Be silent, and sit down in peace, and take care not to provoke
my anger." [Illustration: JUNO. _National Museum, Naples._]

At this point Vulcan interfered, entreating his mother, Juno, to submit
to the will of almighty Jove; "for," said he, "if the Thunderer wishes
to hurl us from our seats in heaven he can easily do it, since his power
is far greater than that of all the other gods." Vulcan then reminded her how she and he had both been punished on a
former occasion for an offense against Jupiter. When Hercules was
returning to Greece from Troy after capturing that city, Juno, who hated
the great hero, caused a storm to be raised in the Ægean Sea, which
drove his ships out of their course and almost destroyed them. That she
might do this without Jupiter knowing it, she contrived to cast him into
a deep sleep. When he awoke and found out what she had done, he was so
angry that he hung her from the heavens by a golden chain, and tied two
heavy iron anvils to her feet. Vulcan tried to loose the chains and set
his mother free, and for this offense Jupiter hurled him from the abode
of the gods. He fell on the island of Lem'nos in the Ægean Sea, but some
of the inhabitants, seeing him descend, caught him in their arms. Nevertheless, he broke his leg by the fall and was ever afterwards lame. How he fell
    From heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
    Sheer o'er the crystal battlements; from morn
    To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
    A summer's day; and with the setting sun
    Dropped from the zenith, like a falling star,
    On Lemnos, the Ægean isle. MILTON, _Paradise Lost_, Book I. After reminding Juno of these things, and restoring peace between her
and the king of heaven, Vulcan took upon himself the office of
cupbearer. He poured nectar into golden goblets and served it round to
the gods and goddesses, all of whom laughed at the sight of the lame god
bustling through the banqueting hall performing the work of Ganymede. They feasted till sunset, Apollo giving them sweet music from his lyre,
while the goddesses of song accompanied him with their voices. Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
    In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song. Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
    With voice alternate aid the silver sound. POPE, _Iliad_, Book I. When the banquet was over, the gods and goddesses retired to their
palaces,--golden palaces built by Vulcan,--and they sought repose in
sleep. But Jupiter did not sleep, for he was thinking how he might carry
out his promise to Thetis. After much thought he resolved to send a
message to Agamemnon by means of a dream, telling him to lead his
forces at once against Troy, as it was the will of the gods that the
city should now fall into the hands of the Greeks. And so this false
Dream or Lying Spirit was sent on its deceitful errand. It took the form
of the venerable Nestor, and, appearing to Agamemnon while he was
sleeping in his tent, delivered to him the command of Jupiter:

    "Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear;
    Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care. In just array draw forth the embattled train,
    Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;
    E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
    The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy." POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. As soon as Agamemnon awoke he hastily called a council of the chiefs to
meet at the ships of Nestor. There he told them of the command of Jove,
as sent to him in his dream. All agreed that the divine will should be
obeyed, but Agamemnon, like a prudent general, thought it would be well,
before going to battle, to find out whether the troops, after their
toils of nine years, were still willing to support him in carrying on
the war. With this object he resolved to try the plan of pretending to
them that he had made up his mind to stop the siege and return at once
to Greece. But he directed the chiefs to advise their followers not to
consent to the proposal, and to encourage them to make one more fight
for the honor of their country. Then the heralds summoned the whole army
to assemble, and the vast host gathered together on the plain before the
camp, to listen to the words of their commander. Homer's description of
the muster of the forces on this occasion is very beautiful:

    The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
    Pour'd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast. As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
    Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
    Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
    With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
    Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
    And o'er the vale descends the living cloud. So, from the tents and ships, a lengthen'd train
    Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain:
    Along the region runs a deafening sound;
    Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. The whole Greek army being thus assembled, with the exception of the
wrathful Achilles and his Myrmidons, Agamemnon then addressed them,
leaning on his scepter. He told them he now believed that Troy could not
be taken, and that Jupiter, who before promised victory to the Greeks,
now commanded them to return to Argos. "Let us therefore," said he, "get ready our ships and hasten to set sail
for our dear native land, where our wives with our beloved children sit
within their dwellings expecting us." The proposal was received with a
loud shout of joy, and the moment the king finished speaking, the vast
multitude began at once to make preparations for launching the vessels
into the sea. So was the whole assembly swayed; they ran
    With tumult to the ships; beneath their feet
    Rose clouds of dust, and each exhorted each
    To seize the ships and drag them to the deep. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book II. But Juno, from her seat on high Olympus, was watching these movements,
and she resolved that the war against the hated Trojans should not thus
come to an end. She therefore sent Minerva down with a message to
Ulysses. The azure-eyed goddess, as Minerva is often called by Homer,
hastened to the Grecian camp, and approached the Ithacan king, who was
standing near his ships, much grieved at seeing his countrymen preparing
to depart. Minerva addressed him in earnest words, begging him to use
his influence with the Greeks and persuade them not to go. "It cannot be," said she, "that you, brave chiefs, will leave to Priam
the glory of victory, and to the Trojans possession of Helen, on whose
account so many of your people have perished, far from their native
land." Ulysses knew the voice of the goddess, and promptly he complied with her
request. He went among the ships and talked to the leaders, reminding
them that it was not Agamemnon's wish that they should give up the war,
and entreating them to set an example of courage to their followers. "Warriors like you, with strength and wisdom bless'd,
    By brave examples should confirm the rest." POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. He also spoke to the soldiers, reproving them for their hasty flight,
and bidding them listen to the words of their leaders, who knew better
than they when and how to act. His efforts were successful. As speedily
as they had fled to their ships the Greeks now rushed back, and again
assembled to await the orders of their commander. Back to the assembly roll the thronging train,
    Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. But there was one evil-minded individual who tried to incite the others
to rebellion. This was Ther-siʹtes, a vulgar brawler, and the ugliest
man in the whole Greek army. Of the multitude
    Who came to Ilium, none so base as he,--
    Squint-eyed, with one lame foot, and on his back
    A lump, and shoulders curving towards the chest;
    His head was sharp, and over it the hairs
    Were thinly scattered. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book II. This ill-conditioned grumbler, as deformed in mind as in body, took much
pleasure in abusing the bravest warriors of the army, particularly
Achilles and Ulysses. But on the present occasion he raised his shrill
voice in words of insult against Agamemnon. "Your tents," cried he to
the king, "are full of money and prizes bestowed upon you by us. Do you
want still more gold, which we by our valor must win for you from the
enemy? If the Greeks were not women instead of men, they would return
home in their ships and leave you here to fight the Trojans. Little
honor and few prizes would you then have!" "O ye coward race! Ye abject Greeklings, Greeks no longer, haste
    Homeward with all the fleet, and let us leave
    This man at Troy to win his trophies here." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book II. Thus did Thersites revile Agamemnon, but his insolent speech brought
speedy punishment upon him. Ulysses, who was close at hand, turned with
angry looks upon the offender and rebuked him in stern language. Then
with his scepter he smote Thersites on the back and shoulders, until he
wept with pain and crouched down upon his seat in fear and trembling. Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears,
    From his vile visage wiped the scalding tears. POPE, _Iliad_, Book II. All the Greeks laughed heartily at the cowering wretch as he wiped his
face, and they loudly applauded the act of the Ithacan chief. "Surely,"
said they, "Ulysses has performed many good deeds, but now he has done
the best thing of all in punishing this foul-mouthed reviler as he
deserved." Then Ulysses, taking in his hand the famous scepter of Agamemnon, made
an eloquent speech to the army, Minerva, the azure-eyed, in the
appearance of a herald, having commanded the people to be silent, that
they might hear the words of the wisest of their leaders. It was upon
this occasion that the Ithacan king told the story of the serpent
devouring the birds at Aulis, as already related. Many of the Greeks had
forgotten the marvelous occurrence, and the prediction of Calchas that
in the tenth year of the siege Troy would be taken. Being now reminded
of it, they were filled with fresh hope and courage, for the tenth year
had come, and the end of the contest was not far off, which was to be
for them a great victory, as the soothsayer had declared. "Therefore,
brave Greeks," said Ulysses, after telling the story, "since the
prophecy is so near its fulfillment, let us all remain here until we
have captured the city of Priam." He spake, and loud applause thereon ensued
    From all the Greeks, and fearfully the ships
    Rang with the clamorous voices uttering
    The praises of Ulysses, and his words. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book II. The venerable Nestor and King Agamemnon then addressed the troops, after
which they all went to their tents and ships to prepare for battle. They
began by making the customary sacrifices to the gods, Agamemnon offered
up a fat ox five years old. Homer fully describes how this was done. First the king and his chiefs stood around the ox, holding pounded
barley cakes in their upraised hands, and praying to Jupiter to grant
them victory in the approaching battle. After the prayer the ox was
killed, and the carcass cut into pieces. Portions of the flesh were then
burned on leafless billets, while other portions were roasted for the
banquet which followed. After the banquet the loud-voiced heralds summoned all the warriors and
their followers to assemble. Immediately they came from their ships and
tents, and then, on the advice of Nestor, there was a review of the
whole army. The azure-eyed Minerva moved amongst them, bearing in her
hand the ægis, or shield of Jupiter, from which hung a hundred golden
fringes, each "worth a hundred oxen in price." She went through the
hosts of the Greeks encouraging them to fight bravely, and so they were
now more eager for battle than to return to their native land. It is at this part of his story--the review of the forces--that Homer
gives the remarkable account known as the "Catalogue of the Ships." In
it he tells the names of all the Greek kings and princes and chiefs, the
Grecian states from which they came, and the number of ships which each
brought to the war. To do this was no easy task, and so the poet, before
undertaking it, again seeks the aid of the Muses:

          O Muses, goddesses who dwell on high,
    Tell me,--for all things ye behold and know,
    While we know nothing and may only hear
    The random tales of rumor,--tell me who
    Were chiefs and princes of the Greeks; for I
    Should fail to number and to name them all,--
    Had I ten tongues, ten throats, a voice unapt
    To weary, uttered from a heart of brass,--
    Unless the Muses aided me. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book II. The allies and leaders of the Trojans are also named and described in
the "Catalogue of the Ships," for they too were marshaling their forces
within the city. From their walls they had observed the movements of the
Greeks, and, moreover, Jupiter had sent down his swift-footed messenger,
Iʹris, to bid them get ready for battle. The goddess found Priam and
Hector and others of the chiefs of Troy sitting in council, and she told
them of the vast host of the Greeks that was just then marching towards
the city. "I have seen many battles, yet have ne'er
    Beheld such armies, and so vast as these,--
    In number like the sands and summer leaves. They march across the plain, prepared to give
    Battle beneath the city walls. To thee,
    O Hector, it belongs to heed my voice
    And counsel. Many are the allies within
    The walls of this great town of Priam, men
    Of diverse race and speech. Let every chief
    Of these array his countrymen for war,
    And give them orders for the coming fight." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book II. Hector promptly obeyed the command of the goddess. Dismissing the
council, he and the other chiefs at once placed themselves at the head
of their troops and marched forth through the gates into the plain. VII. THE COMBAT BETWEEN MENELAUS AND PARIS. The two great armies, now in battle array on the plain before the city
walls, began to advance towards each other. The Trojans moved along with
great clatter, which Homer compares to the noise of flocks of cranes:

                    The Trojan host moved on
    With shouts and clang of arms, as when the cry
    Of cranes is in the air, that, flying south
    From winter and its mighty breadth of rain,
    Wing their way over ocean. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. The Greeks, on the other hand, advanced in deep silence. But silently the Greeks
    Went forward, breathing valor, mindful still
    To aid each other in the coming fray. As when the south wind shrouds a mountain-top
    In vapors that awake the shepherd's fear,--
    A surer covert for the thief than night,--
    And round him one can only see as far
    As one can hurl a stone,--such was the cloud
    Of dust that from the warriors' trampling feet
    Rose round their rapid march and filled the air. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. As soon as the armies approached each other, almost front to front,
Paris rushed forward from the Trojan lines, and challenged the Greeks to
send their bravest warrior to fight him in simple combat. In appearance
he was beautiful as a god. Over his shoulders he wore a panther's skin. His weapons were a bow, a sword, and two spears tipped with brass, which
he brandished in his hands. The challenge was speedily answered by
Menelaus, who bounded from his chariot the moment he beheld Paris,
rejoicing that at last the time had come to have revenge on the man who
had so greatly wronged him. As a hungry lion who has made
    A prey of some large beast--a horned stag
    Or mountain goat--rejoices, and with speed
    Devours it, though swift hounds and sturdy youths
    Press on his flank, so Menelaus felt
    Great joy when Paris, of the godlike form,
    Appeared in sight, for now he thought to wreak
    His vengence on the guilty one, and straight
    Sprang from his car to earth with all his arms. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. But when Paris saw who it was that had come forth to fight him, he was
seized with a great fear, and he shrank back into the ranks of his
companions. As one who meets within a mountain glade
    A serpent, starts aside with sudden fright,
    And takes the backward way with trembling limbs. BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. Though Paris was really a brave man, his feeling of his own guilt and
the sight of Menelaus, whom he had injured, made him a coward for the
moment, and so he fled from before the face of the enraged king of
Sparta. The noble Hector was deeply vexed at seeing his brother's
flight, and in angry words upbraided him for his shameful conduct. "Better would it have been," said he, "if you had never been born than
thus to bring disgrace upon us all. Well may the Greeks laugh at finding
that you, whom they supposed to be a hero, possess neither spirit nor
courage. You have brought evil on your father, your city, and your
people, by carrying away a beautiful woman from her husband, yet you now
fear to meet that warrior in battle. The Trojans are but a weak-minded
race, else they would have long since given you the death you deserve." Paris admitted that his brother's rebuke was just, and he now declared
that he was willing to meet Menelaus in single combat, Helen and her
treasures to be the prize of the victor. "Cause the Trojans and the Greeks
    To pause from battle, while, between the hosts,
    I and the warlike Menelaus strive
    In single fight for Helen and her wealth. Whoever shall prevail and prove himself
    The better warrior, let him take with him
    The treasure and the woman, and depart;
    While all the other Trojans, having made
    A faithful league of amity? shall dwell
    On Ilium's fertile plain, and all the Greeks
    Return to Argos." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. Hector rejoiced at his brother's words, and, immediately going forward
into the center of the open space between the two armies, he spoke in a
loud voice to the Greeks and Trojans, telling them of the proposal which
Paris had made. The brave Menelaus heard the challenge with delight, and
promptly accepted it. "Now hear me also,--me whose spirit feels
    The wrong most keenly. I propose that now
    The Greeks and Trojans separate reconciled,
    For greatly have ye suffered for the sake
    Of this my quarrel, and the original fault
    Of Paris. Whomsoever fate ordains
    To perish, let him die; but let the rest
    Be from this moment reconciled, and part." BRYANT, _Iliad_, Book III. The Greeks and Trojans were happy at the hope thus offered of a speedy
end to the war. Hector sent for King Priam, that he and Agamemnon and
the other leaders on both sides might declare their approval of the
proposed conditions, and pledge themselves in the presence of both
armies to abide by the result of the combat between the two heroes. Just
then the Trojan monarch was seated on one of the watchtowers of the
walls, looking down on the plain where the great hosts were assembled. With him were several of his venerable chiefs, now too old to take part
in fighting. While they sat there the beautiful Helen came out from the palace to
witness the approaching conflict. She had been told of it by the
messenger Iris, who, descending from heaven, and taking the form of
La-odʹi-ce, one of Priam's daughters, appeared to Helen in her chamber. There she was busy at her loom, making in golden tapestry a
representation of some of the great events of the war. In those days, as
we read in many parts of Homer, the noblest ladies, even queens and
their daughters, did not think it beneath them to work at spinning and
weaving and other useful occupations, and so Helen was employed when
Iris came to tell her that Paris and Menelaus were about to fight for
her and her treasure. [Illustration: HELEN OF TROY. _Painting by Lord Leighton._]

From her spinning Helen rose up and went to the walls to view the
combat. As she came near the place where Priam sat, even the venerable
chiefs were compelled to admire her wondrous beauty. "Fair as the
immortal goddesses she is," said they; "yet much better would it be if
she would return to her own country, and not remain here to bring ruin
upon us and our children." But Priam called to her to sit by his side,
and said to her:

    "No crime of thine our present sufferings draws,
    Not thou, but Heaven's disposing will, the cause
    The gods these armies and this force employ,
    The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy." POPE, _Iliad_, Book III. Then King Priam asked Helen to name for him some of the Greek leaders
whom he saw before him, not far from the city walls. "Who is that tall and gallant hero," he asked, "who seems like unto a
king? Never have I beheld a man so graceful, nor so venerable." "Revered
and honored father," answered Helen, "would that death had taken me
before I left my husband and home to come with your son hither, but the
Fates did not will it so, therefore am I here. That hero whom you see is
the wide-ruling Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, both a good king and a
brave warrior, and once my brother-in-law." 