



Produced by Donal O'Danachair





THE POETICAL WORKS OF JOHN MILTON

By John Milton


Transcriber's Notes:

This e-text contains all of Milton's poems in English and Italian. Poems
in Latin have been omitted. The original spelling, capitalisation and punctuation have been retained
as far as possible. Characters not in the ANSI standard set have been
replaced by their nearest equivalent. The AE & OE digraphs have been
transcribed as two letters. Accented letters in the Italian poems have
been replaced by the unaccented letter. No italics have been retained. Footnotes have been moved to the end of the poem to which they refer; in
Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained they have been moved to the end of
the book. Contents:

PREFACE by the Rev. H. C. Beeching, M. A. THE STATIONER TO THE READER. MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. THE PASSION. ON TIME. UPON THE CIRCUMCISION. AT A SOLEMN MUSICK. AN EPITAPH ON THE MARCHIONESS OF WINCHESTER. SONG ON MAY MORNING. ON SHAKESPEAR. 1630. ANOTHER ON THE SAME. L'ALLEGRO. IL PENSEROSO. SONNETS. ARCADES. LYCIDAS. A MASK PRESENTED At LUDLOW-Castle, 1634. &c.

POEMS ADDED IN THE 1673 EDITION. ANNO AETATIS 17. ON THE DEATH OF A FAIR INFANT DYING OF A COUGH. THE FIFTH ODE OF HORACE. LIB. I.

SONNETS. ON THE NEW FORCERS OF CONSCIENCE UNDER THE LONG PARLIAMENT. ON THE LORD GEN. FAIRFAX AT THE SEIGE OF COLCHESTER. TO THE LORD GENERALL CROMWELL MAY 1652. TO SR HENRY VANE THE YOUNGER. TO MR. CYRIACK SKINNER UPON HIS BLINDNESS. PSAL. I. Done into Verse, 1653. PSAL. II Done Aug. 8. 1653. Terzetti. PSAL. III. Aug. 9. 1653

PSAL. IV. Aug. 10.1653. PSAL. V. Aug. 12.1653. PSAL. VI Aug. 13. 1653. PSAL. VII. Aug. 14. 1653. PSAL. VIII. Aug. 14. 1653. APRIL, 1648. J. M. NINE OF THE PSALMS DONE INTO METRE,

PSAL. LXXX. PSAL. LXXXI. PSAL. LXXXII. PSAL. LXXXIV. PSAL LXXXV. PSAL. LXXXVI. PSAL. LXXXVII

PSAL. LXXXVIII

COLLECTION OF PASSAGES TRANSLATED IN THE PROSE WRITINGS. [From Of Reformation in England, 1641.] [From Reason of Church Government, 1641.] [From Apology for Smectymnuus, 1642.] [From Areopagitica, 1644.] [From Tetrachordon, 1645.] [From The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, 1649.] [From History of Britain, 1670.] PARADISE LOST. ON Paradise Lost. THE VERSE. BOOK I. BOOK II. BOOK III. BOOK IV. BOOK V.

BOOK VI. BOOK VII. BOOK VIII. BOOK IX. BOOK X. BOOK XI. BOOK XII. PARADISE REGAIN'D. The First Book. The Second Book. The Third Book. The Fourth Book. SAMSON AGONISTES

Of that sort of Dramatic Poem which is call'd Tragedy. The Argument. APPENDIX. ON TIME




PREFACE by the Rev. H. C. Beeching, M. A. This edition of Milton's Poetry is a reprint, as careful as Editor and
Printers have been able to make it, from the earliest printed copies of
the several poems. First the 1645 volume of the Minor Poems has been
printed entire; then follow in order the poems added in the reissue of
1673; the Paradise Lost, from the edition of 1667; and the Paradise
Regain'd and Samson Agonistes from the edition of 1671. The most interesting portion of the book must be reckoned the first
section of it, which reproduces for the first time the scarce small
octavo of 1645. The only reprint of the Minor Poems in the old
spelling, so far as I know, is the one edited by Mitford, but that
followed the edition of 1673, which is comparatively uninteresting since
it could not have had Milton's oversight as it passed through the press. We know that it was set up from a copy of the 1645 edition, because it
reproduces some pointless eccentricities such as the varying form of the
chorus to Psalm cxxxvi; but while it corrects the errata tabulated in
that edition it commits many more blunders of its own. It is valuable,
however, as the editio princeps of ten of the sonnets and it contains
one important alteration in the Ode on the Nativity. This and all other
alterations will be found noted where they occur. I have not thought it
necessary to note mere differences of spelling between the two editions
but a word may find place here upon their general character. Generally
it may be said that, where the two editions differ, the later spelling
is that now in use. Thus words like goddess, darkness, usually written
in the first edition with one final s, have two, while on the  other
hand words like vernall, youthfull, and monosyllables like hugg, farr,
lose their double letter. Many monosyllables, e.g. som, cours, glimps,
wher, vers, aw, els, don, ey, ly, so written in 1645, take on in 1673 an
e mute, while words like harpe, windes, onely, lose it. By a reciprocal
change ayr and cipress become air and cypress; and the vowels in daign,
vail, neer, beleeve, sheild, boosom, eeven, battail, travailer, and many
other words are similarly modernized. On the other hand there are a few
cases where the 1645 edition exhibits the spelling which has succeeded
in fixing itself, as travail (1673, travel) in the sense of labour; and
rob'd, profane, human, flood and bloody, forest, triple, alas, huddling,
are found where the 1673 edition has roab'd, prophane, humane, floud and
bloudy, forrest, tripple, alass and hudling. Indeed the spelling in
this later edition is not untouched by seventeenth century
inconsistency. It retains here and there forms like shameles, cateres,
(where 1645 reads cateress), and occasionally reverts to the
older-fashioned spelling of monosyllables without the mute e.  In the
Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester, it reads--' And som flowers
and some bays.' But undoubtedly the impression on the whole is of a
much more modern text. In the matter of small or capital letters I have followed the old copy,
except in one or two places where a personification seemed not plainly
enough marked to a modern reader without a capital. Thus in Il
Penseroso, l. 49, I print Leasure, although both editions read leasure;
and in the Vacation Exercise, l. 71, Times for times. Also where the
employment or omission of a capital is plainly due to misprinting, as
too frequently in the 1673 edition, I silently make the correction. Examples are, notes for Notes in Sonnet xvii. l. 13; Anointed for
anointed in Psalm  ii. l.12. In regard to punctuation I have followed the old printers except in
obvious misprints, and followed them also, as far as possible, in their
distribution of roman and italic type and in the grouping of words and
lines in the various titles. To follow them exactly was impossible, as
the  books are so very different in size. At this point the candid reader may perhaps ask what advantage is gained
by presenting these poems to modern readers in the dress of a bygone
age. If the question were put to me I should probably evade it by
pointing out that Mr. Frowde is issuing an edition based upon this, in
which the spelling is frankly that of to-day. But if the question were
pressed, I think a sufficient answer might be found. To begin with, I
should point out that even Prof. Masson, who in his excellent edition
argues the point and decides in favour of modern spelling, allows that
there are peculiarities of Milton's spelling which are really
significant, and ought therefore to be noted or preserved. But who is
to determine exactly which words are spelt according to the poet's own
instructions, and which according to the printer's whim? It is
notorious that in Paradise Lost some words were spelt upon a deliberate
system, and it may very well happen that in the volume of minor poems
which the poet saw through the press in 1645, there were spellings no
less systematic. Prof. Masson makes a great point of the fact that
Milton's own spelling, exhibited in the autograph manuscript of some of
the minor poems preserved in Trinity College, Cambridge, does not
correspond with that of the printed copy. [Note: This manuscript,
invaluable to all students of Milton, has lately been facsimiled under
the superintendence of Dr. Aldis Wright, and published at the Cambridge
University press]. This is certainly true, as the reader may see for
himself by comparing the passage from the manuscript given in the
appendix with the corresponding place in the text. Milton's own
spelling revels in redundant e's, while the printer of the 1645 book is
very sparing of them. But in cases where the spelling affects the
metre, we find that the printed text and Milton's manuscript closely
correspond; and it is upon its value in determining the metre, quite as
much as its antiquarian interest, that I should base a justification of
this reprint. Take, for instance, such a line as the eleventh of Comus,
which Prof. Masson gives as:--

        Amongst the enthroned gods on sainted seats. A reader not learned in Miltonic rhythms will certainly read this

        Amongst th' enthroned gods

But the 1645 edition reads:

        Amongst the enthron'd gods

and so does Milton's manuscript. Again, in line 597, Prof.
Masson reads:

        It shall be in eternal restless change
        Self-fed and self-consumed. If this fail,
        The pillared firmament is rottenness,  &c.

But the 1645 text and Milton's manuscript read self-consum'd; after
which word there is to be understood a metrical pause to mark the
violent transition of the thought. Again in the second line of the Sonnet to a Nightingale Prof. Masson
has:

        Warblest at eve when all the woods are still

but the early edition, which probably follows Milton's spelling though
in this case we have no manuscript to compare, reads 'Warbl'st.' So the
original text of Samson, l. 670, has 'temper'st.' The retention of the old system of punctuation may be less defensible,
but I have retained it because it may now and then be of use in
determining a point of syntax. The absence of a comma, for example,
after the word hearse in the 58th line of the Epitaph on the Marchioness
of Winchester, printed by Prof. Masson thus:--

        And some flowers, and some bays
        For thy hearse to strew thy ways,

but in the 1645 edition:--

        And som Flowers, and som Bays,
        For thy Hears to strew the ways,

goes to prove that for here must be taken as 'fore. Of the Paradise Lost there were two editions issued during Milton's
lifetime, and while the first has been taken as our text, all the
variants in the second, not being simple misprints, have been recorded
in the notes. In one respect, however, in the distribution of the poem
into twelve books instead of ten, it has seemed best, for the sake of
practical convenience, to follow the second edition. A word may be
allowed here on the famous correction among the Errata prefixed to the
first edition:  'Lib. 2. v. 414, for we read wee.' This correction
shows not only that Milton had theories about spelling, but also that he
found means, though his sight was gone, to ascertain whether his rules
had been carried out by his printer; and in itself this fact justifies a
facsimile reprint. What the principle in the use of the double vowel
exactly was (and it is found to affect the other monosyllabic pronouns)
it is not so easy to discover, though roughly it is clear the
reduplication was intended to mark emphasis. For example, in the speech
of the Divine Son after the battle in heaven (vi. 810-817) the pronouns
which the voice would naturally emphasize are spelt with the double
vowel:

                                 Stand onely and behold
        Gods indignation on these Godless pourd
        By mee; not you but mee they have despis'd,
        Yet envied; against mee is all thir rage,
        Because the Father, t'whom in Heav'n supream
        Kingdom and Power and Glorie appertains,
        Hath honourd me according to his will. Therefore to mee thir doom he hath assign'd. In the Son's speech offering himself as Redeemer (iii. 227-249) where
the pronoun all through is markedly emphasized, it is printed mee the
first four times, and afterwards me; but it is noticeable that these
first four times the emphatic word does not stand in the stressed place
of the verse, so that a careless reader might not emphasize it, unless
his attention were specially led by some such sign:

        Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life
        I offer, on mee let thine anger fall;
        Account mee man. In the Hymn of Creation (v.160-209) where ye occurs fourteen times, the
emphasis and the metric stress six times out of seven coincide, and the
pronoun is spelt yee; where it is unemphatic, and in an unstressed
place, it is spelt ye. Two lines are especially instructive:

Speak yee who best can tell, ye Sons of light (l. 160);

and

        Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,
        Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise (l. 195). In v. 694 it marks, as the voice by its emphasis would mark in
reading, a change of subject:

        So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infus'd
        Bad influence into th' unwarie brest
        Of his Associate; hee (i. e. the associate) together calls,
&c.

An examination of other passages, where there is no antithesis, goes to
show that the lengthened form of the pronoun is most frequent before a
pause (as vii. 95); or at the end of a line (i. 245, 257); or when a
foot is inverted (v. 133); or when as object it  precedes its verb (v.
612; vii. 747), or as subject follows it (ix. 1109; x. 4). But as we
might expect under circumstances where a purist could not correct his
own proofs, there are not a few inconsistencies. There does not seem,
for example, any special emphasis in the second wee of the following
passage:

                                        Freely we serve. Because wee freely love, as in our will
        To love or not; in this we stand or fall  (v. 538). On the other hand, in the passage (iii. 41) in which the poet
speaks of his own blindness:

                                Thus with the Year
        Seasons return, but not to me returns
        Day, &c.

where, if anywhere, we should expect mee, we do not find it, though it
occurs in the speech eight lines below. It should be added that this
differentiation of the pronouns is not found in any printed poem of
Milton's before Paradise Lost, nor is it found in the Cambridge
autograph. In that manuscript the constant forms are me, wee, yee. There is one place where there is a difference in the spelling of she,
and it is just possible that this may not be due to accident. In the
first verse of the song in Arcades, the MS. reads:

        This, this is shee;

and in the third verse:

        This, this is she alone. This use of the double vowel is found a few times in Paradise Regain'd:
in ii. 259 and iv. 486, 497 where mee begins a line, and in iv. 638
where hee is specially emphatic in the concluding lines of the poem. In
Samson Agonistes it is more frequent (e.g. lines 124, 178, 193, 220,
252, 290, 1125). Another word the spelling of which in Paradise Lost
will be observed to vary is the pronoun their, which is spelt sometimes
thir. The spelling in the Cambridge manuscript is uniformly thire,
except once when it is thir; and where their once occurs in the writing
of an amanuensis the e is struck through. That the difference is not
merely a printer's device to accommodate his line may be seen by a
comparison of lines 358 and 363 in the First Book, where the shorter
word  comes in the shorter line. It is probable that the lighter form
of the word was intended to be used when it was quite unemphatic. Contrast, for example, in Book iii. l.59: His own works and their works
at once to view with line 113: Thir maker and thir making and thir Fate. But the use is not consistent, and the form thir is not found at all
till the 349th line of the First Book. The distinction is kept up in
the Paradise Regain'd and Samson Agonistes, but, if possible, with even
less consistency. Such passages, however, as Paradise Regain'd, iii. 414-440; Samson Agonistes, 880-890, are certainly spelt upon a method,
and it is noticeable that in the choruses the lighter form is universal. Paradise Regain'd and Samson Agonistes were published in 1671, and no
further edition was called for in the remaining three years of the
poet's lifetime, so that in the case of these poems there are no new
readings to record; and the texts were so carefully revised, that only
one fault (Paradise Regain'd, ii. 309) was left for correction later. In these and the other poems I have corrected the misprints catalogued
in the tables of Errata, and I have silently corrected any other unless
it might be mistaken for a various reading, when I have called attention
to it in a note. Thus I have not recorded such blunders as Lethian for
Lesbian in the 1645 text of Lycidas, line 63; or hallow for hollow in
Paradise Lost, vi. 484; but I have noted content for concent, in At a
Solemn Musick, line 6. In conclusion I have to offer my sincere thanks to all who have
collaborated with me in preparing this Edition; to the Delegates of the
Oxford Press for allowing me to undertake it and decorate it with so
many facsimiles; to the Controller of the Press for his unfailing
courtesy; to the printers and printer's reader for their care and pains. Coming nearer home I cannot but acknowledge the help I have received in
looking over proof-sheets from my sister, Mrs. P. A. Barnett, who has
ungrudgingly put at the service of this book both time and eyesight. In
taking leave of it, I may be permitted to say that it has cost more of
both these inestimable treasures than I had anticipated. The last proof
reaches me just a year after the first, and the progress of the work has
not in the interval been interrupted. In tenui labor et tenuis gloria. Nevertheless I cannot be sorry it was undertaken. H. C. B.

YATTENDON RECTORY,
November 8, 1899. Transcriber's note: Facsimile of Title page of 1645 edition
follows:


                           POEMS
                            OF
                      Mr John Milton,
                           BOTH
                     ENGLISH and LATIN
                  Compos'd at several times. ------------------------------
                Printed by his true copies. ------------------------------
               The SONGS were set in Musick by
                Mr. HENRY LAWES Gentleman of
                 the KINGS Chappel, and one
                      of His MAIESTIES
                       Private Musick. --------Baccare frontem
         Cingite, ne vace noceat mala lingua futuro,
              Virgil, Eclog. 7. -----------------------------------------
            Printed, and Publish'd according to
                           ORDER. -----------------------------------------
                          LONDON,
        Printed by Ruth Raworth for Humphrey Moseley,
        and are to be sold at the signe of the Princes
            Arms in S. Pauls Church-yard. 1645. Transcriber's note: Facsimile of Title page of 1673 edition
follows:


                          POEMS, &c.
                            UPON
                      Several Occasions. --------------------------
                             BY
                       Mr. John Milton:
                  --------------------------
                  Both ENGLISH and LATIN &c.
                  Composed at several times. --------------------------
                   With a small tractate of
                         EDUCATION
                       To Mr. HARTLIB
                  --------------------------
                  --------------------------
                          LONDON. Printed for Tho. Dring at the Blew Anchor
           next Mitre Court over against Fetter
               Lane in Fleet-street. 1673. THE STATIONER TO THE READER. It is not any Private respect of gain, Gentle Reader, for the slightest
Pamphlet is now adayes more vendible then the Works of learnedest men;
but it is the love I have to our own Language that hath made me diligent
to collect, and set forth such Peeces in Prose and Vers as may renew the
wonted honour and esteem of our tongue: and it's the worth of these both
English and Latin poems, not the flourish of any prefixed encomions that
can invite thee to buy them, though these are not without the highest
Commendations and Applause of the learnedst Academicks, both domestic
and forrein: And amongst those of our own Countrey, the unparalleled
attestation of that renowned Provost of Eaton, Sir Henry Wootton: I know
not thy palat how it relishes such dainties, nor  how harmonious thy
soul is; perhaps more trivial Airs may please thee better. But
howsoever thy opinion is spent upon these, that incouragement I have
already received from the most ingenious men in their clear and
courteous entertainment of Mr. Wallers late choice Peeces, hath once
more made me adventure into the World, presenting it with these
ever-green, and not to be blasted Laurels. The Authors more peculiar
excellency in these studies, was too well known to conceal his Papers,
or to keep me from attempting to sollicit them from him. Let the event
guide it self which way it will, I shall deserve of the age, by bringing
into the Light as true a Birth, as the Muses have brought forth since
our famous Spencer wrote; whose Poems in these English ones are as
rarely imitated, as sweetly excell'd. Reader, if thou art Eagle-eied to
censure their worth, I am not fearful to expose them to thy exactest
perusal. Thine to Command

HUMPH. MOSELEY. MISCELLANEOUS POEMS. ON THE MORNING OF CHRISTS NATIVITY. Compos'd 1629. I

  This is the Month, and this the happy morn
  Wherin the Son of Heav'ns eternal King,
  Of wedded Maid, and Virgin Mother born,
  Our great redemption from above did bring;
  For so the holy sages once did sing,
  That he our deadly forfeit should release,
  And with his Father work us a perpetual peace. II

  That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable,
  And that far-beaming blaze of Majesty,
  Wherwith he wont at Heav'ns high Councel-Table,                      10
  To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
  He laid aside; and here with us to be,
  Forsook the Courts of everlasting Day,
  And chose with us a darksom House of mortal Clay. III

  Say Heav'nly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein
  Afford a present to the Infant God? Hast thou no vers, no hymn, or solemn strein,
  To welcom him to this his new abode,
  Now while the Heav'n by the Suns team untrod,
  Hath took no print of the approching light,                          20
  And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright? IV

  See how from far upon the Eastern rode
  The Star-led Wisards haste with odours sweet,
  O run,  prevent them with thy humble ode,
  And lay it lowly at his blessed feet;
  Have thou the honour first, thy Lord to greet,
  And joyn thy voice unto the Angel Quire,
  From out his secret Altar toucht with hallow'd fire. The Hymn. I

  IT was the Winter wilde,
  While the Heav'n-born-childe,                                        30
  All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies;
  Nature in aw to him
  Had doff't her gawdy trim,
  With her great Master so to sympathize:
  It was no season then for her
  To wanton with the Sun her lusty Paramour. II

  Only with speeches fair
  She woo'd the gentle Air
  To hide her guilty front with innocent Snow,
  And on her naked shame,                                              40
  Pollute with sinfull blame,
  The Saintly Vail of Maiden white to throw,
  Confounded, that her Makers eyes
  Should look so near upon her foul deformities. III

  But he her fears to cease,
  Sent down the meek-eyd Peace,
  She crown'd with Olive green, came softly sliding
  Down through the turning sphear
  His ready Harbinger,
  With Turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing,                        50
  And waving wide her mirtle wand,
  She strikes a universall Peace through Sea and Land. IV

  No War, or Battails sound
  Was heard the World around,
  The idle spear and shield were high up hung;
  The hooked Chariot stood
  Unstain'd with hostile blood,
  The Trumpet spake not to the armed throng,
  And Kings sate still with awfull eye,
  As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by. 60

  V

  But peacefull was the night
  Wherin the Prince of light
  His raign of peace upon the earth began:
  The Windes with wonder whist,
  Smoothly the waters kist,
  Whispering new joyes to the milde Ocean,
  Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
  While Birds of Calm sit brooding on the charmed wave. VI

  The Stars with deep amaze
  Stand fit in steadfast gaze,                                         70
  Bending one way their pretious influence,
  And will not take their flight,
  For all the morning light,
  Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;
  But in their glimmering Orbs did glow,
  Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go. VII

  And though the shady gloom
  Had given day her room,
  The Sun himself with-held his wonted speed,
  And hid his head for shame,                                          80
  As his inferior flame,
  The new enlightened world no more should need;
  He saw a greater Sun appear
  Then his bright Throne, or burning Axletree could bear. VIII

  The Shepherds on the Lawn,
  Or ere the point of dawn,
  Sate simply chatting in a rustic row;
  Full little thought they than,
  That the mighty Pan
  Was kindly com to live with them below;                              90
  Perhaps their loves, or els their sheep,
  Was all that did their silly thoughts so busie keep. IX

  When such Musick sweet
  Their hearts and ears did greet,
  As never was by mortal finger strook,
  Divinely-warbled voice
  Answering the stringed noise,
  As all their souls in blisfull rapture took:
  The Air such pleasure loth to lose,
  With  thousand echo's still prolongs each heav'nly close. 100

  X

  Nature that heard such  sound
  Beneath  the hollow round
  of Cynthia's seat the Airy region thrilling,
  Now was almost won
  To think her part was don
  And that her raign had here its last fulfilling;
  She knew such harmony alone
  Could hold all Heav'n and Earth in happier union. XI

  At last surrounds their sight
  A globe of circular light,                                          110
  That with long beams the shame faced night arrayed
  The helmed Cherubim
  And sworded Seraphim,
  Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displaid,
  Harping in loud and solemn quire,
  With unexpressive notes to Heav'ns new-born Heir. XII

  Such Musick (as 'tis said)
  Before was never made,
  But when of old the sons of morning sung,
  While the Creator Great
  His constellations set,                                             120
  And the well-ballanc't world on hinges hung,
  And cast the dark foundations deep,
  And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keep. XIII

  Ring out ye Crystall sphears,
  Once bless our human ears,
  (If ye have power to touch our senses so)
  And let your silver chime
  Move in melodious time;
  And let the Base of Heav'ns deep Organ blow,                        130
  And with your ninefold harmony
  Make up full consort to th'Angelike symphony. XIV

  For if such holy Song
  Enwrap our fancy long,
  Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold,
  And speckl'd vanity
  Will sicken soon and die,
  And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould,
  And Hell it self will pass away
  And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day. 140

  XV

  Yea Truth, and Justice then
  Will down return to men,
  Th'enameld Arras of the Rain-bow wearing,
  And Mercy set between
  Thron'd in Celestiall sheen,
  With radiant feet the tissued clouds down stearing,
  And Heav'n as at som festivall,
  Will open wide the gates of her high Palace Hall. XVI

  But wisest Fate sayes  no,
  This must not yet be so,                                            150
  The Babe lies yet in smiling Infancy,
  That on the bitter cross
  Must redeem our loss;
  So both himself and us to glorifie:
  Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep,
  The Wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep,

  XVII

  With such a horrid clang
  As on Mount Sinai rang
  While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake:
  The aged Earth agast                                                160
  With terrour of that blast,
  Shall from the surface to the center shake;
  When at the worlds last session,
  The dreadfull Judge in middle Air shall spread his throne. XVIII

  And then at last  our bliss
  Full and perfect is,
  But now begins; for from this happy day
  Th'old Dragon under ground
  In straiter limits bound,
  Not half so far casts his usurped sway,                             170
  And wrath to see his Kingdom fail,
  Swindges the scaly Horrour of his foulded tail. XIX

  The Oracles are dumm,
  No voice or hideous humm
  Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving. Apollo from his shrine
  Can no more divine,
  With hollow shreik the steep of Delphos leaving. No nightly trance, or breathed spell,
  Inspire's the pale-ey'd Priest from the prophetic cell. 180

  XX

  The lonely mountains o're,
  And the resounding shore,
  A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
  From haunted spring, and dale
  Edg'd with poplar pale
  The parting Genius is with sighing sent,
  With flowre-inwov'n tresses torn
  The Nimphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn. XXI

  In consecrated Earth,
  And on the holy Hearth,                                             190
  The Lars, and Lemures moan with midnight plaint,
  In Urns, and Altars round,
  A drear, and dying sound
  Affrights the Flamins at their service quaint;
  And the chill Marble seems to sweat,
  While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat. XXII

  Peor, and Baalim,
  Forsake their Temples dim,
  With that twise-batter'd god of Palestine,
  And mooned Ashtaroth,                                               200
  Heav'ns Queen and Mother both,
  Now sits not girt with Tapers holy shine,
  The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn,
  In vain the Tyrian Maids their wounded Thamuz mourn. XXIII

  And sullen Moloch fled,
  Hath left in shadows dred,
  His burning Idol all of blackest hue,
  In vain with Cymbals ring,
  They call the grisly king,
  In dismall dance about the furnace Blue;                            210
  And Brutish gods of Nile as fast,
  lsis and Orus, and the Dog Anubis hast. THE PASSION. I

  ERE-while of Musick, and Ethereal mirth,
  Wherwith the stage of Ayr and Earth did ring,
  And joyous news of heav'nly Infants birth,
  My muse with Angels did divide to sing;
  But headlong joy is ever on the wing,
  In Wintry solstice like the shortn'd light
  Soon swallow'd up in dark and long out-living night. II

  For now to sorrow must I tune my song,
  And set my Harpe to notes of saddest wo,
  Which on our dearest Lord did sease er'e long,
  Dangers, and snares, and wrongs, and worse then so,                  10
  Which he for us did freely undergo. Most perfect Heroe, try'd in heaviest plight
  Of labours huge and hard, too hard for human wight. III

  He sov'ran Priest stooping his regall head
  That dropt with odorous oil down his fair eyes,
  Poor fleshly Tabernacle entered,
  His starry front low-rooft beneath the skies;
  O what a Mask was there, what a disguise! Yet more; the stroke of death he must abide,                         20
  Then lies him meekly down fast by his Brethrens side. IV

  These latter scenes confine my roving vers,
  To this Horizon is my Phoebus bound,
  His Godlike acts, and his temptations fierce,
  And former sufferings other where are found;
  Loud o're the rest Cremona's Trump doth sound;
  Me softer airs befit, and softer strings
  Of Lute, or Viol still, more apt for mournful things. Note: 22 latter] latest 1673. V

  Befriend me night best Patroness of grief,
  Over the Pole thy thickest mantle throw,                             30
  And work my flatterd fancy to belief,
  That Heav'n and Earth are colour'd with my wo;
  My sorrows are too dark for day to know:
  The leaves should all be black wheron I write,
  And letters where my tears have washt a wannish white. VI

  See see the Chariot, and those rushing wheels,
  That whirl'd the Prophet up at Chebar flood,
  My spirit som transporting Cherub feels,
  To bear me where the Towers of Salem stood,
  Once glorious Towers, now sunk in guiltles blood;                    40
  There doth my soul in holy vision sit
  In pensive trance, and anguish, and ecstatick fit. VII

  Mine eye hath found that sad Sepulchral rock
  That was the Casket of Heav'ns richest store,
  And here though grief my feeble hands up-lock,
  Yet on the softned Quarry would I score
  My plaining vers as lively as before;
  For sure so well instructed are my tears,
  They would fitly fall in order'd Characters. VIII

  I thence hurried on viewles wing,                                    50
  Take up a weeping on the Mountains wilde,
  The gentle neighbourhood of grove and spring
  Would soon unboosom all their Echoes milde,
  And I (for grief is easily beguild)
  Might think th'infection of my sorrows bound,
  Had got a race of mourners on som pregnant cloud. Note: This subject the Author finding to be above the yeers he had,
  when he wrote it, and nothing satisfi'd with what was begun,
  left it unfinish'd. ON TIME. FLY envious Time, till thou run out thy race,
  Call on the lazy leaden-stepping hours,
  Whose speed is but the heavy Plummets pace;
  And glut thy self with what thy womb devours,
  Which is no more then what is false and vain,
  And meerly mortal dross;
  So little is our loss,
  So little is thy gain. For when as each thing bad thou hast entomb'd,
  And last of all, thy greedy self consum'd,                           10
  Then long Eternity shall greet our bliss
  With an individual kiss;
  And Joy shall overtake us as a flood,
  When every thing that is sincerely good
  And perfectly divine,
  With Truth, and Peace, and Love shall ever shine
  About the supreme Throne
  Of him, t'whose happy-making sight alone,
  When once our heav'nly-guided soul shall clime,
  Then all this Earthy grosnes quit,                                   20
  Attir'd with Stars, we shall for ever sit,
  Triumphing over Death, and Chance, and thee O Time. Note: See the appendix for the manuscript version. UPON THE CIRCUMCISION. YE flaming Powers, and winged Warriours bright,
  That erst with Musick, and triumphant song
  First heard by happy watchful Shepherds ear,
  So sweetly sung your Joy the Clouds along
  Through the soft silence of the list'ning night;
  Now mourn, and if sad share with us to bear
  Your fiery essence can distill no tear,
  Burn in your sighs, and borrow
  Seas wept from our deep sorrow,
  He who with all Heav'ns heraldry whileare                            10
  Enter'd the world, now bleeds to give us ease;
  Alas, how soon our sin
  Sore doth begin
  His Infancy to sease! O more exceeding love or law more just? Just law indeed, but more exceeding love! For we by rightfull doom remediles
  Were lost in death, till he that dwelt above
  High thron'd in secret bliss, for us frail dust
  Emptied his glory, ev'n to nakednes;                                 20
  And that great Cov'nant which we still transgress
  Intirely satisfi'd,
  And the full wrath beside
  Of vengeful Justice bore for our excess,
  And seals obedience first with wounding smart
  This day, but O ere long
  Huge pangs and strong
  Will pierce more neer his heart. AT A SOLEMN MUSICK. BLEST pair of Sirens, pledges of Heav'ns joy,
  Sphear-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Vers,
  Wed your divine sounds, and mixt power employ
  Dead things with inbreath'd sense able to pierce,
  And to our high-rais'd phantasie present,
  That undisturbed Song of pure content,
  Ay sung before the saphire-colour'd throne
  To him that sits theron
  With Saintly shout, and solemn Jubily,
  Where the bright Seraphim in burning row                             10
  Their loud up-lifted Angel trumpets blow,
  And the Cherubick host in thousand quires
  Touch their immortal Harps of golden wires,
  With those just Spirits that wear victorious Palms,
  Hymns devout and holy Psalms
  Singing everlastingly;
  That we on Earth with undiscording voice
  May rightly answer that melodious noise;
  As  once we did, till disproportion'd sin
  Jarr'd against natures chime, and with harsh din                     20
  The fair musick that all creatures made
  To their great Lord, whose love their motion sway'd
  In perfect Diapason, whilst they stood
  In first obedience, and their state of good. O may we soon again renew that Song,
  And keep in tune with Heav'n, till God ere long
  To his celestial consort us unite,
  To live with him, and sing in endles morn of light. Note: 6 content]  Manuscript reads concent as does the Second
  Edition; so that content is probably a misprint. AN EPITAPH ON THE MARCHIONESS OF WINCHESTER. THIS rich Marble doth enterr
  The honour'd Wife of Winchester,
  A Vicounts daughter, an Earls heir,
  Besides what her vertues fair
  Added to her noble birth,
  More then she could own from Earth. Summers three times eight save one
  She had told, alas too soon,
  After so short time of breath,
  To house with darknes, and with death. 10
  Yet had the number of her days
  Bin as compleat as was her praise,
  Nature and fate had had no strife
  In giving limit to her life. Her high birth, and her graces sweet,
  Quickly found a lover meet;
  The Virgin quire for her request
  The God that sits at marriage feast;
  He at their invoking came
  But with a scarce-wel-lighted flame;                                 20
  And in his Garland as he stood,
  Ye might discern a Cipress bud. Once had the early Matrons run
  To greet her of a lovely son,
  And now with second hope she goes,
  And calls Lucina to her throws;
  But whether by mischance or blame
  Atropos for Lucina came;
  And with remorsles cruelty,
  Spoil'd at once both fruit and tree:                                 30
  The haples Babe before his birth
  Had burial, yet not laid in earth,
  And the languisht Mothers Womb
  Was not long a living Tomb. So have I seen som tender slip
  Sav'd with care from Winters nip,
  The pride of her carnation train,
  Pluck't up by som unheedy swain,
  Who onely thought to crop the flowr
  New shot up from vernall showr;                                      40
  But the fair blossom hangs the head
  Side-ways as on a dying bed,
  And those Pearls of dew she wears,
  Prove to be presaging tears
  Which the sad morn had let fall
  On her hast'ning funerall. Gentle Lady may thy grave
  Peace and quiet ever have;
  After this thy travail sore
  Sweet rest sease thee evermore,                                      50
  That to give the world encrease,
  Shortned hast thy own lives lease;
  Here besides the sorrowing
  That thy noble House doth bring,
  Here be tears of perfect moan
  Weept for thee in Helicon,
  And som Flowers, and som Bays,
  For thy Hears to strew the ways,
  Sent thee from the banks of Came,
  Devoted to thy vertuous name;                                        60
  Whilst thou bright Saint high sit'st in glory,
  Next her much like to thee in story,
  That fair Syrian Shepherdess,
  Who after yeers of barrennes,
  The highly favour'd Joseph bore
  To him that serv'd for her before,
  And at her next birth much like thee,
  Through pangs fled to felicity,
  Far within the boosom bright
  of blazing Majesty and Light,                                        70
  There with thee, new welcom Saint,
  Like fortunes may her soul acquaint,
  With thee there clad in radiant sheen,
  No Marchioness, but now a Queen. SONG ON MAY MORNING. Now the bright morning Star, Dayes harbinger,
  Comes dancing from the East, and leads with her
  The Flowry May, who from her green lap throws
  The yellow Cowslip, and the pale Primrose. Hail bounteous May that dost inspire
  Mirth and youth, and warm desire,
  Woods and Groves, are of thy dressing,
  Hill and Dale, doth boast thy blessing. Thus we salute thee with our early Song,
  And welcom thee, and wish thee long. 10




ON SHAKESPEAR. 1630. WHAT needs my Shakespear for his honour'd Bones,
  The labour of an age in piled Stones,
  Or that his hallow'd reliques should be hid
  Under a Star-ypointing Pyramid? Dear son of memory, great heir of Fame,
  What need'st thou such weak witnes of thy name? Thou in our wonder and astonishment
  Hast built thy self a live-long Monument. For whilst to th'sharne of slow-endeavouring art,
  Thy easie numbers flow, and that each heart                          10
  Hath from the Leaves of thy unvalu'd Book,
  Those Delphick lines with deep impression took,
  Then thou our fancy of it self bereaving,
  Dost make us Marble with too much conceaving;
  And so Sepulcher'd in such pomp dost lie,
  That Kings for such a Tomb would wish to die. Notes: On Shakespear. Reprinted 1632 in the second folio
  Shakespeare:
  Title] An epitaph on the admirable dramaticke poet W.
  Shakespeare
  1 needs] neede
  6 weak] dull
  8 live-long] lasting
  10 heart] part
  13 it] her




ON THE UNIVERSITY CARRIER WHO SICKN'D IN THE TIME OF HIS
  VACANCY, BEING FORBID TO GO TO LONDON, BY REASON OF THE
  PLAGUE. HERE lies old Hobson, Death hath broke his girt,
  And here alas, hath laid him in the dirt,
  Or els the ways being foul, twenty to one,
  He's here stuck in a slough, and overthrown. 'Twas such a shifter, that if truth were known,
  Death was half glad when he had got him down;
  For he had any time this ten yeers full,
  Dodg'd with him, betwixt Cambridge and the Bull. And surely, Death could never have prevail'd,
  Had not his weekly cours of carriage fail'd;                         10
  But lately finding him so long at home,
  And thinking now his journeys end was come,
  And that he had tane up his latest Inne,
  In the kind office of a Chamberlin
  Shew'd him his room where he must lodge that night,
  Pull'd off his Boots, and took away the light:
  If any ask for him, it shall be sed,
  Hobson has supt, and 's newly gon to bed. ANOTHER ON THE SAME. HERE lieth one who did most truly prove,
  That he could never die while he could move,
  So hung his destiny never to rot
  While he might still jogg on, and keep his trot,
  Made of sphear-metal, never to decay
  Untill his revolution was at stay. Time numbers motion, yet (without a crime
  'Gainst old truth) motion number'd out his time:
  And like an Engin mov'd with wheel and waight,
  His principles being ceast, he ended strait. 10
  Rest that gives all men life, gave him his death,
  And too much breathing put him out of breath;
  Nor were it contradiction to affirm
  Too long vacation hastned on his term. Meerly to drive the time away he sickn'd,
  Fainted, and died, nor would with Ale be quickn'd;
  Nay, quoth he, on his swooning bed out-stretch'd,
  If I may not carry, sure Ile ne're be fetch'd,
  But vow though the cross Doctors all stood hearers,
  For one Carrier put down to make six bearers. 20
  Ease was his chief disease, and to judge right,
  He di'd for heavines that his Cart went light,
  His leasure told him that his time was com,
  And lack of load, made his life burdensom
  That even to his last breath (ther be that say't)
  As he were prest to death, he cry'd more waight;
  But had his doings lasted as they were,
  He had bin an immortall Carrier. Obedient to the Moon he spent his date
  In cours reciprocal, and had his fate                                30
  Linkt to the mutual flowing of the Seas,
  Yet (strange to think) his wain was his increase:
  His Letters are deliver'd all and gon,
  Onely remains this superscription. L'ALLEGRO. HENCE loathed Melancholy
  Of Cerberus, and blackest midnight born,
  In Stygian Cave forlorn
  'Mongst horrid shapes, and shreiks, and sights unholy,
  Find out som uncouth cell,
  Where brooding darknes spreads his jealous wings,
  And the night-Raven sings;
  There under Ebon shades and low-brow'd Rocks,
  As ragged as thy Locks,
  In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell. 10
  But com thou Goddes fair and free,
  In Heav'n ycleap'd Euphrosyne,
  And by men, heart-easing Mirth,
  Whom lovely Venus at a birth
  With two sister Graces more
  To Ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
  Or whether (as som Sager sing)
  The frolick Wind that breathes the Spring,
  Zephir with Aurora playing,
  As he met her once a Maying,                                         20
  There on Beds of Violets blew,
  And fresh-blown Roses washt in dew,
  Fill'd her with thee a daughter fair,
  So bucksom, blith, and debonair. Haste thee nymph, and bring with thee
  Jest and youthful Jollity,
  Quips and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
  Nods, and Becks, and Wreathed Smiles,
  Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
  And love to live in dimple sleek;                                    30
  Sport that wrincled Care derides,
  And Laughter holding both his sides. Com, and trip it as ye go
  On the light fantastick toe,
  And in thy right hand lead with thee,
  The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty;
  And if I give thee honour due,
  Mirth, admit me of thy crue
  To live with her, and live with thee,
  In unreproved pleasures free;                                        40
  To hear the Lark begin his flight,
  And singing startle the dull night,
  From his watch-towre in the skies,
  Till the dappled dawn doth rise;
  Then to com in spight of sorrow,
  And at my window bid good morrow,
  Through the Sweet-Briar, or the Vine,
  Or the twisted Eglantine. While the Cock with lively din,
  Scatters the rear of darknes thin,                                   50
  And to the stack, or the Barn dore,
  Stoutly struts his Dames before,
  Oft list'ning how the Hounds and horn
  Chearly rouse the slumbring morn,
  From the side of som Hoar Hill,
  Through the high wood echoing shrill. Som time walking not unseen
  By Hedge-row Elms, on Hillocks green,
  Right against the Eastern gate,
  Wher the great Sun begins his state,                                 60
  Rob'd in flames, and Amber light,
  The clouds in thousand Liveries dight. While the Plowman neer at hand,
  Whistles ore the Furrow'd Land,
  And the Milkmaid singeth blithe,
  And the Mower whets his sithe,
  And every Shepherd tells his tale
  Under the Hawthorn in the dale. Streit mine eye hath caught new pleasures
  Whilst the Lantskip round it measures,                               70
  Russet Lawns, and Fallows Gray,
  Where the nibling flocks do stray,
  Mountains on whose barren brest
  The labouring clouds do often rest:
  Meadows trim with Daisies pide,
  Shallow Brooks, and Rivers wide. Towers, and Battlements it sees
  Boosom'd high in tufted Trees,
  Wher perhaps som beauty lies,
  The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes. 80
  Hard by, a Cottage chimney smokes,
  From betwixt two aged Okes,
  Where Corydon and Thyrsis met,
  Are at their savory dinner set
  Of Hearbs, and other Country Messes,
  Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses;
  And then in haste her Bowre she leaves,
  With Thestylis to bind the Sheaves;
  Or if the earlier season lead
  To the tann'd Haycock in the Mead,                                   90
  Som times with secure delight
  The up-land Hamlets will invite,
  When the merry Bells ring round,
  And the jocond rebecks sound
  To many a youth, and many a maid,
  Dancing in the Chequer'd shade;
  And young and old com forth to play
  On a Sunshine Holyday,
  Till the live-long day-light fail,
  Then to the Spicy Nut-brown Ale,                                    100
  With stories told of many a feat,
  How Faery Mab the junkets eat,
  She was pincht, and pull'd she sed,
  And he by Friars Lanthorn led
  Tells how the drudging Goblin swet,
  To ern his Cream-bowle duly set,
  When in one night, ere glimps of morn,
  His shadowy Flale hath thresh'd the Corn
  That ten day-labourers could not end,
  Then lies him down the Lubbar Fend. 110
  And stretch'd out all the Chimney's length,
  Basks at the fire his hairy strength;
  And Crop-full out of dores he flings,
  Ere the first Cock his Mattin rings. Thus don the Tales, to bed they creep,
  By whispering Windes soon lull'd asleep. Towred Cities please us then,
  And the busie humm of men,
  Where throngs of Knights and Barons bold,
  In weeds of Peace high triumphs hold,                               120
  With store of Ladies, whose bright eies
  Rain influence, and judge the prise
  Of Wit, or Arms, while both contend
  To win her Grace, whom all commend. There let Hymen oft appear
  In Saffron robe, with Taper clear,
  And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
  With mask, and antique Pageantry,
  Such sights as youthfull Poets dream
  On Summer eeves by haunted stream. 130
  Then to the well-trod stage anon,
  If Jonsons learned Sock be on,
  Or sweetest Shakespear fancies childe,
  Warble his native Wood-notes wilde,
  And ever against eating Cares,
  Lap me in soft Lydian Aires,
  Married to immortal verse
  Such as the meeting soul may pierce
  In notes, with many a winding bout
  Of lincked sweetnes long drawn out,                                 140
  With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
  The melting voice through mazes running;
  Untwisting all the chains that ty
  The hidden soul of harmony. That Orpheus self may heave his head
  From golden slumber on a bed
  Of heapt Elysian flowres, and hear
  Such streins as would have won the ear
  Of Pluto, to have quite set free
  His half regain'd Eurydice. 150
  These delights, if thou canst give,
  Mirth with thee, I mean to live. Notes:
  33 Ye] You 1673
  104 And he by] And by the 1673




IL PENSEROSO. Hence vain deluding joyes,
  The brood of folly without father bred,
  How little you bested,
  Or fill the fixed mind with all your toyes;
  Dwell in som idle brain
  And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess,
  As thick and numberless
  As the gay motes that people the Sun Beams,
  Or likest hovering dreams
  The fickle Pensioners of Morpheus train. 10
  But hail thou Goddess, sage and holy,
  Hail divinest Melancholy
  Whose Saintly visage is too bright
  To hit the Sense of human sight;
  And therefore to our weaker view,
  Ore laid with black staid Wisdoms hue. Black, but such as in esteem,
  Prince Memnons sister might beseem,
  Or that Starr'd Ethiope Queen that strove
  To set her beauties praise above                                     20
  The Sea Nymphs, and their powers offended. Yet thou art higher far descended,
  Thee bright-hair'd Vesta long of yore,
  To solitary Saturn bore;
  His daughter she (in Saturns raign,
  Such mixture was not held a stain)
  Oft in glimmering Bowres, and glades
  He met her, and in secret shades
  Of woody Ida's inmost grove,
  While yet there was no fear of Jove. 30
  Com pensive Nun, devout and pure,
  Sober, stedfast, and demure,
  All in a robe of darkest grain,
  Flowing with majestick train,
  And sable stole of Cipres Lawn,
  Over thy decent shoulders drawn. Com, but keep thy wonted state,
  With eev'n step, and musing gate,
  And looks commercing with the skies,
  Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes:                                 40
  There held in holy passion still,
  Forget thy self to Marble, till
  With a sad Leaden downward cast,
  Thou fix them on the earth as fast. And joyn with thee calm Peace, and Quiet,
  Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet,
  And hears the Muses in a ring,
  Ay round about Joves Altar sing. And adde to these retired Leasure,
  That in trim Gardens takes his pleasure;                             50
  But first, and chiefest, with thee bring,
  Him that yon soars on golden wing,
  Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne,
  The Cherub Contemplation,
  And the mute Silence hist along,
  'Less Philomel will daign a Song,
  In her sweetest, saddest plight,
  Smoothing the rugged brow of night,
  While Cynthia checks her Dragon yoke,
  Gently o're th'accustom'd Oke;                                       60
  Sweet Bird that shunn'st the noise of folly
  Most musical!, most melancholy! Thee Chauntress oft the Woods among
  I woo to hear thy eeven-Song;
  And missing thee, I walk unseen
  On the dry smooth-shaven Green,
  To behold the wandring Moon,
  Riding neer her highest noon,
  Like one that had bin led astray
  Through the Heav'ns wide pathles way;                                70
  And oft, as if her head she bow'd,
  Stooping through a fleecy cloud. Oft on a Plat of rising ground,
  I hear the far-off Curfeu sound,
  Over som wide-water'd shoar,
  Swinging slow with sullen roar;
  Or if the Ayr will not permit,
  Som still removed place will fit,
  Where glowing Embers through the room
  Teach light to counterfeit a gloom                                   80
  Far from all resort of mirth,
  Save the Cricket on the hearth,
  Or the Belmans drowsie charm,
  To bless the dores from nightly harm:
  Or let my Lamp at midnight hour,
  Be seen in som high lonely Towr,
  Where I may oft out-watch the Bear,
  With thrice great Hermes, or unsphear
  The spirit of Plato to unfold
  What Worlds, or what vast Regions hold                               90
  The immortal mind that hath forsook
  Her mansion in this fleshly nook:
  And of those Daemons that are found
  In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
  Whose power hath a true consent
  With planet or with Element. Som time let Gorgeous Tragedy
  In Scepter'd Pall com sweeping by,
  Presenting Thebs, or Pelops line,
  Or the tale of Troy divine. 100
  Or what (though rare) of later age,
  Ennobled hath the Buskind stage. But, O sad Virgin, that thy power
  Might raise Musaeus from his bower,
  Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing
  Such notes as warbled to the string,
  Drew Iron tears down Pluto's cheek,
  And made Hell grant what Love did seek. Or call up him that left half told
  The story of Cambuscan bold,                                        110
  Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
  And who had Canace to wife,
  That own'd the vertuous Ring and Glass,
  And of the wondrous Hors of Brass,
  On which the Tartar King did ride;
  And if ought els, great Bards beside,
  In sage and solemn tunes have sung,
  Of Turneys and of Trophies hung;
  Of Forests, and inchantments drear,
  Where more is meant then meets the ear. 120
  Thus night oft see me in thy pale career,
  Till civil-suited Morn appeer,
  Not trickt and frounc't as she was wont,
  With the Attick Boy to hunt,
  But Cherchef't in a comly Cloud,
  While rocking Winds are Piping loud,
  Or usher'd with a shower still,
  When the gust hath blown his fill,
  Ending on the russling Leaves,
  With minute drops from off the Eaves. 130
  And when the Sun begins to fling
  His flaring beams, me Goddes bring
  To arched walks of twilight groves,
  And shadows brown that Sylvan loves
  Of Pine, or monumental Oake,
  Where the rude Ax with heaved stroke,
  Was never heard the Nymphs to daunt,
  Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt. There in close covert by som Brook,
  Where no profaner eye may look,                                     140
  Hide me from Day's garish eie,
  While the Bee with Honied thie,
  That at her flowry work doth sing,
  And the Waters murmuring
  With such consort as they keep,
  Entice the dewy-feather'd Sleep;
  And let som strange mysterious dream,
  Wave at his Wings in Airy stream,
  Of lively portrature display'd,
  Softly on my eye-lids laid. 150
  And as I wake, sweet musick breath
  Above, about, or underneath,
  Sent by som spirit to mortals good,
  Or th'unseen Genius of the Wood. But let my due feet never fail,
  To walk the studious Cloysters pale,
  And love the high embowed Roof
  With antick Pillars massy proof,
  And storied Windows richly dight,
  Casting a dimm religious light. 160
  There let the pealing Organ blow,
  To the full voic'd Quire below,
  In Service high, and Anthems cleer,
  As may with sweetnes, through mine ear,
  Dissolve me into extasies,
  And bring all Heav'n before mine eyes. And may at last my weary age
  Find out the peacefull hermitage,
  The Hairy Gown and Mossy Cell,
  Where I may sit and rightly spell                                   170
  Of every Star that Heav'n doth shew,
  And every Herb that sips the dew;
  Till old  experience do attain
  To somthing like prophetic strain. These pleasures Melancholy give,
  And I with thee will choose to live. SONNETS. I

  O Nightingale, that on yon bloomy Spray
  Warbl'st at eeve, when all the Woods are still,
  Thou with fresh hope the Lovers heart dost fill,
  While the jolly hours lead on propitious May,
  Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day,
  First heard before the shallow Cuccoo's bill
  Portend success in love; O if Jove's will
  Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay,
  Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate
  Foretell my hopeles doom in som Grove ny:                            10
  As thou from yeer to yeer hast sung too late
  For my relief; yet hadst no reason why,
  Whether the Muse, or Love call thee his mate,
  Both them I serve, and of their train am I.

  II

  Donna leggiadra il cui bel nome honora
  L'herbosa val di Rheno, e il nobil varco,
  Ben e colui d'ogni valore scarco
  Qual tuo spirto gentil non innamora,
  Che dolcemente mostra si di fuora
  De suoi atti soavi giamai parco,
  E i don', che son d'amor saette ed arco,
  La onde l' alta tua virtu s'infiora. Quando tu vaga parli, O lieta canti
  Che mover possa duro alpestre legno,                                 10
  Guardi ciascun a gli occhi ed a gli orecchi
  L'entrata, chi di te si truova indegno;
  Gratia sola di su gli vaglia, inanti
  Che'l disio amoroso al cuor s'invecchi. III

  Qual in colle aspro, al imbrunir di sera
  L'avezza giovinetta pastorella
  Va bagnando l'herbetta strana e bella
  Che mal si spande a disusata spera
  Fuor di sua natia alma primavera,
  Cosi Amor meco insu la lingua snella
  Desta il fior novo di strania favella,
  Mentre io di te, vezzosamente altera,
  Canto, dal mio buon popol non inteso
  E'l bel Tamigi cangio col bel Arno                                   10
  Amor lo volse, ed io a l'altrui peso
  Seppi ch' Amor cosa mai volse indarno. Deh! foss' il mio cuor lento e'l duro seno
  A chi pianta dal ciel si buon terreno. Canzone. Ridonsi donne e giovani amorosi
  M' occostandosi attorno, e perche scrivi,
  Perche tu scrivi in lingua ignota e strana
  Verseggiando d'amor, e come t'osi? Dinne, se la tua speme sia mai vana
  E de pensieri lo miglior t' arrivi;
  Cosi mi van burlando, altri rivi
  Altri lidi t' aspettan, & altre onde
  Nelle cui verdi sponde
  Spuntati ad hor, ad hor a la tua chioma                              10
  L'immortal guiderdon d 'eterne frondi
  Perche alle spalle tue soverchia soma? Canzon dirotti, e tu per me rispondi
  Dice mia Donna, e'l suo dir, e il mio cuore
  Questa e lingua di cui si vanta Amore. IV

  Diodati, e te'l diro con maraviglia,
  Quel ritroso io ch'amor spreggiar solea
  E de suoi lacci spesso mi ridea
  Gia caddi, ov'huom dabben talhor s'impiglia. Ne treccie d'oro, ne guancia vermiglia
  M' abbaglian si, ma sotto nova idea
  Pellegrina bellezza che'l cuor bea,
  Portamenti alti honesti, e nelle ciglia
  Quel sereno fulgor d' amabil nero,
  Parole adorne di lingua piu d'una,                                   10
  E'l cantar che di mezzo l'hemispero
  Traviar ben puo la faticosa Luna,
  E degil occhi suoi auventa si gran fuoco
  Che l 'incerar gli oreechi mi fia poco. V

  Per certo i bei vostr'occhi Donna mia
  Esser non puo che non fian lo mio sole
  Si mi percuoton forte, come ci suole
  Per l'arene di Libia chi s'invia,
  Mentre un caldo vapor (ne senti pria)
  Da quel lato si spinge ove mi duole,
  Che forsi amanti nelle lor parole
  Chiaman sospir; io non so che si sia:
  Parte rinchiusa, e turbida si cela
  Scosso mi il petto, e poi n'uscendo poco                             10
  Quivi d' attorno o s'agghiaccia, o s'ingiela;
  Ma quanto a gli occhi giunge a trovar loco
  Tutte le notti a me suol far piovose
  Finche mia Alba rivien colma di rose. VI

  Giovane piano, e semplicetto amante
  Poi che fuggir me stesso in dubbio sono,
  Madonna a voi del mio cuor l'humil dono
  Faro divoto; io certo a prove tante
  L'hebbi fedele, intrepido, costante,
  De pensieri leggiadro, accorto, e buono;
  Quando rugge il gran mondo, e scocca il tuono,
  S 'arma di se, e d' intero diamante,
  Tanto del forse, e d' invidia sicuro,
  Di timori, e speranze al popol use                                   10
  Quanto d'ingegno, e d' alto valor vago,
  E di cetra sonora, e delle muse:
  Sol troverete in tal parte men duro
  Ove amor mise l 'insanabil ago. VII
  How soon hath Time the suttle theef of youth,
  Stoln on his wing my three and twentith yeer! My hasting dayes flie on with full career,
  But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th,
  Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth,
  That I to manhood am arriv'd so near,
  And inward ripenes doth much less appear,
  That som more timely-happy spirits indu'th. Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow. It shall be still in strictest measure eev'n,                        10
  To that same lot, however mean, or high,
  Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heav'n;
  All is, if I have grace to use it so,
  As ever in my great task Masters eye. VIII

  Captain or Colonel, or Knight in Arms,
  Whose chance on these defenceless dores may sease,
  If ever deed of honour did thee please,
  Guard them, and him within protect from harms,
  He can requite thee, for he knows the charms
  That call Fame on such gentle acts as these,
  And he can spred thy Name o're Lands and Seas,
  What ever clime the Suns bright circle warms. Lift not thy spear against the Muses Bowre,
  The great Emathian Conqueror bid spare                               10
  The house of Pindarus, when Temple and Towre
  Went to the ground: And the repeated air
  Of sad Electra's Poet had the power
  To save th' Athenian Walls from ruine bare. Notes:
  Camb. autograph supplies title, When the assault was intended
  to the city. 3 If deed of honour did thee ever please,  1673. IX

  Lady that in the prime of earliest youth,
  Wisely hath shun'd the broad way and the green,
  And with those few art eminently seen,
  That labour up the Hill of heav'nly Truth,
  The better part with Mary and with Ruth,
  Chosen thou hast, and they that overween,
  And at thy growing vertues fret their spleen,
  No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth. Thy care is fixt and zealously attends
  To fill thy odorous Lamp with deeds of light,
  And Hope that reaps not shame. Therefore be sure
  Thou, when the Bridegroom with his feastfull friends
  Passes to bliss at the mid hour of night,
  Hast gain'd thy entrance, Virgin wise and pure. Note: 5 with Ruth] the Ruth  1645. X

  Daughter to that good Earl, once President
  Of Englands Counsel, and her Treasury,
  Who liv'd in both, unstain'd with gold or fee,
  And left them both, more in himself content,
  Till the sad breaking of that Parlament
  Broke him, as that dishonest victory
  At Chaeronea, fatal to liberty
  Kil'd with report that Old man eloquent,
  Though later born, then to have known the dayes
  Wherin your Father flourisht, yet by you                             10
  Madam, me thinks I see him living yet;
  So well your words his noble vertues praise,
  That all both judge you to relate them true,
  And to possess them, Honour'd Margaret. Note: Camb. autograph supplies title, To the Lady Margaret
  Ley. ARCADES. Part of an entertainment presented to the Countess Dowager of
  Darby at Harefield, by som Noble persons of her Family, who
  appear on the Scene in pastoral habit, moving toward the seat
  of State with this Song. I. SONG. LOOK Nymphs, and Shepherds look,
  What sudden blaze of majesty
  Is that which we from hence descry
  Too divine to be mistook:
  This this is she
  To whom our vows and wishes bend,
  Heer our solemn search hath end. Fame that her high worth to raise,
  Seem'd erst so lavish and profuse,
  We may justly now accuse                                             10
  Of detraction from her praise,
  Less then half we find exprest,
  Envy bid conceal the rest. Mark what radiant state she spreds,
  In circle round her shining throne,
  Shooting her beams like silver threds,
  This this is she alone,
  Sitting like a Goddes bright,
  In the center of her light. Might she the wise Latona be,                                        20
  Or the towred Cybele,
  Mother of a hunderd gods;
  Juno dare's not give her odds;
  Who had thought this clime had held
  A deity so unparalel'd? As they com forward, the genius of the Wood appears, and
  turning toward them, speaks. GEN. Stay gentle Swains, for though in this disguise,
  I see bright honour sparkle through your eyes,
  Of famous Arcady ye are, and sprung
  Of that renowned flood, so often sung,
  Divine Alpheus, who by secret sluse,                                 30
  Stole under Seas to meet his Arethuse;
  And ye the breathing Roses of the Wood,
  Fair silver-buskind Nymphs as great and good,
  I know this quest of yours, and free intent
  Was all in honour and devotion ment
  To the great Mistres of yon princely shrine,
  Whom with low reverence I adore as mine,
  And with all helpful service will comply
  To further this nights glad solemnity;
  And lead ye where ye may more neer behold                            40
  What shallow-searching Fame hath left untold;
  Which I full oft amidst these shades alone
  Have sate to wonder at, and gaze upon:
  For know by lot from Jove I am the powr
  Of this fair wood, and live in Oak'n bowr,
  To nurse the Saplings tall, and curl the grove
  With Ringlets quaint, and wanton windings wove. And all my Plants I save from nightly ill,
  Of noisom winds, and blasting vapours chill. And from the Boughs brush off the evil dew,                          50
  And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blew,
  Or what the cross dire-looking Planet smites,
  Or hurtfull Worm with canker'd venom bites. When Eev'ning gray doth rise, I fetch my round
  Over the mount, and all this hallow'd ground,
  And early ere the odorous breath of morn
  Awakes the slumbring leaves, or tasseld horn
  Shakes the high thicket, haste I all about,
  Number my ranks, and visit every sprout
  With puissant words, and murmurs made to bless,                      60
  But els in deep of night when drowsines
  Hath lockt up mortal sense, then listen I
  To the celestial Sirens harmony,
  That sit upon the nine enfolded Sphears,
  And sing to those that hold the vital shears,
  And turn the Adamantine spindle round,
  On which the fate of gods and men is wound. Such sweet compulsion doth in musick ly,
  To lull the daughters of Necessity,
  And keep unsteddy Nature to her law,                                 70
  And the low world in measur'd motion draw
  After the heavenly tune, which none can hear
  Of human mould with grosse unpurged ear;
  And yet such musick worthiest were to blaze
  The peerles height of her immortal praise,
  Whose lustre leads us, and for her most fit,
  If my inferior hand or voice could hit
  Inimitable sounds, yet as we go,
  What ere the skill of lesser gods can show,
  I will assay, her worth to celebrate,                                80
  And so attend ye toward her glittering state;
  Where ye may all that are of noble stemm
  Approach, and kiss her sacred vestures hemm. 2. SONG. O're the smooth enameld green
  Where no print of step hath been,
  Follow me as I sing,
  And touch the warbled string. Under the shady roof
  Of branching Elm Star-proof,
  Follow me,                                                           90
  I will bring you where she sits
  Clad in splendor as befits
  Her deity. Such a rural Queen
  All Arcadia hath not seen. 3. SONG. Nymphs and Shepherds dance no more
  By sandy Ladons Lillied banks. On old Lycaeus or Cyllene hoar,
  Trip no more in twilight ranks,
  Though Erynanth your loss deplore,                                  100
  A better soyl shall give ye thanks. From the stony Maenalus,
  Bring your Flocks, and live with us,
  Here ye shall have greater grace,
  To serve the Lady of this place. Though Syrinx your Pans Mistres were,
  Yet Syrinx well might wait on her. Such a rural Queen
  All Arcadia hath not seen. Note: 22 hunderd]  Milton's own spelling here is hundred. But in
  the Errata to Paradise Lost (i. 760) he corrects hundred to hunderd. Transcriber's note: Facsimile of Title page of Lycidas follows:


                             JUSTA
                         EDOVARDO KING
                           naufrago,
                               ab
                      Amicis Moerentibus,
                             amoris
                               &
                         mneias chaein
  ------------------------------------------------------------
  ------------------------------------------------------------
         Sirecte calculam ponas, ubique naufragium est. Pet. Arb. ------------------------------------------------------------
  ------------------------------------------------------------
                         CANTABRIGIAE:
        Apud Thomam Buck, & Rogerum Daniel, celeberrimae
                 Academiae typographos. 1638. LYCIDAS. In this Monody the Author bewails a learned Friend,
  unfortunatly drown'd in his Passage from Chester on the Irish
  Seas, 1637. And by occasion foretels the ruine of our
  corrupted Clergy then in their height. YET once more, O ye Laurels, and once more
  Ye Myrtles brown, with Ivy never-sear,
  I com to pluck your Berries harsh and crude,
  And with forc'd fingers rude,
  Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear,
  Compels me to disturb your season due:
  For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime
  Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer:
  Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew
  Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme. 10
  He must not flote upon his watry bear
  Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
  Without the meed of som melodious tear. Begin then, Sisters of the sacred well,
  That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring,
  Begin, and somwhat loudly sweep the string. Hence with denial vain, and coy excuse,
  So may som gentle Muse
  With lucky words favour my destin'd Urn,                             20
  And as he passes turn,
  And bid fair peace be to my sable shrowd. For we were nurst upon the self-same hill,
  Fed the same flock by fountain, shade, and rill. Together both, ere the high Lawns appear'd
  Under the opening eye-lids of the morn,
  We drove a field and both together heard
  What time the Gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
  Batt'ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
  Oft till the Star that rose, at Ev'ning, bright                      30
  Toward Heav'ns descent had slop'd his westering wheel. Mean while the Rural ditties were not mute,
  Temper'd to th'Oaten Flute;
  Rough Satyrs danc'd, and Fauns with clov'n heel,
  From the glad sound would not be absent long,
  And old Damoetas lov'd to hear our song. But O the heavy change, now thou art gon,
  Now thou art gon, and never must return! Thee Shepherd, thee the Woods, and desert Caves,
  With wilde Thyme and the gadding Vine o'regrown,                     40
  And all their echoes mourn. The Willows, and the Hazle Copses green,
  Shall now no more be seen,
  Fanning their joyous Leaves to thy soft layes. As killing as the Canker to the Rose,
  Or Taint-worm to the weanling Herds that graze,
  Or Frost to Flowers, that their gay wardrop wear,
  When first the White thorn blows;
  Such, Lycidas, thy loss to Shepherds ear. Where were ye Nymphs when the remorseless deep                       50
  Clos'd o're the head of your lov'd Lycidas? For neither were ye playing on the steep,
  Where your old Bards, the famous Druids ly,
  Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
  Nor yet where Deva spreads her wisard stream:
  Ay me, I fondly dream! Had ye bin there--for what could that have don? What could the Muse her self that Orpheus bore,
  The Muse her self, for her inchanting son
  Whom Universal nature did lament,                                    60
  When by the rout that made the hideous roar,
  His goary visage down the stream was sent,
  Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore. Alas! What boots it with uncessant care
  To tend the homely slighted Shepherds trade,
  And strictly meditate the thankles Muse,
  Were it not better don as others use,
  To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
  Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair? Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise                    70
  (That last infirmity of Noble mind)
  To scorn delights, and live laborious dayes:
  But the fair Guerdon when we hope to find,
  And think to burst out into sudden blaze. Comes the blind Fury with th'abhorred shears,
  And slits the thin spun life. But not the praise,
  Phoebus repli'd, and touch'd my trembling ears;
  Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
  Nor in the glistering foil
  Set off to th'world, nor in broad rumour lies,                       80
  But lives and spreds aloft by those pure eyes,
  And perfet witnes of all judging Jove;
  As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
  Of so much fame in Heav'n expect thy meed. O Fountain Arethuse, and thou honour'd floud,
  Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown'd with vocall reeds,
  That strain I heard was of a higher mood:
  But now my Oate proceeds,
  And listens to the Herald of the Sea
  That came in Neptune's plea,                                         90
  He ask'd the Waves, and ask'd the Fellon winds,
  What hard mishap hath doom'd this gentle swain? And question'd every gust of rugged wings
  That blows from off each beaked Promontory,
  They knew not of his story,
  And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
  That not a blast was from his dungeon stray'd,
  The Ayr was calm, and on the level brine,
  Sleek Panope with all her sisters play'd. It was that fatall and perfidious Bark                              100
  Built in th'eclipse, and rigg'd with curses dark,
  That sunk so low that sacred head of thine. Next Camus, reverend Sire, went footing slow,
  His Mantle hairy, and his Bonnet sedge,
  Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge
  Like to that sanguine flower inscrib'd with woe. Ah; Who hath reft (quoth he) my dearest pledge? Last came, and last did go,
  The Pilot of the Galilean lake,
  Two massy Keyes he bore of metals twain,                            110
  (The Golden opes, the Iron shuts amain)
  He shook his Miter'd locks, and stern bespake,
  How well could I have spar'd for thee, young swain,
  Anow of such as for their bellies sake,
  Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold? Of other care they little reck'ning make,
  Then how to scramble at the shearers feast,
  And shove away the worthy bidden guest. Blind mouthes! that scarce themselves know how to hold
  A Sheep-hook, or have learn'd ought els the least                   120
  That to the faithfull Herdmans art belongs! What recks it them? What need they? They are sped;
  And when they list, their lean and flashy songs
  Grate on their scrannel Pipes of wretched straw,
  The hungry Sheep look up, and are not fed,
  But swoln with wind, and the rank mist they draw,
  Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread:
  Besides what the grim Woolf with privy paw
  Daily devours apace, and nothing sed,
  But that two-handed engine at the door,                             130
  Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more. Return Alpheus, the dread voice is past,
  That shrunk thy streams; Return Sicilian Muse,
  And call the Vales, and bid them hither cast
  Their Bels, and Flourets of a thousand hues. Ye valleys low where the milde whispers use,
  Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
  On whose fresh lap the swart Star sparely looks,
  Throw hither all your quaint enameld eyes,
  That on the green terf suck the honied showres,                     140
  And purple all the ground with vernal flowres. Bring the rathe Primrose that forsaken dies. The tufted Crow-toe, and pale Gessamine,
  The white Pink, and the Pansie freakt with jeat,
  The glowing Violet. The Musk-rose, and the well attir'd Woodbine. With Cowslips wan that hang the pensive hed,
  And every flower that sad embroidery wears:
  Bid Amaranthus all his beauty shed,
  Daffadillies fill their cups with tears,                            150
  And strew the Laureat Herse where Lycid lies. For so to interpose a little ease,
  Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise. Ah me! Whilst thee the shores, and sounding Seas
  Wash far away, where ere thy bones are hurl'd
  Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides. Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
  Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world;
  Or whether thou to our moist vows deny'd,
  Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old,                              160
  Where the great vision of the guarded Mount
  Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold;
  Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth. And, O ye Dolphins, waft the haples youth. Weep no more, woful Shepherds weep no more,
  For Lycidas your sorrow is not dead,
  Sunk though he be beneath the watry floar,
  So sinks the day-star in the Ocean bed,
  And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
  And tricks his beams, and with new spangled Ore,                    170
  Flames in the forehead of the morning sky:
  So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high,
  Through the dear might of him that walk'd the waves
  Where other groves, and other streams along,
  With Nectar pure his oozy Lock's he laves,
  And hears the unexpressive nuptiall Song,
  In the blest Kingdoms meek of joy and love. There entertain him all the Saints above,
  In solemn troops, and sweet Societies
  That sing, and singing in their glory move,                         180
  And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes. Now Lycidas the Shepherds weep no more;
  Hence forth thou art the Genius of the shore,
  In thy large recompense and shalt be good
  To all that wander in that perilous flood. Thus sang the uncouth Swain to th'Okes and rills,
  While the still morn went out with Sandals gray,
  He touch'd the tender stops of various Quills,
  With eager thought warbling his Dorick lay:
  And now the Sun had stretch'd out all the hills,                    190
  And now was dropt into the Western bay;
  At last he rose, and twitch'd his Mantle blew:
  To morrow to fresh Woods, and Pastures new. Notes:
   64  uncessant] Manuscript reads incessant, so that uncessant
  is probably a misprint; though that spelling is retained in the Second
  Edition. 82  perfet] So in Comus, line 203. In both these places
  the manuscript has perfect, as elsewhere where the word occurs. In
  the Solemn Music, line 23, where the First Edition reads perfect,
  the second reads perfet. 149 Amaranthus] Amarantus



Transcriber's note: Facsimile of Title page of Comus follows:

                            A MASKE
                           PRESENTED
                       At Ludlow Castle,
                             1634:

                On Michalemasse night, before the
                        RIGHT HONORABLE,
          IOHN Earle of Bridgewater, Viscount Brackly,
              Lord President of WALES, and one of
                 His MAIESTIES most honorable
                        Privie Counsell. ------------------------------------------------------------
     Eheu quid volui misero mihi! floribus austrum
     Perditus ------------------
  ------------------------------------------------------------

                            LONDON
                 Printed for HYMPHREY ROBINSON
             at the signe of the Three Pidgeons in
                   Pauls Church-yard. 1637. To the Right Honourable, John Lord Vicount Bracly, Son and
  Heir apparent to the Earl of Bridgewater, &c.


  My LORD,

  This Poem, which receiv'd its first occasion of Birth from your
  Self, and others of your Noble Family, and much honour from
  your own Person in the performance, now returns again to
  make a finall Dedication of it self to you. Although not openly
  acknowledg'd by the Author, yet it is a legitimate off-spring, so
  lovely, and so much desired, that the often Copying of it hath
  tired my Pen to give my several friends satisfaction, and brought
  me to a necessity of producing it to the publike view; and now
  to offer it up in all rightfull devotion to those fair Hopes, and
  rare endowments of your much-promising Youth, which give a
  full assurance, to all that know you, of a future excellence. Live
  sweet Lord to be the honour of your Name, and receive this as
  your own, from the hands of him, who hath by many favours
  been long oblig'd to your most honour'd Parents, and as in this
  representation your attendant Thyrsis, so now in all reall
  expression

  Your faithfull, and most humble Servant

  H. LAWES. Note: Dedication to Vicount Bracly: Omitted in 1673. The Copy of a Letter writt'n by Sir HENRY WOOTTON, to
  the Author, upon the following Poem. From the Colledge, this 13. of April, 1638. SIR,
  It was a special favour, when you lately bestowed upon me
  here, the first taste of your acquaintance, though no longer then
  to make me know that I wanted more time to value it, and  to
  enjoy it rightly; and in truth, if  I could then have imagined your
  farther stay in these parts, which I understood afterwards by
  Mr. H. I would have been bold in our vulgar phrase to mend my
  draught (for you left me with an extreme thirst) and to have
  begged your conversation again, joyntly with your said learned
  Friend, at a poor meal or two, that we might have banded
  together som good Authors of the antient time: Among which, I
  observed you to have been familiar. Since your going, you have charg'd me with new Obligations,
  both for a very kinde Letter from you dated the sixth of this
  Month, and for a dainty peece of entertainment which came
  therwith. Wherin I should much commend the Tragical part, if
  the Lyrical did not ravish me with a certain Dorique delicacy in
  your Songs and Odes, wherunto I must plainly confess to have
  seen yet nothing parallel in our Language: Ipsa mollities. But I must not omit to tell you, that I now onely owe you
  thanks for intimating unto me (how modestly soever) the true
  Artificer. For the work it self I had view'd som good while
  before, with singular delight, having receiv'd it from our
  common Friend Mr. R. in the very close of the late R's Poems,
  Printed at Oxford, wherunto it was added (as I now suppose)
  that the Accessory might help out the Principal, according to
  the Art of Stationers, and to leave the Reader Con la bocca
  dolce. Now Sir, concerning your travels, wherin I may challenge a
  little more priviledge of Discours with you; I suppose you will
  not blanch Paris in your way; therfore I have been bold to
  trouble you with a few lines to Mr. M. B. whom you shall easily
  find attending the young Lord S. as his Governour, and you
  may surely receive from him good directions for the shaping of
  your farther journey into Italy, where he did reside by my choice
  som time for the King, after mine own recess from Venice. I should think that your best Line will be thorow the whole
  length of France to Marseilles, and thence by Sea to Genoa,
  whence the passage into Tuscany is as Diurnal as a Gravesend
  Barge: I hasten as you do to Florence, or Siena, the rather tell
  you a short story from the interest you have given me in your
  safety. At Siena I was tabled in the House of one Alberto Scipioni, an
  old Roman Courtier in dangerous times, having bin Steward to
  the Duca di Pagliano, who with all his Family were strangled
  save this onely man that escap'd by foresight of the Tempest:
  With him I  had often much chat of those affairs; Into which he
  took pleasure to look back from his Native Harbour: and at my
  departure toward Rome (which had been the center of    his
  experience) I had wonn confidence enough to beg his advice,
  how I might carry my self securely there, without offence of
  mine own conscience. Signor Arrigo mio (sayes he) I pensieri
  stretti, & il viso sciolto, will go safely over the whole World: Of
  which Delphian Oracle (for so I have found it) your judgement
  doth need no commentary; and therfore (Sir) I will commit you
  with it to the best of all securities, Gods dear love, remaining

  Your Friend as much at command as any of longer date,

  Henry Wootton. Postscript. SIR, I have expressly sent this my Foot-boy to prevent your
  departure without som acknowledgement from me of the
  receipt of your obliging Letter, having myself through som
  busines, I know not how, neglected the ordinary conveyance. In any part where I shall understand you fixed, I shall be glad,
  and diligent to entertain you with Home-Novelties; even for
  som fomentation of our friendship, too soon interrupted in the
  Cradle. Note: Letter from Sir Henry Wootton: Omitted in 1673




A MASK PRESENTED At LUDLOW-Castle, 1634. &c.


  The Persons. The attendant Spirit afterwards in the habit of Thyrsis. Comus with his crew. The Lady. 1. Brother. 2. Brother. Sabrina the Nymph. The cheif persons which presented, were
  The Lord Bracly. Mr. Thomas Egerton his Brother,
  The Lady Alice Egerton. The first Scene discovers a wilde Wood. The attendant Spirit descends or enters. Spir: Before the starry threshold of Joves Court
  My mansion is, where those immortal shapes
  Of bright aereal Spirits live insphear'd
  In Regions milde of calm and serene Ayr,
  Above the smoak and stirr of this dim spot,
  Which men call Earth, and with low-thoughted care
  Confin'd, and pester'd in this pin-fold here,
  Strive to keep up a frail, and Feaverish being
  Unmindfull of the crown that Vertue gives
  After this mortal change, to her true Servants                       10
  Amongst the enthron'd gods on Sainted seats. Yet som there he that by due steps aspire
  To lay their just hands on that Golden Key
  That ope's the Palace of Eternity:
  To such my errand is, and but for such,
  I would not soil these pure Ambrosial weeds,
  With the rank vapours of this Sin-worn mould. But to my task. Neptune besides the sway
  Of every salt Flood, and each ebbing Stream,
  Took in by lot 'twixt high, and neather Jove,                        20
  Imperial rule of all the Sea-girt Iles
  That like to rich, and various gemms inlay
  The unadorned boosom of the Deep,
  Which he to grace his tributary gods
  By course commits to severall government,
  And gives them leave to wear their Saphire crowns,
  And weild their little tridents, but this Ile
  The greatest, and the best of all the main
  He quarters to his blu-hair'd deities,
  And all this tract that fronts the falling Sun                       30
  A noble Peer of mickle trust, and power
  Has in his charge, with temper'd awe to guide
  An old, and haughty Nation proud in Arms:
  Where his fair off-spring nurs't in Princely lore,
  Are coming to attend their Fathers state,
  And new-entrusted Scepter, but their way
  Lies through the perplex't paths of this drear Wood,
  The nodding horror of whose shady brows
  Threats the forlorn and wandring Passinger. And here their tender age might suffer perill,                       40
  But that by quick command from Soveran Jove
  I was dispatcht for their defence, and guard;
  And listen why, for I will tell ye now
  What never yet was heard in Tale or Song
  From old, or modern Bard in Hall, or Bowr. Bacchus that first from out the purple Grape,
  Crush't the sweet poyson of mis-used Wine
  After the Tuscan Mariners transform'd
  Coasting the Tyrrhene shore, as the winds listed,
  On Circes Hand fell (who knows not Circe                             50
  The daughter of the Sun? Whose charmed Cup
  Whoever tasted, lost his upright shape,
  And downward fell into a groveling Swine)
  This Nymph that gaz'd upon his clustring locks,
  With Ivy berries wreath'd, and his blithe youth,
  Had by him, ere he parted thence, a Son
  Much like his Father, but his Mother more,
  Whom therfore she brought up and Comus named,
  Who ripe, and frolick of his full grown age,
  Roving the Celtic, and Iberian fields,                               60
  At last betakes him to this ominous Wood,
  And in thick shelter of black shades imbowr'd,
  Excells his Mother at her mighty Art,
  Offring to every weary Travailer,
  His orient liquor in a Crystal Glasse,
  To quench the drouth of Phoebus, which as they taste
  (For most do taste through fond intemperate thirst )
  Soon as the Potion works,  their human count'nance,
  Th' express resemblance of the gods, is chang'd
  Into som brutish form of Woolf, or Bear,                             70
  Or Ounce, or Tiger, Hog, or bearded Goat,
  All other parts remaining as they were,
  And they, so perfect is their misery,
  Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
  But boast themselves more comely then before
  And all their friends, and native home forget
  To roule with pleasure in a sensual stie. Therfore when any favour'd of high Jove,
  Chances to pass through this adventrous glade,
  Swift as the Sparkle of a glancing Star,                             80
  I shoot from Heav'n to give him safe convoy,
  As now I do: But first I must put off
  These my skie robes spun out of Iris Wooff,
  And take the Weeds and likenes of a Swain,
  That to the service of this house belongs,
  Who with his soft Pipe, and smooth-dittied Song,
  Well knows to still the wilde winds when they roar,
  And hush the waving Woods, nor of lesse faith,
  And in this office of his Mountain watch,
  Likeliest, and neerest to the present ayd                            90
  Of this occasion. But I hear the tread
  Of hatefull steps, I must be viewles now. Comus enters with a Charming Rod in one hand, his Glass in
  the other, with him a rout of monsters, headed like sundry sorts
  of wilde Beasts, but otherwise like Men and Women, their
  Apparel glistring, they come in making a riotous and unruly
  noise, with Torches in their hands. Co: The Star that bids the Shepherd fold,
  Now the top of Heav'n doth hold,
  And the gilded Car of Day,
  His glowing Axle doth allay
  In the steep Atlantick stream,
  And the slope Sun his upward beam
  Shoots against the dusky Pole,
  Pacing toward the other gole                                        100
  Of his Chamber in the East. Meanwhile welcom Joy, and Feast,
  Midnight shout, and revelry,
  Tipsie dance, and Jollity. Braid your Locks with rosie Twine
  Dropping odours, dropping Wine. Rigor now is gon to bed,
  And Advice with scrupulous head,
  Strict Age, and sowre Severity,
  With their grave Saws in slumber ly. 110
  We that are of purer fire
  Imitate the Starry Quire,
  Who in their nightly watchfull Sphears,
  Lead in swift round the Months and Years. The Sounds, and Seas with all their finny drove
  Now to the Moon in wavering Morrice move,
  And on the Tawny Sands and Shelves,
  Trip the pert Fairies and the dapper Elves;
  By dimpled Brook, and Fountain brim,
  The Wood-Nymphs deckt with Daisies trim,                            120
  Their merry wakes and pastimes keep:
  What hath night to do with sleep? Night hath better sweets to prove,
  Venus now wakes, and wak'ns Love. Com let us our rights begin,
  'Tis onely day-light that makes Sin
  Which these dun shades will ne're report. Hail Goddesse of Nocturnal sport
  Dark vaild Cotytto, t' whom the secret flame
  Of mid-night Torches burns; mysterious Dame                        130
  That ne're art call'd, but when the Dragon woom
  Of Stygian darknes spets her thickest gloom,
  And makes one blot of all the ayr,
  Stay thy cloudy Ebon chair,
  Wherin thou rid'st with Hecat', and befriend
  Us thy vow'd Priests, til utmost end
  Of all thy dues be done, and none left out,
  Ere the blabbing Eastern scout,
  The nice Morn on th' Indian steep
  From her cabin'd loop hole peep,                                    140
  And to the tel-tale Sun discry
  Our conceal'd Solemnity. Com, knit hands, and beat the ground,
  In a light fantastick round. The Measure. Break off; break off, I feel the different pace,
  Of som chast footing neer about this ground. Run to your shrouds, within these Brakes and Trees,
  Our number may affright: Som Virgin sure
  (For so I can distinguish by mine Art)
  Benighted in these Woods. Now to my charms,                        150
  And to my wily trains, I shall e're long
  Be well stock't with as fair a herd as graz'd
  About my Mother Circe. Thus I hurl
  My dazling Spells into the spungy ayr,
  Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion,
  And give it false presentments, lest the place
  And my quaint habits breed astonishment,
  And put the Damsel to suspicious flight,
  Which must not be, for that's against my course;
  I under fair pretence of friendly ends,                             160
  And well plac't words of glozing courtesie
  Baited with reasons not unplausible
  Wind me into the easie-hearted man,
  And hugg him into snares. When once her eye
  Hath met the vertue of this Magick dust,
  I shall appear som harmles Villager
  Whom thrift keeps up about his Country gear,
  But here she comes, I fairly step aside,
  And hearken, if I may, her busines here. The Lady enters. La: This way the noise was, if mine ear be true,                    170
  My best guide now, me thought it was the sound
  Of Riot, and ill manag'd Merriment,
  Such as the jocond Flute, or gamesom Pipe
  Stirs up among the loose unleter'd Hinds,
  When for their teeming Flocks, and granges full
  In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan,
  And thank the gods amiss. I should be loath
  To meet the rudenesse, and swill'd insolence
  of such late Wassailers; yet O where els
  Shall I inform my unacquainted feet                                 180
  In the blind mazes of this tangl'd Wood? My Brothers when they saw me wearied out
  With this long way, resolving here to lodge
  Under the spreading favour of these Pines,
  Stept as they se'd to the next Thicket side
  To bring me Berries, or such cooling fruit
  As the kind hospitable Woods provide. They left me then, when the gray-hooded Eev'n
  Like a sad Votarist in Palmers weed
  Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus wain. 190
  But where they are, and why they came not back,
  Is now the labour of my thoughts, 'tis likeliest
  They had ingag'd their wandring steps too far,
  And envious darknes, e're they could return,
  Had stole them from me, els O theevish Night
  Why shouldst thou, but for som fellonious end,
  In thy dark lantern thus close up the Stars,
  That nature hung in Heav'n, and fill'd their Lamps
  With everlasting oil, to give due light
  To the misled and lonely Travailer? 200
  This is the place as well as I may guess,
  Whence eev'n now the tumult of loud Mirth
  Was rife and perfect in my list'ning ear,
  Yet nought but single darknes do I find. What might this be? A thousand fantasies
  Begin to throng into my memory
  Of calling shapes, and beckning shadows dire,
  And airy tongues, that syllable mens names
  On Sands and Shoars and desert Wildernesses. These thoughts may startle well, but not astound                    210
  The vertuous mind that ever walks attended
  By a strong siding champion Conscience.--
  O welcom pure-ey'd Faith, white-handed Hope,
  Thou hovering Angel girt with golden wings. And thou unblemish't form of Chastity,
  I see ye visibly and now beleeve
  That he, the Supreme good t'whom all things ill
  Are but as slavish  officers of vengeance,
  Would send a glistring Guardian if need were
  To keep my life and honour unassail'd. 220
  Was I deceiv'd, or did a sable cloud
  Turn forth her silver lining on the night? I did not err, there does a sable cloud
  Turn forth her silver lining on the night,
  And casts a gleam over this tufted Grove. I cannot hallow to my Brothers, but
  Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest
  Ile venter, for my new enliv'nd spirits
  Prompt me; and they perhaps are not far off. SONG. Sweet Echo, sweetest Nymph that liv'st unseen                       230
  Within thy airy shell
  By slow Meander's margent green,
  And in the violet imbroider'd vale
  Where the love-lorn Nightingale
  Nightly to thee her sad Song mourneth well. Canst thou not tell me of a gentle Pair
  That likest thy Narcissus are? O if thou have
  Hid them in som flowry Cave,
  Tell me but where                                                   240
  Sweet Queen of  Parly, Daughter of the Sphear,
  So maist thou be translated to the skies,
  And give resounding grace to all Heav'ns Harmonies. Co: Can any mortal mixture of Earths mould
  Breath such Divine inchanting ravishment? Sure somthing holy lodges in that brest,
  And with these raptures moves the vocal air
  To testifie his hidd'n residence;
  How sweetly did they float upon the wings
  Of silence, through the empty-vaulted night                         250
  At every fall smoothing the Raven doune
  Of darknes till it smil'd: I have oft heard
  My mother Circe with the Sirens three,
  Amid'st the flowry-kirtl'd Naiades
  Culling their Potent hearbs, and balefull drugs. Who as they sung, would take the prison'd soul,
  And lap it in Elysium, Scylla wept,
  And chid her barking waves into attention. And fell Charybdis murmur'd soft applause:
  Yet they in pleasing slumber lull'd the sense,                      260
  And in sweet madnes rob'd it of it self,
  But such a sacred, and home-felt delight,
  Such sober certainty of waking bliss
  I never heard till now. Ile speak to her
  And she shall be my Queen. Hail forren wonder
  Whom certain these rough shades did never breed
  Unlesse the Goddes that in rurall shrine
  Dwell'st here with Pan, or Silvan, by blest Song
  Forbidding every bleak unkindly Fog
  To touch the prosperous growth of this tall Wood. 270

  La: Nay gentle Shepherd ill is lost that praise
  That is addrest to unattending Ears,
  Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift
  How to regain my sever'd company
  Compell'd me to awake the courteous Echo
  To give me answer from her mossie Couch. Co: What chance good Lady hath bereft you thus? La: Dim darknes, and this heavy Labyrinth. Co: Could that divide you from neer-ushering guides? La: They left me weary on a grassie terf. 280

  Co: By falshood, or discourtesie, or why? La: To seek in vally som cool friendly Spring. Co: And left your fair side all unguarded Lady? La: They were but twain, and purpos'd quick return. Co: Perhaps fore-stalling night prevented them. La: How easie my misfortune is to hit! Co:  Imports their loss, beside the present need? La:  No less then if I should my brothers loose. Co: Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom? La:  As smooth as Hebe's their unrazor'd lips. 290

  Co: Two such I saw, what time the labour'd Oxe
  In his loose traces from the furrow came,
  And the swink't hedger at his Supper sate;
  I saw them under a green mantling vine
  That crawls along the side of yon small hill,
  Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots,
  Their port was more then human, as they stood;
  I took it for a faery vision
  Of som gay creatures of the element
  That in the colours of the Rainbow live                             300
  And play i'th plighted clouds. I was aw-strook,
  And as I past, I worshipt: if those you seek
  It were a journey like the path to Heav'n,
  To help you find them. La:  Gentle villager
  What readiest way would bring me to that place? Co:  Due west it rises from this shrubby point. La: To find out that, good Shepherd, I suppose,
  In such a scant allowance of Star-light,
  Would overtask the best Land-Pilots art,
  Without the sure guess of well-practiz'd feet,                      310

  Co: I know each lane, and every alley green
  Dingle, or bushy dell of this wilde Wood,
  And every bosky bourn from side to side
  My daily walks and ancient neighbourhood,
  And if your stray attendance be yet lodg'd,
  Or shroud within these limits, I shall know
  Ere morrow wake, or the low roosted lark
  From her thatch't pallat rowse, if otherwise
  I can conduct you Lady to a low
  But loyal cottage, where you may be safe                            320
  Till further quest. La: Shepherd I take thy word,
  And trust thy honest offer'd courtesie,
  Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds
  With smoaky rafters, then in tapstry Halls
  And Courts of Princes, where it first was nam'd,
  And yet is most pretended: In a place
  Less warranted then this, or less secure
  I cannot be, that I should fear to change it. Eie me blest Providence, and square my triall
  To my proportion'd strength. Shepherd lead on.--                   330

  The Two Brothers. Eld. Bro: Unmuffle ye faint stars, and thou fair Moon
  That wontst to love the travailers benizon,
  Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud,
  And disinherit Chaos, that raigns here
  In double night of darknes, and of shades;
  Or if your influence be quite damm'd up
  With black usurping mists, som gentle taper
  Though a rush Candle from the wicker hole
  Of som clay habitation visit us
  With thy long levell'd rule of streaming light. 340
  And thou shalt be our star of Arcady,
  Or Tyrian Cynosure. 2. Bro: Or if our eyes
  Be barr'd that happines, might we but hear
  The folded flocks pen'd in their watled cotes,
  Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops,
  Or whistle from the Lodge, or village cock
  Count the night watches to his feathery Dames,
  'Twould be som solace yet, som little chearing
  In this close dungeon of innumerous bowes. But O that haples virgin our lost sister                            350
  Where may she wander now, whether betake her
  From the chill dew, amongst rude burrs and thistles? Perhaps som cold bank is her boulster now
  Or 'gainst the rugged bark of som broad Elm
  Leans her unpillow'd head fraught with sad fears. What if in wild amazement, and affright,
  Or while we speak within the direfull grasp
  Of Savage hunger, or of Savage heat? Eld. Bro: Peace brother, be not over-exquisite
  To cast the fashion of uncertain evils;                             360
  For grant they be so, while they rest unknown,
  What need a man forestall his date of grief
  And run to meet what he would most avoid? Or if they be but false alarms of Fear,
  How bitter is such self delusion? I do not think my sister so to seek,
  Or so unprincipl'd in vertues book,
  And the sweet peace that goodnes boosoms ever,
  As that the single want of light and noise
  (Not being in danger, as I trust she is not)                        370
  Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts,
  And put them into mis-becoming plight. Vertue could see to do what vertue would
  By her own radiant light, though Sun and Moon
  Were in the salt sea sunk. And Wisdoms self
  Oft seeks to sweet retired Solitude,
  Where with her best nurse Contemplation
  She plumes her feathers and lets grow her wings
  That in the various bustle of resort
  Were all too ruffled and sometimes impaired. 380
  He that has light within his own deer brest
  May sit i'th center, and enjoy bright day,
  But he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts
  Benighted walks under the mid-day Sun;
  Himself is his own dungeon. 2. Bro: Tis most true
  That musing meditation most affects
  The pensive secrecy of desert cell,
  Far from the cheerfull haunt of men, and herds,
  And sits as safe as in a Senat house,
  For who would rob a Hermit of his Weeds,                            390
  His few Books, or his Beads, or Maple Dish,
  Or do his gray hairs any violence? But beauty like the fair Hesperian Tree
  Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard
  Of dragon watch with uninchanted eye,
  To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit
  From the rash hand of bold Incontinence. You may as well spred out the unsun'd heaps
  Of Misers treasure by an out-laws den,
  And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope                              400
  Danger will wink on Opportunity,
  And let a single helpless maiden pass
  Uninjur'd in this wilde surrounding wast. Of night, or lonelines it recks me not,
  I fear the dred events that dog them both,
  Lest som ill greeting touch attempt the person
  Of our unowned sister. Eld. Bro: I do not, brother,
  Inferr, as if I thought my sisters state
  Secure without all doubt, or controversie:
  Yet where an equall poise of hope and fear                          410
  Does arbitrate th'event, my nature is
  That I encline to hope, rather then fear,
  And gladly banish squint suspicion. My sister is not so defenceless left
  As you imagine, she has a hidden strength
  Which you remember not. 2. Bro: What hidden strength,
  Unless the strength of Heav'n, if you mean that? ELD Bro: I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength
  Which if Heav'n gave it, may be term'd her own:
  'Tis chastity, my brother, chastity:                               420
  She that has that, is clad in compleat steel,
  And like a quiver'd Nymph with Arrows keen
  May trace huge Forests, and unharbour'd Heaths,
  Infamous Hills, and sandy perilous wildes,
  Where through the sacred rayes of Chastity,
  No savage fierce, Bandite, or mountaneer
  Will dare to soyl her Virgin purity,
  Yea there, where very desolation dwels
  By grots, and caverns shag'd with horrid shades,
  She may pass on with unblench't majesty,                            430
  Be it not don in pride, or in presumption. Som say no evil thing that walks by night
  In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen,
  Blew meager Hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost,
  That breaks his magick chains at curfeu time,
  No goblin, or swart faery of the mine,
  Hath hurtfull power o're true virginity. Do ye beleeve me yet, or shall I call
  Antiquity from the old Schools of Greece
  To testifie the arms of Chastity? 440
  Hence had the huntress Dian her dred bow
  Fair silver-shafted Queen for ever chaste,
  Wherwith she tam'd the brinded lioness
  And spotted mountain pard, but set at nought
  The frivolous bolt of Cupid, gods and men
  Fear'd her stern frown, and she was queen oth' Woods. What was that snaky-headed Gorgon sheild
  That wise Minerva wore, unconquer'd Virgin,
  Wherwith she freez'd her foes to congeal'd stone? But rigid looks of Chast austerity,                                 450
  And noble grace that dash't brute violence
  With sudden adoration, and blank aw. So dear to Heav'n is Saintly chastity,
  That when a soul is found sincerely so,
  A thousand liveried Angels lacky her,
  Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt,
  And in cleer dream, and solemn vision
  Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
  Till oft convers with heav'nly habitants
  Begin to cast a beam on th'outward shape,                           460
  The unpolluted temple of the mind. And turns it by degrees to the souls essence,
  Till all be made immortal: but when lust
  By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk,
  But most by leud and lavish act of sin,
  Lets in defilement to the inward parts,
  The soul grows clotted by contagion,
  Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite loose
  The divine property of her first being. Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp                        470
  Oft seen in Charnell vaults, and Sepulchers
  Lingering, and sitting by a new made grave,
  As loath to leave the body that it lov'd,
  And link't it self by carnal sensualty
  To a degenerate and degraded state. 2. Bro: How charming is divine Philosophy! Not harsh, and crabbed as dull fools suppose,
  But musical as is Apollo's lute,
  And a perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets,
  Where no crude surfet raigns. Eld. Bro: List, list, I hear          480
  Som far off hallow break the silent Air. 2. Bro: Me thought so too; what should it be? Eld. Bro: For certain
  Either som one like us night-founder'd here,
  Or els som neighbour Wood-man, or at worst,
  Som roaving robber calling to his fellows. 2. Bro: Heav'n keep my sister, agen agen and neer,
  Best draw, and stand upon our guard. Eld. Bro: Ile hallow,
  If he be friendly he comes well, if not,
  Defence is a good cause, and Heav'n be for us. [Enter] The attendant Spirit habited like a Shepherd. That hallow I should know, what are you? speak;                     490
  Com not too neer, you fall on iron stakes else. Spir: What voice is that, my young Lord? speak agen. 2. Bro: O brother, 'tis my father Shepherd sure. Eld. Bro: Thyrsis? Whose artful strains have oft delaid
  The huddling brook to hear his madrigal,
  And sweeten'd every muskrose of the dale,
  How cam'st thou here good Swain? hath any ram
  Slip't from the fold, or young Kid lost his dam,
  Or straggling weather the pen't flock forsook? How couldst thou find this dark sequester'd nook? 500

  Spir: O my lov'd masters heir, and his next joy,
  I came not here on such a trivial toy
  As a stray'd Ewe, or to pursue the stealth
  Of pilfering Woolf, not all the fleecy wealth
  That doth enrich these Downs, is worth a thought
  To this my errand, and the care it brought. But O my Virgin Lady, where is she? How chance she is not in your company? Eld. Bro: To tell thee sadly Shepherd, without blame
  Or our neglect, we lost her as we came. 510

  Spir: Ay me unhappy then my fears are true. Eld. Bro: What fears good Thyrsis? Prethee briefly shew. Spir: Ile tell ye, 'tis not vain or fabulous,
  (Though so esteem'd by shallow ignorance)
  What the sage Poets taught by th' heav'nly Muse,
  Storied of old in high immortal vers
  Of dire Chimera's and inchanted Iles,
  And rifted Rocks whose entrance leads to hell,
  For such there be, but unbelief is blind. Within the navil of this hideous Wood,                              520
  Immur'd in cypress shades a Sorcerer dwels
  Of Bacchus, and of Circe born, great Comus,
  Deep skill'd in all his mothers witcheries,
  And here to every thirsty wanderer,
  By sly enticement gives his banefull cup,
  With many murmurs mixt, whose pleasing poison
  The visage quite transforms of him that drinks,
  And the inglorious likenes of a beast
  Fixes instead, unmoulding reasons mintage
  Character'd in the Face; this have I learn't                        530
  Tending my flocks hard by i'th hilly crofts,
  That brow this bottom glade, whence night by night
  He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl
  Like stabl'd wolves, or tigers at their prey,
  Doing abhorred rites to Hecate
  In their obscured haunts of inmost bowres. Yet have they many baits, and guilefull spells
  To inveigle and invite th' unwary sense
  Of them that pass unweeting by the way. This evening late by then the chewing flocks                        540
  Had ta'n their supper on the savoury Herb
  Of Knot-grass dew-besprent, and were in fold,
  I sate me down to watch upon a bank
  With Ivy canopied, and interwove
  With flaunting Hony-suckle, and began
  Wrapt in a pleasing fit of melancholy
  To meditate my rural minstrelsie,
  Till fancy had her fill, but ere a close
  The wonted roar was up amidst the Woods,
  And fill'd the Air with barbarous dissonance,                       550
  At which I ceas' t, and listen'd them a while,
  Till an unusuall stop of sudden silence
  Gave respit to the drowsie frighted steeds
  That draw the litter of close-curtain'd sleep. At last a soft and solemn breathing sound
  Rose like a steam of rich distill'd Perfumes,
  And stole upon the Air, that even Silence
  Was took e're she was ware, and wish't she might
  Deny her nature, and be never more
  Still to be so displac't. I was all eare,                          560
  And took in strains that might create a soul
  Under the ribs of Death, but O ere long
  Too well I did perceive it was the voice
  Of my most honour'd Lady, your dear sister. Amaz'd I stood, harrow'd with grief and fear,
  And O poor hapless Nightingale thought I,
  How sweet thou sing'st, how neer the deadly snare! Then down the Lawns I ran with headlong hast
  Through paths, and turnings oft'n trod by day,
  Till guided by mine ear I found the place                           570
  Where that damn'd wisard hid in sly disguise
  (For so by certain signes I knew) had met
  Already, ere my best speed could praevent,
  The aidless innocent Lady his wish't prey,
  Who gently ask't if he had seen such two,
  Supposing him som neighbour villager;
  Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guess't
  Ye were the two she mean't, with that I sprung
  Into swift flight, till I had found you here,
  But furder know I not. 2. Bro: O night and shades,                   580
  How are ye joyn'd with hell in triple knot
  Against th'unarmed weakness of one Virgin
  Alone, and helpless! Is this the confidence
  You gave me Brother? Eld. Bro: Yes, and keep it still,
  Lean on it safely, not a period
  Shall be unsaid for me: against the threats
  Of malice or of sorcery, or that power
  Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm,
  Vertue may be assail'd, but never hurt,
  Surpriz'd by unjust force, but not enthrall'd,                      590
  Yea even that which mischief meant most harm,
  Shall in the happy trial prove most glory. But evil on it self shall back recoyl,
  And mix no more with goodness, when at last
  Gather'd like scum, and setl'd to it self
  It shall be in eternal restless change
  Self-fed, and self-consum'd, if this fail,
  The pillar'd firmament is rott'nness,
  And earths base built on stubble. But corn let's on. Against th' opposing will and arm of Heav'n                         600
  May never this just sword be lifted up,
  But for that damn'd magician, let him be girt
  With all the greisly legions that troop
  Under the sooty flag of Acheron,
  Harpyies and Hydra's, or all the monstrous forms
  'Twixt Africa and Inde, Ile find him out,
  And force him to restore his purchase back,
  Or drag him by the curls, to a foul death,
  Curs'd as his life. Spir: Alas good ventrous youth,
  I love thy courage yet, and bold Emprise,                           610
  But here thy sword can do thee little stead,
  Farr other arms, and other weapons must
  Be those that quell the might of hellish charms,
  He with his bare wand can unthred thy joynts,
  And crumble all thy sinews. Eld. Bro: Why prethee Shepherd
  How durst thou then thy self approach so neer
  As to make this relation? Spir: Care and utmost shifts
  How to secure the lady from surprisal,
  Brought to my mind a certain Shepherd Lad
  Of small regard to see to, yet well skill'd                         620
  In every vertuous plant and healing herb
  That spreds her verdant leaf to th'morning ray,
  He lov'd me well, and oft would beg me sing,
  Which when I did, he on the tender grass
  Would sit, and hearken even to extasie,
  And in requitall ope his leather'n scrip,
  And shew me simples of a thousand names
  Telling their strange and vigorous faculties;
  Amongst the rest a small unsightly root,
  But of divine effect, he cull'd me out;                             630
  The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it,
  But in another Countrey, as he said,
  Bore a bright golden flowre, but not in this soyl:
  Unknown, and like esteem'd, and the dull swayn
  Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon,
  And yet more med'cinal is it then that Moly
  That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
  He call'd it Haemony, and gave it me,
  And bad me keep it as of sov'ran use
  'Gainst all inchantments, mildew blast, or damp                     640
  Or gastly furies apparition;
  I purs't it up, but little reck'ning made,
  Till now that this extremity compell'd,
  But now I find it true; for by this means
  I knew the foul inchanter though disguis'd,
  Enter'd the very lime-twigs of his spells,
  And yet came off: if you have this about you
  (As I will give you when we go) you may
  Boldly assault the necromancers hall;
  Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood,                           650
  And brandish't blade rush on him, break his glass,
  And shed the lushious liquor on the ground,
  But sease his wand, though he and his curst crew
  Feirce signe of battail make, and menace high,
  Or like the sons of Vulcan vomit smoak,
  Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink. Eld. Bro: Thyrsis lead on apace, Ile follow thee,
  And som good angel bear a sheild before us. The scene changes to a stately Palace, set out with all manner of
  deliciousness; Soft Musick, Tables spred with all dainties. Comus appears with his rabble, and the Lady set in an inchanted
  Chair, to whom he offers his Glass, which she puts by, and goes
  about to rise. COMUS: Nay Lady sit; if I but wave this wand
  Your nerves are all chain'd up in Alablaster,                       660
  And you a statue; or as Daphne was
  Root-bound, that fled Apollo. La:  Fool do not boast,
  Thou canst not touch the freedom of my minde
  With all thy charms, although this corporal rinde
  Thou haste immanacl'd, while Heav'n sees good. Co: Why are you vext Lady? why do you frown
  Here dwell no frowns, nor anger, from these gates
  Sorrow flies farr: See here be all the pleasures
  That fancy can beget on youthfull thoughts,
  When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns                      670
  Brisk as the April buds in Primrose-season. And first behold this cordial Julep here
  That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds
  With spirits of balm, and fragrant Syrops mixt. Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone,
  In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena
  Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
  To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst. Why should you be so cruel to your self,
  And to those dainty limms which nature lent                         680
  For gentle usage, and soft delicacy? But you invert the cov'nants of her trust,
  And harshly deal like an ill borrower
  With that which you receiv'd on other terms,
  Scorning the unexempt condition
  By which all mortal frailty must subsist,
  Refreshment after toil, ease after pain,
  That have been tir'd all day without repast,
  And timely rest have wanted, but fair Virgin
  This will restore all soon. La: 'Twill not false traitor,                                       690
  'Twill not restore the truth and honesty
  That thou hast banish't from thy tongue with lies
  Was this the cottage, and the safe abode
  Thou told'st me of? What grim aspects are these
  These oughly-headed Monsters? Mercy guard me! Hence with thy brew'd inchantments, foul deceit
  Hast thou betrai'd my credulous innocence
  With visor'd falshood, and base forgery,
  And wouldst thou seek again to trap me here
  With lickerish baits fit to ensnare a brute? 700
  Were it a draft for Juno when she banquets,
  I would not taste thy treasonous offer; none
  But such as are good men can give good things,
  And that which is not good, is not delicious
  To a well-govern'd and wise appetite. Co: O foolishnes of men! that lend their ears
  To those budge doctors of the Stoick Furr,
  And fetch their precepts from the Cynick Tub,
  Praising the lean and sallow Abstinence. Wherefore did Nature powre her bounties forth,                      710
  With such a full and unwithdrawing hand,
  Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks,
  Thronging the Seas with spawn innumerable,
  But all to please, and sate the curious taste? And set to work millions of spinning Worms,
  That in their green shops weave the smooth-hair'd silk
  To deck her Sons, and that no corner might
  Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loyns
  She hutch't th'all-worshipt ore, and precious gems
  To store her children with; if all the world                       720
  Should in a pet of temperance feed on Pulse,
  Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but Freize,
  Th'all-giver would be unthank't, would be unprais'd,
  Not half his riches known, and yet despis'd,
  And we should serve him as a grudging master,
  As a penurious niggard of his wealth,
  And live like Natures bastards, not her sons,
  Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight,
  And strangl'd with her waste fertility;
  Th'earth cumber'd, and the wing'd air dark't with plumes. 730
  The herds would over-multitude their Lords,
  The Sea o'refraught would swell, and th'unsought diamonds
  Would so emblaze the forhead of the Deep,
  And so bested with Stars, that they below
  Would grow inur'd to light, and com at last
  To gaze upon the Sun with shameless brows. List Lady be not coy, and be not cosen'd
  With that same vaunted name Virginity,
  Beauty is natures coyn, must not be hoorded,
  But must be currant, and the good thereof                           740
  Consists in mutual and partak'n bliss,
  Unsavoury in th'injoyment of it self
  If you let slip time, like a neglected rose
  It withers on the stalk with languish't head. Beauty is natures brag, and must be shown
  In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities
  Where most may wonder at the workmanship;
  It is for homely features to keep home,
  They had their name thence; course complexions
  And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply                         750
  The sampler, and to teize the huswifes wooll. What need a vermeil-tinctured lip for that
  Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the Morn? There was another meaning in these gifts,
  Think what, and be adviz'd, you are but young yet. La: I had not thought to have unlockt my lips
  In this unhallow'd air, but that this Jugler
  Would think to charm my judgement, as mine eyes,
  Obtruding false rules pranckt in reasons garb. I hate when vice can bolt her arguments,                            760
  And vertue has no tongue to check her pride:
  Impostor do not charge most innocent nature,
  As if she would her children should be riotous
  With her abundance, she good cateress
  Means her provision onely to the good
  That live according to her sober laws,
  And holy dictate of spare Temperance:
  If every just man that now pines with want
  Had but a moderate and heseeming share
  Of that which lewdly-pamper'd Luxury                                770
  Now heaps upon som few with vast excess,
  Natures full blessings would be well dispenc't
  In unsuperfluous eeven proportion,
  And she no whit encomber'd with her store,
  And then the giver would be better thank't,
  His praise due paid, for swinish gluttony
  Ne're looks to Heav'n amidst his gorgeous feast,
  But with besotted base ingratitude
  Cramms, and blasphemes his feeder. Shall I go on? Or have I said anough? To him that dares                            780
  Arm his profane tongue with contemptuous words
  Against the Sun-clad power of Chastity,
  Fain would I somthing say, yet to what end? Thou hast nor Eare, nor Soul to apprehend
  The sublime notion, and high mystery
  That must be utter'd to unfold the sage
  And serious doctrine of Virginity,
  And thou art worthy that thou shouldst not know
  More happiness then this thy present lot. Enjoy your deer Wit, and gay Rhetorick                              790
  That hath so well been taught her dazling fence,
  Thou art not fit to hear thy self convinc't;
  Yet should I try, the uncontrouled worth
  Of this pure cause would kindle my rap't spirits
  To such a flame of sacred vehemence
  That dumb things would be mov'd to sympathize,
  And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake,
  Till all thy magick structures rear'd so high,
  Were shatter'd into heaps o're thy false head. Co:  She fables not, I feel that I do fear                          800
  Her words set off by som superior power;
  And though not mortal, yet a cold shuddring dew
  Dips me all o're, as when the wrath of Jove
  Speaks thunder, and the chains of Erebus
  To som of Saturns crew. I must dissemble,
  And try her yet more strongly. Com, no more,
  This is meer moral babble, and direct
  Against the canon laws of our foundation;
  I must not suffer this, yet 'tis but the lees
  And setlings of a melancholy blood;                                 810
  But this will cure all streight, one sip of this
  Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight
  Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste.--

  The brothers rush in with Swords drawn, wrest his Glass out of
  his hand, and break it against the ground; his rout make signe of
  resistance, but are all driven in; The attendant Spirit comes in. Spir: What, have you let the false enchanter scape? O ye mistook, ye should have snatcht his wand
  And bound him fast; without his rod revers't,
  And backward mutters of dissevering power,
  We cannot free the Lady that sits here
  In stony fetters fixt, and motionless;
  Yet stay, be not disturb'd, now I bethink me                        820
  Som other means I have which may he us'd
  Which once of Meliboeus old I learnt
  The soothest Shepherd that ere pip't on plains. There is a gentle Nymph not farr from hence,
  That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream,
  Sabrina is her name, a Virgin pure,
  Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine,
  That had the Scepter from his father Brute. The guiltless damsel flying the mad pursuit
  Of her enraged stepdam Guendolen,                                   830
  Commended her fair innocence to the flood
  That stay'd her flight with his cross-flowing course,
  The water Nymphs that in the bottom plaid,
  Held up their pearled wrists and took her in,
  Bearing her straight to aged Nereus Hall,
  Who piteous of her woes, rear'd her lank head,
  And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
  In nectar'd lavers strew'd with Asphodil,
  And through the porch and inlet of each sense
  Dropt in Ambrosial Oils till she reviv'd,                           840
  And underwent a quick immortal change
  Made Goddess of the River; still she retains
  Her maid'n gentlenes, and oft at Eeve
  Visits the herds along the twilight meadows,
  Helping all urchin blasts, and ill luck signes
  That the shrewd medling Elfe delights to make,
  Which she with pretious viold liquors heals. For which the Shepherds at their festivals
  Carrol her goodnes lowd in rustick layes,
  And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream                     850
  Of pancies, pinks, and gaudy Daffadils. And, as the old Swain said, she can unlock
  The clasping charms, and thaw the numming spell,
  If she be right invok't in warbled Song,
  For maid'nhood she loves, and will be swift
  To aid a Virgin, such as was her self
  In hard besetting need, this will I try
  And adde the power of som adjuring verse. SONG. Sabrina fair
  Listen when thou art sitting                                        860
  Under the glassie, cool, translucent wave,
  In twisted braids of Lillies knitting
  The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair,
  Listen for dear honour's sake,
  Goddess of the silver lake,
  Listen and save. Listen and appear to us
  In name of great Oceanus,
  By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace,
  And Tethys grave majestick pace,                                    870
  By hoary Nereus wrincled look,
  And the Carpathian wisards hook,
  By scaly Tritons winding shell,
  And old sooth-saying Glaucus spell,
  By Leucothea's lovely hands,
  And her son that rules the strands,
  By Thetis tinsel-slipper'd feet,
  And the Songs of Sirens sweet,
  By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
  And fair Ligea's golden comb,                                       880
  Wherwith she sits on diamond rocks
  Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
  By all the Nymphs that nightly dance
  Upon thy streams with wily glance,
  Rise, rise, and heave thy rosie head
  From thy coral-pav'n bed,
  And bridle in thy headlong wave,
  Till thou our summons answered have. Listen and save. Sabrina rises, attended by water-Nymphes, and sings. Sab: By the rushy-fringed bank,                                     890
  Where grows the Willow and the Osier dank,
  My sliding Chariot stayes,
  Thick set with Agat, and the azurn sheen
  Of Turkis blew, and Emrauld green
  That in the channell strayes,
  Whilst from off the waters fleet
  Thus I set my printless feet
  O're the Cowslips Velvet head,
  That bends not as I tread,
  Gentle swain at thy request                                         900
  I am here. Spir: Goddess dear
  We implore thy powerful hand
  To undo the charmed band
  Of true Virgin here distrest,
  Through the force, and through the wile
  Of unblest inchanter vile. Sab: Shepherd 'tis my office best
  To help insnared chastity;
  Brightest Lady look on me,                                          910
  Thus I sprinkle on thy brest
  Drops that from my fountain pure,
  I have kept of pretious cure,
  Thrice upon thy fingers tip,
  Thrice upon thy rubied lip,
  Next this marble venom'd seat
  Smear'd with gumms of glutenous heat
  I touch with chaste palms moist and cold,
  Now the spell hath lost his hold;
  And I must haste ere morning hour                                   920
  To wait in Amphitrite's bowr. Sabrina descends, and the Lady rises out of her seat. Spir: Virgin, daughter of Locrine
  Sprung of old Anchises line,
  May thy brimmed waves for this
  Their full tribute never miss
  From a thousand petty rills,
  That tumble down the snowy hills:
  Summer drouth, or singed air
  Never scorch thy tresses fair,
  Nor wet Octobers torrent flood                                      930
  Thy molten crystal fill with mudd,
  May thy billows rowl ashoar
  The beryl, and the golden ore,
  May thy lofty head be crown'd
  With many a tower and terrass round,
  And here and there thy banks upon
  With Groves of myrrhe, and cinnamon. Com Lady while Heaven lends us grace,
  Let us fly this cursed place,
  Lest the Sorcerer us intice                                         940
  With som other new device. Not a waste, or needless sound
  Till we com to holier ground,
  I shall be your faithfull guide
  Through this gloomy covert wide,
  And not many furlongs thence
  Is your Fathers residence,
  Where this night are met in state
  Many a friend to gratulate
  His wish't presence, and beside                                     950
  All the Swains that there abide,
  With Jiggs, and rural dance resort,
  We shall catch them at their sport,
  And our sudden coming there
  Will double all their mirth and chere;
  Com let us haste, the Stars grow high,
  But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky. The Scene changes, presenting Ludlow Town and the President
  Castle, then com in Countrey-Dancers, after them the attendant
  Spirit, with the two Brothers and the Lady. SONG. Spir: Back Shepherds, back, anough your play,
  Till next Sun-shine holiday,
  Here be without duck or nod                                         960
  Other trippings to be trod
  Of lighter toes, and such Court guise
  As Mercury did first devise
  With the mincing Dryades
  On the Lawns, and on the Leas. This second Song presents them to their father and mother. Noble Lord, and Lady bright,
  I have brought ye new delight,
  Here behold so goodly grown
  Three fair branches of your own,
  Heav'n hath timely tri'd their youth. 970
  Their faith, their patience, and their truth
  And sent them here through hard assays
  With a crown of deathless Praise,
  To triumph in victorious dance
  O're sensual folly, and Intemperance. The dances ended, the Spirit Epiloguizes. Spir: To the Ocean now I fly,
  And those happy climes that ly
  Where day never shuts his eye,
  Up in the broad fields of the sky:
  There I suck the liquid ayr                                         980
  All amidst the Gardens fair
  Of Hesperus, and his daughters three
  That sing about the golden tree:
  Along the crisped shades and bowres
  Revels the spruce and jocond Spring,
  The Graces, and the rosie-boosom'd Howres,
  Thither all their bounties bring,
  That there eternal Summer dwels,
  And West winds, with musky wing
  About the cedar'n alleys fling                                      990
  Nard, and Cassia's balmy smels. Iris there with humid bow,
  Waters the odorous banks that blow
  Flowers of more mingled hew
  Then her purfl'd scarf can shew,
  And drenches with Elysian dew
  (List mortals, if your ears be true)
  Beds of Hyacinth, and roses
  Where young Adonis oft reposes,
  Waxing well of his deep wound                                      1000
  In slumber soft, and on the ground
  Sadly sits th' Assyrian Queen;
  But far above in spangled sheen
  Celestial Cupid her fam'd son advanc't,
  Holds his dear Psyche sweet intranc't
  After her wandring labours long,
  Till free consent the gods among
  Make her his eternal Bride,
  And from her fair unspotted side
  Two blissful twins are to be born,
  Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn. 1010
  But now my task is smoothly don,
  I can fly, or I can run
  Quickly to the green earths end,
  Where the bow'd welkin slow doth bend,
  And from thence can soar as soon
  To the corners of the Moon. Mortals that would follow me,
  Love vertue, she alone is free,
  She can teach ye how to clime                                      1020
  Higher then the Spheary chime;
  Or if Vertue feeble were,
  Heav'n it self would stoop to her. Notes:
  43 ye] you  1673
  167 omitted 1673
  168, 9 Thus 1637. Manuscript reads--
  but heere she comes I fairly step aside
  & hearken, if I may, her buisnesse heere. 1673 reads--
  And hearken, if I may her business hear. But here she comes, I fairly step aside. 474 sensualty] sensuality 1673. Manuscript also reads sensualtie,
  as the metre requires. 493 father] So also 1673. Manuscript reads father's
  547 meditate] meditate upon 1673
  553 drowsie frighted] Manuscript reads drowsie flighted. 556 steam] stream 1673
  580 furder] further 1673
  743 In the manuscript, which reads--
  If you let slip time like an neglected rose
  a circle has been drawn round the an, but probably not by Milton. 780 anough] anow 1673




POEMS ADDED IN THE 1673 EDITION. ANNO AETATIS 17. ON THE DEATH OF A FAIR INFANT DYING OF A COUGH. I

  O FAIREST flower no sooner blown but blasted,
  Soft silken Primrose fading timelesslie,
  Summers chief honour if thou hadst outlasted
  Bleak winters force that made thy blossome drie;
  For he being amorous on that lovely die
  That did thy cheek envermeil, thought to kiss
  But kill'd alas, and then bewayl'd his fatal bliss. II

  For since grim Aquilo his charioter
  By boistrous rape th' Athenian damsel got,
  He thought it toucht his Deitie full neer,                           10
  If likewise he some fair one wedded not,
  Thereby to wipe away th' infamous blot,
  Of long-uncoupled bed, and childless eld,
  Which 'mongst the wanton gods a foul reproach was held. III

  So mounting up in ycie-pearled carr,
  Through middle empire of the freezing aire
  He wanderd long, till thee he spy'd from farr,
  There ended was his quest, there ceast his care
  Down he descended from his Snow-soft chaire,
  But all unwares with his cold-kind embrace                           20
  Unhous'd thy Virgin Soul from her fair hiding place. IV

  Yet art thou not inglorious in thy fate;
  For so Apollo, with unweeting hand
  Whilome did slay his dearly-loved mate
  Young Hyacinth born on Eurotas' strand,
  Young Hyacinth the pride of Spartan land;
  But then transform'd him to a purple flower
  Alack that so to change thee winter had no power. V

  Yet can I not perswade me thou art dead
  Or that thy coarse corrupts in earths dark wombe,                    30
  Or that thy beauties lie in wormie bed,
  Hid from the world in a low delved tombe;
  Could Heav'n for pittie thee so strictly doom? O no! for something in thy face did shine
  Above mortalitie that shew'd thou wast divine. VI

  Resolve me then oh Soul most surely blest
  (If so it be that thou these plaints dost hear)
  Tell me bright Spirit where e're thou hoverest
  Whether above that high first-moving Spheare
  Or in the Elisian fields (if such there were.) 40
  Oh say me true if thou wert mortal wight
  And why from us so quickly thou didst take thy flight. VII

  Wert thou some Starr which from the ruin'd roofe
  Of shak't Olympus by mischance didst fall;
  Which carefull Jove in natures true behoofe
  Took up, and in fit place did reinstall? Or did of late earths Sonnes besiege the wall
  Of sheenie Heav'n, and thou some goddess fled
  Amongst us here below to hide thy nectar'd head

  VIII

  Or wert thou that just Maid who once before                          50
  Forsook the hated earth, O tell me sooth
  And cam'st again to visit us once more? Or wert thou that sweet smiling Youth! Or that c[r]own'd Matron sage white-robed Truth? Or any other of that heav'nly brood
  Let down in clowdie throne to do the world some good. Note: 53 Or wert thou] Or wert thou Mercy--conjectured by
  John Heskin Ch. Ch. Oxon. from Ode on Nativity, st. 15. IX

  Or wert thou of the golden-winged boast,
  Who having clad thy self in humane weed,
  To earth from thy praefixed seat didst poast,
  And after short abode flie back with speed,                          60
  As if to shew what creatures Heav'n doth breed,
  Thereby to set the hearts of men on fire
  To scorn the sordid world, and unto Heav'n aspire. X

  But oh why didst thou not stay here below
  To bless us with thy heav'n-lov'd innocence,
  To slake his wrath whom sin hath made our foe
  To turn Swift-rushing black perdition hence,
  Or drive away the slaughtering  pestilence,
  To stand 'twixt us and our deserved smart
  But thou canst best perform that office where thou art. 70

  XI

  Then thou the mother of so sweet a child
  Her false imagin'd loss cease to lament,
  And wisely learn to curb thy sorrows wild;
  Think what a present thou to God hast sent,
  And render him with patience what he lent;
  This if thou do he will an off-spring give,
  That till the worlds last-end shall make thy name to live. Anno Aetatis 19. At a Vacation Exercise in the Colledge, part
  Latin, part English. The Latin  speeches ended, the English thus
  began. HAIL native Language, that by sinews weak
  Didst move my first endeavouring tongue to speak,
  And mad'st imperfect words with childish tripps,
  Half unpronounc't, slide through my infant-lipps,
  Driving dum silence from the portal dore,
  Where he had mutely sate two years before:
  Here I salute thee and thy pardon ask,
  That now I use thee in my latter task:
  Small loss it is that thence can come unto thee,
  I know my tongue but little Grace can do thee:                       10
  Thou needst not be ambitious to be first,
  Believe me I have thither packt the worst:
  And, if it happen as I did forecast,
  The daintest dishes shall be serv'd up last. I pray thee then deny me not thy aide
  For this same small neglect that I have made:
  But haste thee strait to do me once a Pleasure,
  And from thy wardrope bring thy chiefest treasure;
  Not those new fangled toys, and triming slight
  Which takes our late fantasticks with delight,                       20
  But cull those richest Robes, and gay'st attire
  Which deepest Spirits, and choicest Wits desire:
  I have some naked thoughts that rove about
  And loudly knock to have their passage out;
  And wearie of their place do only stay
  Till thou hast deck't them in thy best aray;
  That so they may without suspect or fears
  Fly swiftly to this fair Assembly's ears;
  Yet I had rather if I were to chuse,
  Thy service in some graver subject use,                              30
  Such as may make thee search thy coffers round
  Before thou cloath my fancy in fit sound:
  Such where the deep transported mind may scare
  Above the wheeling poles, and at Heav'ns dore
  Look in, and see each blissful Deitie
  How he before the thunderous throne doth lie,
  Listening to what unshorn Apollo sings
  To th'touch of golden wires, while Hebe brings
  Immortal Nectar to her Kingly Sire:
  Then passing through the Spherse of watchful fire,                   40
  And mistie Regions of wide air next under,
  And hills of Snow and lofts of piled Thunder,
  May tell at length how green-ey'd Neptune raves,
  In Heav'ns defiance mustering all his waves;
  Then sing of secret things that came to pass
  When Beldam Nature in her cradle was;
  And last of Kings and Queens and Hero's old,
  Such as the wise Demodocus once told
  In solemn Songs at King Alcinous feast,
  While sad Ulisses soul and all the rest                              50
  Are held with his melodious harmonie
  In willing chains and sweet captivitie. But fie my wandring Muse how thou dost stray! Expectance calls thee now another way,
  Thou know'st it must be now thy only bent
  To keep in compass of thy Predicament:
  Then quick about thy purpos'd business come,
  That to the next I may resign my Roome

  Then Ens is represented as Father of the Predicaments his ten
  Sons, whereof the Eldest stood for Substance with his Canons,
  which Ens thus speaking, explains. Good luck befriend thee Son; for at thy birth
  The Faiery Ladies daunc't upon the hearth;                           60
  Thy drowsie Nurse hath sworn she did them spie
  Come tripping to the Room where thou didst lie;
  And sweetly singing round about thy Bed
  Strew all their blessings on thy sleeping Head. She heard them give thee this, that thou should'st still
  From eyes of mortals walk invisible,
  Yet there is something that doth force my fear,
  For once it was my dismal hap to hear
  A Sybil old, bow-bent with crooked age,
  That far events full wisely could presage,
  And in Times long and dark Prospective Glass
  Fore-saw what future dayes should bring to pass,
  Your Son, said she, (nor can you it prevent)
  Shall subject be to many an Accident. O're all his Brethren he shall Reign as King,
  Yet every one shall make him underling,
  And those that cannot live from him asunder
  Ungratefully shall strive to keep him under,
  In worth and excellence he shall out-go them,
  Yet being above them, he shall be below them;                        80
  From others he shall stand in need of nothing,
  Yet on his Brothers shall depend for Cloathing. To find a Foe it shall not be his hap,
  And peace shall lull him in her flowry lap;
  Yet shall he live in strife, and at his dore
  Devouring war shall never cease to roare;
  Yea it shall be his natural property
  To harbour those that are at enmity. What power, what force, what mighty spell, if not
  Your learned hands, can loose this Gordian knot? 90

  The next Quantity and Quality, spake in Prose, then Relation
  was call'd by his Name. Rivers arise; whether thou be the Son,
  Of utmost Tweed, or Oose, or gulphie Dun,
  Or Trent, who like some earth-born Giant spreads
  His thirty Armes along the indented Meads,
  Or sullen Mole that runneth underneath,
  Or Severn swift, guilty of Maidens death,
  Or Rockie Avon, or of Sedgie Lee,
  Or Coaly Tine, or antient hallowed Dee,
  Or Humber loud that keeps the Scythians Name,
  Or Medway smooth, or Royal Towred Thame. 100

  The rest was Prose. THE FIFTH ODE OF HORACE. LIB. I.

  Quis multa gracilis te puer in Rosa
  Rendred almost word for word without Rhyme according to the
  Latin Measure, as near as the Language permit. WHAT slender Youth bedew'd with liquid odours
  Courts thee on Roses in some pleasant Cave,
  Pyrrha for whom bind'st thou
  In wreaths thy golden Hair,
  Plain in thy neatness; O how oft shall he
  On Faith and changed Gods complain: and Seas
  Rough with black winds and storms
  Unwonted shall admire:
  Who now enjoyes thee credulous, all Gold,
  Who alwayes vacant, alwayes amiable                                  10
  Hopes thee; of flattering gales
  Unmindfull. Hapless they
  To whom thou untry'd seem'st fair. Me in my vow'd
  Picture the sacred wall declares t' have hung
  My dank and dropping weeds
  To the stern God of Sea. [The Latin text follows.] SONNETS. XI

  A Book was writ of late call'd Tetrachordon;
  And wov'n close, both matter, form and stile;
  The Subject new: it walk'd the Town a while,
  Numbring good intellects; now seldom por'd on. Cries the stall-reader, bless us! what a word on
  A title page is this! and some in file
  Stand spelling fals, while one might walk to Mile-
  End Green. Why is it harder Sirs then Gordon,
  Colkitto, or Macdonnel, or Galasp? Those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek                     10
  That would have made Quintilian stare and gasp. Thy age, like ours, O Soul of Sir John Cheek,
  Hated not Learning wors then Toad or Asp;
  When thou taught'st Cambridge, and King Edward Greek. Note: Camb. Autograph supplies title, On the Detraction which
  followed my writing certain Treatises. XII. On the same. I did but prompt the age to quit their cloggs
  By the known rules of antient libertie,
  When strait a barbarous noise environs me
  Of Owles and Cuckoes, Asses, Apes and Doggs. As when those Hinds that were transform'd to Froggs
  Raild at Latona's twin-born progenie
  Which after held the Sun and Moon in fee. But this is got by casting Pearl to Hoggs;
  That bawle for freedom in their senceless mood,
  And still revolt when truth would set them free. 10
  Licence they mean when they cry libertie;
  For who loves that, must first be wise and good;
  But from that mark how far they roave we see
  For all this wast of wealth, and loss of blood. XIII

  To Mr. H. Lawes, on his Aires. Harry whose tuneful and well measur'd Song
  First taught our English Musick how to span
  Words with just note and accent, not to scan
  With Midas Ears, committing short and long;
  Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,
  With praise enough for Envy to look wan;
  To after age thou shalt be writ the man,
  That with smooth aire couldst humor best our tongue
  Thou honour'st Verse, and Verse must send her wing
  To honour thee, the Priest of Phoebus Quire                          10
  That tun'st their happiest lines in Hymn or Story
  Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher
  Then his Casella, whom he woo'd to sing
  Met in the milder shades of Purgatory. Note: 9 send] lend  Cambridge Autograph MS.


  XIV

  When Faith and Love which parted from thee never,
  Had ripen'd thy just soul to dwell with God,
  Meekly thou didst resign this earthy load
  Of Death, call'd Life; which us from Life doth sever
  Thy Works and Alms and all thy good Endeavour
  Staid not behind, nor in the grave were trod;
  But as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
  Follow'd thee up to joy and bliss for ever. Love led them on, and Faith who knew them best
  Thy hand-maids, clad them o're with purple beams                     10
  And azure wings, that up they flew so drest,
  And speak the truth of thee on glorious Theams
  Before the Judge, who thenceforth bid thee rest
  And drink thy fill of pure immortal streams. Note: Camb. Autograph supplies title, On the Religious
  Memory of Catherine Thomson, my Christian Friend, deceased
  16 Decemb., 1646. XV

  ON THE LATE MASSACHER IN PIEMONT. Avenge O lord thy slaughter'd Saints, whose bones
  Lie scatter'd on the Alpine mountains cold,
  Ev'n them who kept thy truth so pure of old
  When all our Fathers worship't Stocks and Stones,
  Forget not: in thy book record their groanes
  Who were thy Sheep and in their antient Fold
  Slayn by the bloody Piemontese that roll'd
  Mother with Infant down the Rocks. Their moans
  The Vales redoubl'd to the Hills, and they
  To Heav'n. Their martyr'd blood and ashes sow                       10
  O're all th'Italian fields where still doth sway
  The triple Tyrant: that from these may grow
  A hunder'd-fold, who having learnt thy way
  Early may fly the Babylonian wo. XVI


  When I consider how my light is spent,
  E're half my days, in this dark world and wide,
  And that one Talent which is death to hide,
  Lodg'd with me useless, though my Soul more bent
  To serve therewith my Maker, and present
  My true account, least he returning chide,
  Doth God exact day-labour, light deny'd,
  I fondly ask; But patience to prevent
  That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need
  Either man's work or his own gifts, who best                         10
  Bear his milde yoak, they serve him best, his State
  Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed
  And post o're Land and Ocean without rest:
  They also serve who only stand and waite. XVII


  Lawrence of vertuous Father vertuous Son,
  Now that the Fields are dank, and ways are mire,
  Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
  Help wast a sullen day; what may be Won
  From the hard Season gaining: time will run
  On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
  The frozen earth; and cloth in fresh attire
  The Lillie and Rose, that neither sow'd nor spun. What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
  Of Attick tast, with Wine, whence we may rise                        10
  To hear the Lute well toucht, or artfull voice
  Warble immortal Notes and Tuskan Ayre? He who of those delights can judge, and spare
  To interpose them oft, is not unwise. XVIII


  Cyriack, whose Grandsire on the Royal Bench
  Of Brittish Themis, with no mean applause
  Pronounc't and in his volumes taught our Lawes,
  Which others at their Barr so often wrench:
  To day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
  In mirth, that after no repenting drawes;
  Let Euclid rest and Archimedes pause,
  And what the Swede intend, and what the French. To measure life, learn thou betimes, and know
  Toward solid good what leads the nearest way;                        10
  For other things mild Heav'n a time ordains,
  And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
  That with superfluous burden loads the day,
  And when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains. XIX


  Methought I saw my late espoused Saint
  Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
  Whom Joves great Son to her glad Husband gave,
  Rescu'd from death by force though pale and faint. Mine as whom washt from spot of child-bed taint,
  Purification in the old Law did save,
  And such, as yet once more I trust to have
  Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint,
  Came vested all in white, pure as her mind:
  Her face was vail'd, yet to my fancied sight,                        10
  Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd
  So clear, as in no face with more delight. But O as to embrace me she enclin'd
  I wak'd, she fled, and day brought back my night. ON THE NEW FORCERS OF CONSCIENCE UNDER THE LONG PARLIAMENT. Because you have thrown of your Prelate Lord,
  And with stiff Vowes renounc'd his Liturgie
  To seise the widdow'd whore Pluralitie
  From them whose sin ye envi'd, not abhor'd,
  Dare ye for this adjure the Civill Sword
  To force our Consciences that Christ set free,
  And ride us with a classic Hierarchy
  Taught ye by meer A. S. and Rotherford? Men whose Life, Learning, Faith and pure intent
  Would have been held in high esteem with Paul                        10
  Must now he nam'd and printed Hereticks
  By shallow Edwards and Scotch what d'ye call:
  But we do hope to find out all your tricks,
  Your plots and packing wors then those of Trent,
  That so the Parliament
  May with their wholsom and preventive Shears
  Clip your Phylacteries, though bauk your Ears,
  And succour our just Fears
  When they shall read this clearly in your charge
  New Presbyter is but Old Priest Writ Large. 20


  The four following sonnets were not published until 1694, and
  then in a mangled form by Phillips, in his Life of Milton; they
  are here printed from the Cambridge MS., where that to Fairfax
  is in Milton's autograph. ON THE LORD GEN. FAIRFAX AT THE SEIGE OF COLCHESTER. Fairfax, whose name in armes through Europe rings
  Filling each mouth with envy, or with praise,
  And all her jealous monarchs with amaze,
  And rumors loud, that daunt remotest kings,
  Thy firm unshak'n vertue ever brings
  Victory home, though new rebellions raise
  Their Hydra heads, & the fals North displaies
  Her brok'n league, to impe their serpent wings,
  O yet a nobler task awaites thy hand;
  Yet what can Warr, but endless warr still breed,                     10
  Till Truth, & Right from Violence be freed,
  And Public Faith cleard from the shamefull brand
  Of Public Fraud. In vain doth Valour bleed
  While Avarice, & Rapine share the land. TO THE LORD GENERALL CROMWELL MAY 1652. ON THE PROPOSALLS OF CERTAINE MINISTERS AT THE COMMITTEE FOR
  PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPELL. Cromwell, our cheif of men, who through a cloud
  Not of warr onely, but detractions rude,
  Guided by faith & matchless Fortitude
  To peace & truth thy glorious way hast plough'd,
  And on the neck of crowned Fortune proud
  Hast reard Gods Trophies, & his work pursu'd,
  While Darwen stream with blood of Scotts imbru'd,
  And Dunbarr field resounds thy praises loud,
  And Worsters laureat wreath; yet much remaines
  To conquer still; peace hath her victories                           10
  No less renownd then warr, new foes aries
  Threatning to bind our soules with secular chaines:
  Helpe us to save free Conscience from the paw
  Of hireling wolves whose Gospell is their maw. TO SR HENRY VANE THE YOUNGER. Vane, young in yeares, but in sage counsell old,
  Then whome a better Senatour nere held
  The helme of Rome, when gownes not armes repelld
  The feirce Epeirot & the African bold,
  Whether to settle peace, or to unfold
  The drift of hollow states, hard to be spelld,
  Then to advise how warr may best, upheld,
  Move by her two maine nerves, Iron & Gold
  In all her equipage: besides to know
  Both spirituall powre & civill, what each meanes                     10
  What severs each thou hast learnt, which few have don
  The bounds of either sword to thee wee ow. Therfore on thy firme hand religion leanes
  In peace, & reck'ns thee her eldest son. TO MR. CYRIACK SKINNER UPON HIS BLINDNESS. Cyriack, this three years day these eys, though clear
  To outward view, of blemish or of spot;
  Bereft of light thir seeing have forgot,
  Nor to thir idle orbs doth sight appear
  Of Sun or Moon or Starre throughout the year,
  Or man or woman. Yet I argue not
  Against heavns hand or will, nor bate a jot
  Of heart or hope; but still bear up and steer
  Right onward. What supports me, dost thou ask? The conscience, Friend, to have lost them overply'd                  10
  In libertyes defence, my noble task,
  Of which all Europe talks from side to side. This thought might lead me through the world's vain mask
  Content though blind, had I no better guide. PSAL. I. Done into Verse,  1653. BLESS'D is the man who hath not walk'd astray
  In counsel of the wicked, and ith'way
  Of sinners hath not stood, and in the seat
  Of scorners hath not sate. But in the great
  Jehovahs Law is ever his delight,
  And in his law he studies day and night. He shall be as a tree which planted grows
  By watry streams, and in his season knows
  To yield his fruit, and his leaf shall not fall. And what he takes in hand shall prosper all. 10
  Not so the wicked, but as chaff which fann'd
  The wind drives, so the wicked shall not stand
  In judgment, or abide their tryal then
  Nor sinners in th'assembly of just men. For the Lord knows th'upright way of the just
  And the way of bad men to ruine must. PSAL. II   Done Aug. 8. 1653. Terzetti. WHY do the Gentiles tumult, and the Nations
  Muse a vain thing, the Kings of th'earth upstand
  With power, and Princes in their Congregations
  Lay deep their plots together through each Land,
  Against the Lord and his Messiah dear. Let us break off; say they, by strength of hand
  Their bonds, and cast from us, no more to wear,
  Their twisted cords: he who in Heaven doth dwell
  Shall laugh, the Lord shall scoff them, then severe
  Speak to them in his wrath, and in his fell                          10
  And fierce ire trouble them; but I saith hee
  Anointed have my King (though ye rebell)
  On Sion my holi' hill. A firm decree
  I will declare; the Lord to me hath say'd
  Thou art my Son I have begotten thee
  This day, ask of me, and the grant is made;
  As thy possession I on thee bestow
  Th'Heathen, and as thy conquest to be sway'd
  Earths utmost bounds: them shalt thou bring full low
  With Iron Sceptir bruis'd, and them disperse                         20
  Like to a potters vessel shiver'd so. And now be wise at length ye Kings averse
  Be taught ye Judges of the earth; with fear
  Jehovah serve and let your joy converse
  With trembling;  Kiss the Son least he appear
  In anger and ye perish in the way
  If once his wrath take fire like fuel sere. Happy all those who have in him their stay. PSAL. III. Aug. 9. 1653

  WHEN HE FLED FROM ABSALOM. LORD how many are my foes
  How many those
  That in arms against me rise
  Many are they
  That of my life distrustfully thus say,
  No help for him in God there lies. But thou Lord art my shield my glory,
  Thee through my story
  Th' exalter of my head I count
  Aloud I cry'd                                                        10
  Unto Jehovah, he full soon reply'd
  And heard me from his holy mount. I lay and slept, I wak'd again,
  For my sustain
  Was the Lord. Of many millions
  The populous rout
  I fear not though incamping round about
  They pitch against me their Pavillions. Rise Lord, save me my God for thou
  Hast smote ere now                                                   20
  On the cheek-bone all my foes,
  Of men abhor'd
  Hast broke the teeth. This help was from the Lord;
  Thy blessing on thy people flows. PSAL. IV. Aug. 10.1653. ANSWER me when I call
  God of my righteousness;
  In straights and in distress
  Thou didst me disinthrall
  And set at large; now spare,
  Now pity me, and hear my earnest prai'r. Great ones how long will ye
  My glory have in scorn
  How long be thus forlorn
  Still to love vanity,                                                10
  To love, to seek, to prize
  Things false and vain and nothing else but lies? Yet know the Lord hath chose
  Chose to himself a part
  The good and meek of heart
  (For whom to chuse he knows)
  Jehovah from on high
  Will hear my voyce what time to him I crie. Be aw'd, and do not sin,
  Speak to your hearts alone,                                          20
  Upon your beds, each one,
  And be at peace within. Offer the offerings just
  Of righteousness and in Jehovah trust. Many there be that say
  Who yet will shew us good? Talking like this worlds brood;
  But Lord, thus let me pray,
  On us lift up the light
  Lift up the favour of thy count'nance bright. 30

  Into my heart more joy
  And gladness thou hast put
  Then when a year of glut
  Their stores doth over-cloy
  And from their plenteous grounds
  With vast increase their corn and wine abounds. In peace at once will I
  Both lay me down and sleep
  For thou alone dost keep
  Me safe where ere I lie                                              40
  As in a rocky Cell
  Thou Lord alone in safety mak'st me dwell. PSAL. V. Aug. 12.1653. JEHOVAH to my words give ear
  My meditation waigh
  The voyce of my complaining hear
  My King and God for unto thee I pray. Jehovah thou my early voyce
  Shalt in the morning hear
  Ith'morning I to thee with choyce
  Will rank my Prayers, and watch till thou appear. For thou art not a God that takes
  In wickedness delight                                                10
  Evil with thee no biding makes
  Fools or mad men stand not within thy sight. All workers of iniquity
  Thou wilt destroy that speak a ly
  The bloodi' and guileful man God doth detest. But I will in thy mercies dear
  Thy numerous mercies go
  Into thy house; I in thy fear
  Will towards thy holy temple worship low. 20
  Lord lead me in thy righteousness
  Lead me because of those
  That do observe if I transgress,
  Set thy wayes right before, where my step goes. For in his faltring mouth unstable
  No word is firm or sooth
  Their inside, troubles miserable;
  An open grave their throat, their tongue they smooth. God, find them guilty, let them fall
  By their own counsels quell'd;                                       30
  Push them in their rebellions all
  Still on; for against thee they have rebell'd;
  Then all who trust in thee shall bring
  Their joy, while thou from blame
  Defend'st them, they shall ever sing
  And shall triumph in thee, who love thy name. For thou Jehovah wilt be found
  To bless the just man still,
  As with a shield thou wilt surround
  Him with thy lasting favour and good will. 40




PSAL. VI  Aug. 13. 1653. LORD in thine anger do not reprehend me
  Nor in thy hot displeasure me correct;
  Pity me Lord for I am much deject
  Am very weak and faint; heal and amend me,
  For all my bones, that even with anguish ake,
  Are troubled, yea my soul is troubled sore
  And thou O Lord how long? turn Lord, restore
  My soul, O save me for thy goodness sake
  For in death no remembrance is of thee;
  Who in the grave can celebrate thy praise? 10
  Wearied I am with sighing out my dayes. Nightly my Couch I make a kind of Sea;
  My Bed I water with my tears; mine Eie
  Through grief consumes, is waxen old and dark
  Ith' mid'st of all mine enemies that mark. Depart all ye that work iniquitie. Depart from me, for the voice of my weeping
  The Lord hath heard, the Lord hath heard my prai'r
  My supplication with acceptance fair
  The Lord will own, and have me in his keeping. 20
  Mine enemies shall all be blank and dash't
  With much confusion; then grow red with shame,
  They shall return in hast the way they came
  And in a moment shall be quite abash't. PSAL. VII. Aug.  14. 1653. UPON THE WORDS OF CHUSH THE BENJAMITE AGAINST HIM. Lord my God to thee I flie
  Save me and secure me under
  Thy protection while I crie
  Least as a Lion (and no wonder)
  He hast to tear my Soul asunder
  Tearing and no rescue nigh. Lord my God if I have thought
  Or done this, if wickedness
  Be in my hands, if I have wrought
  Ill to him that meant me peace,                                      10
  Or to him have render'd less,
  And fre'd my foe for naught;

  Let th'enemy pursue my soul
  And overtake it, let him tread
  My life down to the earth and roul
  In the dust my glory dead,
  In the dust and there out spread
  Lodge it with dishonour foul. Rise Jehovah in thine ire
  Rouze thy self amidst the rage                                       20
  Of my foes that urge like fire;
  And wake for me, their furi' asswage;
  Judgment here thou didst ingage
  And command which I desire. So th' assemblies of each Nation
  Will surround thee, seeking right,
  Thence to thy glorious habitation
  Return on high and in their sight. Jehovah judgeth most upright
  All people from the worlds foundation. 30

  Judge me Lord, be judge in this
  According to my righteousness
  And the innocence which is
  Upon me: cause at length to cease
  Of evil men the wickedness
  And their power that do amiss. But the just establish fast,
  Since thou art the just God that tries
  Hearts and reins. On God is cast
  My defence, and in him lies                                          40
  In him who both just and wise
  Saves th' upright of Heart at last. God is a just Judge and severe,
  And God is every day offended;
  If th' unjust will not forbear,
  His Sword he whets, his Bow hath bended
  Already, and for him intended
  The tools of death, that waits him near. (His arrows purposely made he
  For them that persecute.) Behold                                    50
  He travels big with vanitie,
  Trouble he hath conceav'd of old
  As in a womb, and from that mould
  Hath at length brought forth a Lie. He dig'd a pit, and delv'd it deep,
  And fell into the pit he made,
  His mischief that due course doth keep,
  Turns on his head, and his ill trade
  Of violence will undelay'd
  Fall on his crown with ruine steep. 60

  Then will I Jehovah's praise
  According to his justice raise
  And sing the Name and Deitie
  Of Jehovah the most high. PSAL. VIII. Aug. 14. 1653. O JEHOVAH our Lord how wondrous great
  And glorious is thy name through all the earth? So as above the Heavens thy praise to set
  Out of the tender mouths of latest bearth,

  Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
  Hast founded strength because of all thy foes
  To stint th'enemy, and slack th'avengers brow
  That bends his rage thy providence to oppose. When I behold thy Heavens, thy Fingers art,
  The Moon and Starrs which thou so bright hast set,                   10
  In the pure firmament, then saith my heart,
  O What is man that thou remembrest yet,

  And think'st upon him; or of man begot
  That him thou visit'st and of him art found;
  Scarce to be less then Gods, thou mad'st his lot,
  With honour and with state thou hast him crown'd. O're the works of thy hand thou mad'st him Lord,
  Thou hast put all under his lordly feet,
  All Flocks, and Herds, by thy commanding word,
  All beasts that in the field or forrest meet. 20

  Fowl of the Heavens, and Fish that through the wet
  Sea-paths in shoals do slide. And know no dearth. O Jehovah our Lord how wondrous great
  And glorious is thy name through all the earth. APRIL, 1648. J. M. NINE OF THE PSALMS DONE INTO METRE,

Wherein all but what is in a different Character, are the very words of
the Text, translated from the Original. PSAL. LXXX. 1   THOU Shepherd that dost Israel keep
      Give ear in time of need,
      Who leadest like a flock of sheep
      Thy loved Josephs seed,
      That sitt'st between the Cherubs bright
      Between their wings out-spread
      Shine forth, and from thy cloud give light,
      And on our foes thy dread. 2   In Ephraims view and Benjamins,
      And in Manasse's sight                                           10
      Awake* thy strength, come, and be seen                    *Gnorera. To save us by thy might. 3   Turn us again, thy grace divine
      To us O God vouchsafe;
      Cause thou thy face on us to shine
      And then we shall be safe. 4   Lord God of Hosts, how long wilt thou,
      How long wilt thou declare
      Thy *smoaking wrath, and angry brow                     *Gnashanta. Against thy peoples praire. 20
  5   Thou feed'st them with the bread of tears,
      Their bread with tears they eat,
      And mak'st them* largely drink the tears                  *Shalish. Wherewith their cheeks are wet. 6   A strife thou mak'st us and a prey
      To every neighbour foe,
      Among themselves they *laugh, they *play,                *Jilgnagu. And *flouts at us they throw. 7   Return us, and thy grace divine,
      O God of Hosts vouchsafe                                         30
      Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
      And then we shall be safe. 8   A Vine from Aegypt thou hast brought,
      Thy free love made it thine,
      And drov'st out Nations proud and haut
      To plant this lovely Vine. 9   Thou did'st prepare for it a place
      And root it deep and fast
      That it began to grow apace,
      And fill'd the land at last. 40
  10  With her green shade that cover'd all,
      The Hills were over-spread
      Her Bows as high as Cedars tall
      Advanc'd their lofty head. 11  Her branches on the western side
      Down to the Sea she sent,
      And upward to that river wide
      Her other branches went. 12  Why hast thou laid her Hedges low
      And brok'n down her Fence,                                       50
      That all may pluck her, as they go,
      With rudest violence? 13  The tusked Boar out of the wood
      Up turns it by the roots,
      Wild Beasts there brouze, and make their food
      Her Grapes and tender Shoots. 14  Return now, God of Hosts, look down
      From Heav'n, thy Seat divine,
      Behold us, but without a frown,
      And visit this thy Vine. 60
  15  Visit this Vine, which thy right hand
      Hath set, and planted long,
      And the young branch, that for thy self
      Thou hast made firm and strong. 16  But now it is consum'd with fire,
      And cut with Axes down,
      They perish at thy dreadfull ire,
      At thy rebuke and frown. 17  Upon the man of thy right hand
      Let thy good hand be laid,                                       70
      Upon the Son of Man, whom thou
      Strong for thyself hast made. 18  So shall we not go back from thee
      To wayes of sin and shame,
      Quick'n us thou, then gladly wee
      Shall call upon thy Name. Return us, and thy grace divine
      Lord God of Hosts voutsafe,
      Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
      And then we shall be safe. 80




PSAL. LXXXI. 1   To God our strength sing loud, and clear,
      Sing loud to God our King,
      To Jacobs God, that all may hear
      Loud acclamations ring. 2   Prepare a Hymn, prepare a Song
      The Timbrel hither bring
      The cheerfull Psaltry bring along
      And Harp with pleasant string. 3   Blow, as is wont, in the new Moon
      With Trumpets lofty sound,                                       10
      Th'appointed time, the day wheron
      Our solemn Feast comes round. 4   This was a Statute giv'n of old
      For Israel to observe
      A Law of Jacobs God, to hold
      From whence they might not swerve. 5   This he a Testimony ordain'd
      In Joseph, not to change,
      When as he pass'd through Aegypt land;
      The Tongue I heard, was strange. 20
  6   From burden, and from slavish toyle
      I set his shoulder free;
      His hands from pots, and mirie soyle
      Deliver'd were by me. 7   When trouble did thee sore assaile,
      On me then didst thou call,
      And I to free thee did not faile,
      And led thee out of thrall. I answer'd thee in *thunder deep                 *Be Sether ragnam. With clouds encompass'd round;                                   30
      I tri'd thee at the water steep
      Of Meriba renown'd. 8   Hear O my people, heark'n well,
      I testifie to thee
      Thou antient flock of Israel,
      If thou wilt list to mee,
  9   Through out the land of thy abode
      No alien God shall be
      Nor shalt thou to a forein God
      In honour bend thy knee. 40
  10  I am the Lord thy God which brought
      Thee out of Aegypt land
      Ask large enough, and I, besought,
      Will grant thy full demand. 11  And yet my people would not hear,
      Nor hearken to my voice;
      And Israel whom I lov'd so dear
      Mislik'd me for his choice. 12  Then did I leave them to their will
      And to their wandring mind;                                      50
      Their own conceits they follow'd still
      Their own devises blind
  13  O that my people would be wise
      To serve me all their daies,
      And O that Israel would advise
      To walk my righteous waies. 14  Then would I soon bring down their foes
      That now so proudly rise,
      And turn my hand against all those
      That are their enemies. 60
  15  Who hate the Lord should then be fain
      To bow to him and bend,
      But they, His should remain,
      Their time should have no end. 16  And he would free them from the shock
      With flower of finest wheat,
      And satisfie them from the rock
      With Honey for their Meat. PSAL. LXXXII. 1   GOD in the *great *assembly stands                    *Bagnadath-el
      Of Kings and lordly States,
      Among the gods* on both his hands. *Bekerev. He judges and debates. 2   How long will ye *pervert the right                      *Tishphetu
      With *judgment false and wrong                              gnavel. Favouring the wicked by your might,
      Who thence grow bold and strong? 3  *Regard the *weak and fatherless                       *Shiphtu-dal. *Dispatch the *poor mans cause,                                   10
      And **raise the man in deep distress
      By **just and equal Lawes. **Hatzdiku. 