



Produced by Sandra Laythorpe





SINTRAM AND HIS COMPANIONS

By Friedrich de la Motte Fouque

with foreword by Charlotte M. Yonge




Introduction


Four tales are, it is said, intended by the Author to be appropriate to
the Four Seasons: the stern, grave "Sintram", to winter; the tearful,
smiling, fresh "Undine", to Spring; the torrid deserts of the "Two
Captains", to summer; and the sunset gold of "Aslauga's Knight", to
autumn. Of these two are before us. The author of these tales, as well as of many more, was Friedrich, Baron
de la Motte Fouque, one of the foremost of the minstrels or tale-tellers
of the realm of spiritual chivalry--the realm whither Arthur's knights
departed when they "took the Sancgreal's holy quest,"--whence Spenser's
Red Cross knight and his fellows came forth on their adventures, and in
which the Knight of la Mancha believed, and endeavoured to exist. La Motte Fouque derived his name and his title from the French Huguenot
ancestry, who had fled on the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes. His
Christian name was taken from his godfather, Frederick the Great,
of whom his father was a faithful friend, without compromising his
religious principles and practice. Friedrich was born at Brandenburg on
February 12, 1777, was educated by good parents at home, served in the
Prussian army through disaster and success, took an enthusiastic part
in the rising of his country against Napoleon, inditing as many
battle-songs as Korner. When victory was achieved, he dedicated his
sword in the church of Neunhausen where his estate lay. He lived there,
with his beloved wife and his imagination, till his death in 1843. And all the time life was to him a poet's dream. He lived in a continual
glamour of spiritual romance, bathing everything, from the old deities
of the Valhalla down to the champions of German liberation, in an ideal
glow of purity and nobleness, earnestly Christian throughout, even in
his dealings with Northern mythology, for he saw Christ unconsciously
shown in Baldur, and Satan in Loki. Thus he lived, felt, and believed what he wrote, and though his dramas
and poems do not rise above fair mediocrity, and the great number of his
prose stories are injured by a certain monotony, the charm of them is
in their elevation of sentiment and the earnest faith pervading all. His
knights might be Sir Galahad--


            "My strength is as the strength of ten,
             Because my heart is pure." Evil comes to them as something to be conquered, generally as a form of
magic enchantment, and his "wondrous fair maidens" are worthy of them. Yet there is adventure enough to afford much pleasure, and often we have
a touch of true genius, which has given actual ideas to the world, and
precious ones. This genius is especially traceable in his two masterpieces, Sintram and
Undine. Sintram was inspired by Albert Durer's engraving of the "Knight
of Death," of which we give a presentation. It was sent to Fouque by his
friend Edward Hitzig, with a request that he would compose a ballad
on it. The date of the engraving is 1513, and we quote the description
given by the late Rev. R. St. John Tyrwhitt, showing how differently it
may be read. "Some say it is the end of the strong wicked man, just overtaken by
Death and Sin, whom he has served on earth. It is said that the tuft on
the lance indicates his murderous character, being of such unusual size. You know the use of that appendage was to prevent blood running down
from the spearhead to the hands. They also think that the object under
the horse's off hind foot is a snare, into which the old oppressor is
to fall instantly. The expression of the faces may be taken either way:
both good men and bad may have hard, regular features; and both good men
and bad would set their teeth grimly on seeing Death, with the sands of
their life nearly run out. Some say they think the expression of Death
gentle, or only admonitory (as the author of "Sintram"); and I have to
thank the authoress of the "Heir of Redclyffe" for showing me a fine
impression of the plate, where Death certainly had a not ungentle
countenance--snakes and all. I think the shouldered lance, and quiet,
firm seat on horseback, with gentle bearing on the curb-bit, indicate
grave resolution in the rider, and that a robber knight would have his
lance in rest; then there is the leafy crown on the horse's head; and
the horse and dog move on so quietly, that I am inclined to hope the
best for the Ritter." Musing on the mysterious engraving, Fouque saw in it the life-long
companions of man, Death and Sin, whom he must defy in order to reach
salvation; and out of that contemplation rose his wonderful romance,
not exactly an allegory, where every circumstance can be fitted with an
appropriate meaning, but with the sense of the struggle of life, with
external temptation and hereditary inclination pervading all, while
Grace and Prayer aid the effort. Folko and Gabrielle are revived from
the Magic Ring, that Folko may by example and influence enhance all
higher resolutions; while Gabrielle, in all unconscious innocence,
awakes the passions, and thus makes the conquest the harder. It is within the bounds of possibility that the similarities of
folk-lore may have brought to Fouque's knowledge the outline of the
story which Scott tells us was the germ of "Guy Mannering"; where a boy,
whose horoscope had been drawn by an astrologer, as likely to encounter
peculiar trials at certain intervals, actually had, in his twenty-first
year, a sort of visible encounter with the Tempter, and came off
conqueror by his strong faith in the Bible. Sir Walter, between
reverence and realism, only took the earlier part of the story, but
Fouque gives us the positive struggle, and carries us along with the
final victory and subsequent peace. His tale has had a remarkable power
over the readers. We cannot but mention two remarkable instances at
either end of the scale. Cardinal Newman, in his younger days, was
so much overcome by it that he hurried out into the garden to read it
alone, and returned with traces of emotion in his face. And when Charles
Lowder read it to his East End boys, their whole minds seemed engrossed
by it, and they even called certain spots after the places mentioned. Imagine the Rocks of the Moon in Ratcliff Highway! May we mention that Miss Christabel Coleridge's "Waynflete" brings
something of the spirit and idea of "Sintram" into modern life? "Undine" is a story of much lighter fancy, and full of a peculiar grace,
though with a depth of melancholy that endears it. No doubt it
was founded on the universal idea in folk-lore of the nixies or
water-spirits, one of whom, in Norwegian legend, was seen weeping
bitterly because of the want of a soul. Sometimes the nymph is a wicked
siren like the Lorelei; but in many of these tales she weds an earthly
lover, and deserts him after a time, sometimes on finding her diving
cap, or her seal-skin garment, which restores her to her ocean kindred,
sometimes on his intruding on her while she is under a periodical
transformation, as with the fairy Melusine, more rarely if he becomes
unfaithful. There is a remarkable Cornish tale of a nymph or mermaiden, who thus
vanished, leaving a daughter who loved to linger on the beach rather
than sport with other children. By and by she had a lover, but no sooner
did he show tokens of inconstancy, than the mother came up from the sea
and put him to death, when the daughter pined away and died. Her name
was Selina, which gives the tale a modern aspect, and makes us wonder
if the old tradition can have been modified by some report of Undine's
story. There was an idea set forth by the Rosicrucians of spirits abiding in
the elements, and as Undine represented the water influences, Fouque's
wife, the Baroness Caroline, wrote a fairly pretty story on the sylphs
of fire. But Undine's freakish playfulness and mischief as an elemental
being, and her sweet patience when her soul is won, are quite
original, and indeed we cannot help sharing, or at least understanding,
Huldbrand's beginning to shrink from the unearthly creature to something
of his own flesh and blood. He is altogether unworthy, and though in
this tale there is far less of spiritual meaning than in Sintram, we
cannot but see that Fouque's thought was that the grosser human nature
is unable to appreciate what is absolutely pure and unearthly. C. M. YONGE. CHAPTER 1



In the high castle of Drontheim many knights sat assembled to hold
council for the weal of the realm; and joyously they caroused together
till midnight around the huge stone table in the vaulted hall. A rising
storm drove the snow wildly against the rattling windows; all the oak
doors groaned, the massive locks shook, the castle-clock slowly
and heavily struck the hour of one. Then a boy, pale as death, with
disordered hair and closed eyes, rushed into the hall, uttering a wild
scream of terror. He stopped beside the richly carved seat of the mighty
Biorn, clung to the glittering knight with both his hands, and shrieked
in a piercing voice, "Knight and father! father and knight! Death and
another are closely pursuing me!" An awful stillness lay like ice on the whole assembly, save that the boy
screamed ever the fearful words. But one of Biorn's numerous retainers,
an old esquire, known by the name of Rolf the Good, advanced towards the
terrified child, took him in his arms, and half chanted this prayer: "O
Father, help Thy servant! I believe, and yet I cannot believe." The boy,
as if in a dream, at once loosened his hold of the knight; and the good
Rolf bore him from the hall unresisting, yet still shedding hot tears
and murmuring confused sounds. The lords and knights looked at one another much amazed, until the
mighty Biorn said, wildly and fiercely laughing, "Marvel not at that
strange boy. He is my only son; and has been thus since he was five
years old: he is now twelve. I am therefore accustomed to see him so;
though, at the first, I too was disquieted by it. The attack comes upon
him only once in the year, and always at this same time. But forgive me
for having spent so many words on my poor Sintram, and let us pass on to
some worthier subject for our discourse." Again there was silence for a while; then whisperingly and doubtfully
single voices strove to renew their broken-off discourse, but without
success. Two of the youngest and most joyous began a roundelay; but
the storm howled and raged so wildly without, that this too was soon
interrupted. And now they all sat silent and motionless in the lofty
hall; the lamp flickered sadly under the vaulted roof; the whole party
of knights looked like pale, lifeless images dressed up in gigantic
armour. Then arose the chaplain of the castle of Drontheim, the only priest
among the knightly throng, and said, "Dear Lord Biorn, our eyes and
thoughts have all been directed to you and your son in a wonderful
manner; but so it has been ordered by the providence of God. You
perceive that we cannot withdraw them; and you would do well to tell
us exactly what you know concerning the fearful state of the boy. Perchance, the solemn tale, which I expect from you, might do good to
this disturbed assembly." Biorn cast a look of displeasure on the priest, and answered, "Sir
chaplain, you have more share in the history than either you or I could
desire. Excuse me, if I am unwilling to trouble these light-hearted
warriors with so rueful a tale." But the chaplain approached nearer to the knight, and said, in a firm
yet very mild tone, "Dear lord, hitherto it rested with you alone to
relate, or not to relate it; but now that you have so strangely hinted
at the share which I have had in your son's calamity, I must positively
demand that you will repeat word for word how everything came to pass. My honour will have it so, and that will weigh with you as much as with
me." In stern compliance Biorn bowed his haughty head, and began the
following narration. "This time seven years I was keeping the Christmas
feast with my assembled followers. We have many venerable old customs
which have descended to us by inheritance from our great forefathers;
as, for instance, that of placing a gilded boar's head on the table, and
making thereon knightly vows of daring and wondrous deeds. Our chaplain
here, who used then frequently to visit me, was never a friend to
keeping up such traditions of the ancient heathen world. Such men as he
were not much in favour in those olden times." "My excellent predecessors," interrupted the chaplain, "belonged more
to God than to the world, and with Him they were in favour. Thus they
converted your ancestors; and if I can in like manner be of service to
you, even your jeering will not vex me." With looks yet darker, and a somewhat angry shudder, the knight resumed:
"Yes, yes; I know all your promises and threats of an invisible Power,
and how they are meant persuade us to part more readily with whatever of
this world's goods we may possess. Once, ah, truly, once I too had such! Strange!--Sometimes it seems to me as though ages had passed over since
then, and as if I were alone the survivor, so fearfully has everything
changed. But now I bethink me, that the greater part of this noble
company knew me in my happiness, and have seen my wife, my lovely
Verena." He pressed his hands on his eyes, and it seemed as though he wept. The
storm had ceased; the soft light of the moon shone through the windows,
and her beams played on his wild features. Suddenly he started up, so
that his heavy armour rattled with a fearful sound, and he cried out
in a thundering voice, "Shall I turn monk, as she has become a nun? No,
crafty priest; your webs are too thin to catch flies of my sort." "I have nothing to do with webs," said the chaplain. "In all openness
and sincerity have I put heaven and hell before you during the space of
six years; and you gave full consent to the step which the holy Verena
took. But what all that has to do with your son's sufferings I know not,
and I wait for your narration." "You may wait long enough," said Biorn, with a sneer. "Sooner shall--"

"Swear not!" said the chaplain in a loud commanding tone, and his eyes
flashed almost fearfully. "Hurra!" cried Biorn, in wild affright; "hurra! Death and his companion
are loose!" and he dashed madly out of the chamber and down the steps. The rough and fearful notes of his horn were heard summoning his
retainers; and presently afterwards the clatter of horses' feet on the
frozen court-yard gave token of their departure. The knights retired,
silent and shuddering; while the chaplain remained alone at the huge
stone table, praying. CHAPTER 2



After some time the good Rolf returned with slow and soft steps, and
started with surprise at finding the hall deserted. The chamber where he
had been occupied in quieting and soothing the unhappy child was in so
distant a part of the castle that he had heard nothing of the knight's
hasty departure. The chaplain related to him all that had passed, and
then said, "But, my good Rolf, I much wish to ask you concerning those
strange words with which you seemed to lull poor Sintram to rest. They sounded like sacred words, and no doubt they are; but I could not
understand them. 'I believe, and yet I cannot believe.'" "Reverend sir," answered Rolf, "I remember that from my earliest years
no history in the Gospels has taken such hold of me as that of the child
possessed with a devil, which the disciples were not able to cast out;
but when our Saviour came down from the mountain where He had been
transfigured, He broke the bonds wherewith the evil spirit had held the
miserable child bound. I always felt as if I must have known and loved
that boy, and been his play-fellow in his happy days; and when I grew
older, then the distress of the father on account of his lunatic son lay
heavy at my heart. It must surely have all been a foreboding of our poor
young Lord Sintram, whom I love as if he were my own child; and now
the words of the weeping father in the Gospel often come into my
mind,--'Lord, I believe; help Thou my unbelief;' and something similar
I may very likely have repeated to-day as a chant or a prayer. Reverend
father, when I consider how one dreadful imprecation of the father has
kept its withering hold on the son, all seems dark before me; but, God
be praised! my faith and my hope remain above." "Good Rolf," said the priest, "I cannot clearly understand what you
say about the unhappy Sintram; for I do not know when and how this
affliction came upon him. If no oath or solemn promise bind you to
secrecy, will you make known to me all that is connected with it?" "Most willingly," replied Rolf. "I have long desired to have an
opportunity of so doing; but you have been almost always separated
from us. I dare not now leave the sleeping boy any longer alone; and
to-morrow, at the earliest dawn, I must take him to his father. Will you
come with me, dear sir, to our poor Sintram?" The chaplain at once took up the small lamp which Rolf had brought with
him, and they set off together through the long vaulted passages. In the
small distant chamber they found the poor boy fast asleep. The light of
the lamp fell strangely on his very pale face. The chaplain stood gazing
at him for some time, and at length said: "Certainly from his birth his
features were always sharp and strongly marked, but now they are almost
fearfully so for such a child; and yet no one can help having a kindly
feeling towards him, whether he will or not." "Most true, dear sir," answered Rolf. And it was evident how his whole
heart rejoiced at any word which betokened affection for his beloved
young lord. Thereupon he placed the lamp where its light could not
disturb the boy, and seating himself close by the priest, he began to
speak in the following terms:--"During that Christmas feast of which my
lord was talking to you, he and his followers discoursed much concerning
the German merchants, and the best means of keeping down the increasing
pride and power of the trading-towns. At length Biorn laid his impious
hand on the golden boar's head, and swore to put to death without mercy
every German trader whom fate, in what way soever, might bring
alive into his power. The gentle Verena turned pale, and would have
interposed--but it was too late, the bloody word was uttered. And
immediately afterwards, as though the great enemy of souls were
determined at once to secure with fresh bonds the vassal thus devoted
to him, a warder came into the hall to announce that two citizens of a
trading-town in Germany, an old man and his son, had been shipwrecked
on this coast, and were now within the gates, asking hospitality of the
lord of the castle. The knight could not refrain from shuddering; but
he thought himself bound by his rash vow and by that accursed heathenish
golden boar. We, his retainers, were commanded to assemble in the
castle-yard, armed with sharp spears, which were to be hurled at the
defenceless strangers at the first signal made to us. For the first,
and I trust the last time in my life, I said 'No' to the commands of
my lord; and that I said in a loud voice, and with the heartiest
determination. The Almighty, who alone knows whom He will accept and
whom He will reject, armed me with resolution and strength. And Biorn
might perceive whence the refusal of his faithful old servant arose, and
that it was worthy of respect. He said to me, half in anger and half in
scorn: 'Go up to my wife's apartments; her attendants are running to
and fro, perhaps she is ill. Go up, Rolf the Good, I say to thee, and so
women shall be with women.' I thought to myself, 'Jeer on, then;' and I
went silently the way that he had pointed out to me. On the stairs
there met me two strange and right fearful beings, whom I had never seen
before; and I know not how they got into the castle. One of them was a
great tall man, frightfully pallid and thin; the other was a dwarf-like
man, with a most hideous countenance and features. Indeed, when I
collected my thoughts and looked carefully at him, it appeared to me--"

Low moanings and convulsive movements of the boy here interrupted the
narrative. Rolf and his chaplain hastened to his bedside, and perceived
that his countenance wore an expression of fearful agony, and that he
was struggling in vain to open his eyes. The priest made the Sign of
the Cross over him, and immediately peace seemed to be restored, and his
sleep again became quiet: they both returned softly to their seats. "You see," said Rolf, "that it will not do to describe more closely
those two awful beings. Suffice it to say, that they went down into the
court-yard, and that I proceeded to my lady's apartments. I found the
gentle Verena almost fainting with terror and overwhelming anxiety, and
I hastened to restore her with some of those remedies which I was able
to apply by my skill, through God's gift and the healing virtues of
herbs and minerals. But scarcely had she recovered her senses, when,
with that calm holy power which, as you know, is hers, she desired me
to conduct her down to the court-yard, saying that she must either put
a stop to the fearful doings of this night, or herself fall a sacrifice. Our way took us by the little bed of the sleeping Sintram. Alas! hot
tears fell from my eyes to see how evenly his gentle breath then came
and went, and how sweetly he smiled in his peaceful slumbers." The old man put his hands to his eyes, and wept bitterly; but soon
he resumed his sad story. "As we approached the lowest window of the
staircase, we could hear distinctly the voice of the elder merchant; and
on looking out, the light of the torches showed me his noble features,
as well as the bright youthful countenance of his son. 'I take Almighty
God to witness,' cried he, 'that I had no evil thought against this
house! But surely I must have fallen unawares amongst heathens; it
cannot be that I am in a Christian knight's castle; and if you are
indeed heathens, then kill us at once. And thou, my beloved son, be
patient and of good courage; in heaven we shall learn wherefore it could
not be otherwise.' I thought I could see those two fearful ones amidst
the throng of retainers. The pale one had a huge curved sword in his
hand, the little one held a spear notched in a strange fashion. Verena
tore open the window, and cried in silvery tones through the wild night,
'My dearest lord and husband, for the sake of your only child, have pity
on those harmless men! Save them from death, and resist the temptation
of the evil spirit.' The knight answered in his fierce wrath--but I
cannot repeat his words. He staked his child on the desperate cast; he
called Death and the Devil to see that he kept his word:--but hush! the
boy is again moaning. Let me bring the dark tale quickly to a close. Biorn commanded his followers to strike, casting on them those fierce
looks which have gained him the title of Biorn of the Fiery Eyes; while
at the same time the two frightful strangers bestirred themselves very
busily. Then Verena called out, with piercing anguish, 'Help, O God, my
Saviour!' Those two dreadful figures disappeared; and the knight and his
retainers, as if seized with blindness, rushed wildly one against the
other, but without doing injury to themselves, or yet being able to
strike the merchants, who ran so close a risk. They bowed reverently
towards Verena, and with calm thanksgivings departed through the
castle-gates, which at that moment had been burst open by a violent gust
of wind, and now gave a free passage to any who would go forth. The lady
and I were yet standing bewildered on the stairs, when I fancied I
saw the two fearful forms glide close by me, but mist-like and unreal. Verena called to me: 'Rolf, did you see a tall pale man, and a little
hideous one with him, pass just now up the staircase?' I flew after
them; and found, alas, the poor boy in the same state in which you saw
him a few hours ago. Ever since, the attack has come on him regularly at
this time, and he is in all respects fearfully changed. The lady of
the castle did not fail to discern the avenging hand of Heaven in this
calamity; and as the knight, her husband, instead of repenting, ever
became more truly Biorn of the Fiery Eyes, she resolved, in the walls of
a cloister, by unremitting prayer, to obtain mercy in time and eternity
for herself and her unhappy child." Rolf was silent; and the chaplain, after some thought, said: "I now
understand why, six years ago, Biorn confessed his guilt to me in
general words, and consented that his wife should take the veil. Some
faint compunction must then have stirred within him, and perhaps may
stir him yet. At any rate it was impossible that so tender a flower as
Verena could remain longer in so rough keeping. But who is there now to
watch over and protect our poor Sintram?" "The prayer of his mother," answered Rolf. "Reverend sir, when the
first dawn of day appears, as it does now, and when the morning breeze
whispers through the glancing window, they ever bring to my mind the
soft beaming eyes of my lady, and I again seem to hear the sweet tones
of her voice. The holy Verena is, next to God, our chief aid." "And let us add our devout supplications to the Lord," said the
chaplain; and he and Rolf knelt in silent and earnest prayer by the bed
of the pale sufferer, who began to smile in his dreams. CHAPTER 3



The rays of the sun shining brightly into the room awoke Sintram, and
raising himself up, he looked angrily at the chaplain, and said, "So
there is a priest in the castle! And yet that accursed dream continues
to torment me even in his very presence. Pretty priest he must be!" "My child," answered the chaplain in the mildest tone, "I have prayed
for thee most fervently, and I shall never cease doing so--but God alone
is Almighty." "You speak very boldly to the son of the knight Biorn," cried Sintram. "'My child!' If those horrible dreams had not been again haunting me,
you would make me laugh heartily." "Young Lord Sintram," said the chaplain, "I am by no means surprised
that you do not know me again; for in truth, neither do I know you
again." And his eyes filled with tears as he spoke. The good Rolf looked sorrowfully in the boy's face, saying, "Ah, my dear
young master, you are so much better than you would make people believe. Why do you that? Your memory is so good, that you must surely recollect
your kind old friend the chaplain, who used formerly to be constantly at
the castle, and to bring you so many gifts--bright pictures of saints,
and beautiful songs?" "I know all that very well," replied Sintram thoughtfully. "My sainted
mother was alive in those days." "Our gracious lady is still living, God be praised," said the good Rolf. "But she does not live for us, poor sick creatures that we are!" cried
Sintram. "And why will you not call her sainted? Surely she knows
nothing about my dreams?" "Yes, she does know of them," said the chaplain; "and she prays to God
for you. But take heed, and restrain that wild, haughty temper of yours. It might, indeed, come to pass that she would know nothing about your
dreams, and that would be if your soul were separated from your body;
and then the holy angels also would cease to know anything of you." Sintram fell back on his bed as if thunderstruck; and Rolf said, with
a gentle sigh, "You should not speak so severely to my poor sick child,
reverend sir." The boy sat up, and with tearful eyes he turned caressingly towards the
chaplain: "Let him do as he pleases, you good, tender-hearted Rolf;
he knows very well what he is about. Would you reprove him if I were
slipping down a snow-cleft, and he caught me up roughly by the hair of
my head?" The priest looked tenderly at him, and would have spoken his holy
thoughts, when Sintram suddenly sprang off the bed and asked after his
father. As soon as he heard of the knight's departure, he would not
remain another hour in the castle; and put aside the fears of the
chaplain and the old esquire, lest a rapid journey should injure his
hardly restored health, by saying to them, "Believe me, reverend sir,
and dear old Rolf, if I were not subject to these hideous dreams, there
would not be a bolder youth in the whole world; and even as it is, I am
not so far behind the very best. Besides, till another year has passed,
my dreams are at an end." On his somewhat imperious sign Rolf brought out the horses. The boy
threw himself boldly into the saddle, and taking a courteous leave of
the chaplain, he dashed along the frozen valley that lay between the
snow-clad mountains. He had not ridden far, in company with his old
attendant, when he heard a strange indistinct sound proceeding from
a neighbouring cleft in the rock; it was partly like the clapper of a
small mill, but mingled with that were hollow groans and other tones of
distress. Thither they turned their horses, and a wonderful sight showed
itself to them. A tall man, deadly pale, in a pilgrim's garb, was striving with violent
though unsuccessful efforts, to work his way out of the snow and to
climb up the mountain; and thereby a quantity of bones, which were
hanging loosely all about his garments, rattled one against the other,
and caused the mysterious sound already mentioned. Rolf, much terrified,
crossed himself, while the bold Sintram called out to the stranger,
"What art thou doing there? Give an account of thy solitary labours." "I live in death," replied that other one with a fearful grin. "Whose are those bones on thy clothes?" "They are relics, young sir." "Art thou a pilgrim?" "Restless, quietless, I wander up and down." "Thou must not perish here in the snow before my eyes." "That I will not." "Thou must come up and sit on my horse." "That I will." And all at once he started up out of the snow with
surprising strength and agility, and sat on the horse behind Sintram,
clasping him tight in his long arms. The horse, startled by the rattling
of the bones, and as if seized with madness, rushed away through the
most trackless passes. The boy soon found himself alone with his strange
companion; for Rolf, breathless with fear, spurred on his horse in vain,
and remained far behind them. From a snowy precipice the horse slid,
without falling, into a narrow gorge, somewhat indeed exhausted, yet
continuing to snort and foam as before, and still unmastered by the boy. Yet his headlong course being now changed into a rough irregular trot,
Sintram was able to breathe more freely, and to begin the following
discourse with his unknown companion. "Draw thy garment closer around thee, thou pale man, so the bones will
not rattle, and I shall be able to curb my horse." "It would be of no avail, boy; it would be of no avail. The bones must
rattle." "Do not clasp me so tight with thy long arms, they are so cold." "It cannot be helped, boy; it cannot be helped. Be content. For my long
cold arms are not pressing yet on thy heart." "Do not breathe on me so with thy icy breath. All my strength is
departing." "I must breathe, boy; I must breathe. But do not complain. I am not
blowing thee away." The strange dialogue here came to an end; for to Sintram's surprise he
found himself on an open plain, over which the sun was shining brightly,
and at no great distance before him he saw his father's castle. While
he was thinking whether he might invite the unearthly pilgrim to rest
there, this one put an end to his doubts by throwing himself suddenly
off the horse, whose wild course was checked by the shock. Raising his
forefinger, he said to the boy, "I know old Biorn of the Fiery Eyes
well; perhaps but too well. Commend me to him. It will not need to tell
him my name; he will recognize me at the description." So saying, the
ghastly stranger turned aside into a thick fir-wood, and disappeared
rattling amongst the tangled branches. Slowly and thoughtfully Sintram rode on towards his father's castle,
his horse now again quiet and altogether exhausted. He scarcely knew
how much he ought to relate of his wonderful journey, and he also
felt oppressed with anxiety for the good Rolf, who had remained so far
behind. He found himself at the castle-gate sooner than he had expected;
the drawbridge was lowered, the doors were thrown open; an attendant led
the youth into the great hall, where Biorn was sitting all alone at
a huge table, with many flagons and glasses before him, and suits of
armour ranged on either side of him. It was his daily custom, by way of
company, to have the armour of his ancestors, with closed visors, placed
all round the table at which he sat. The father and son began conversing
as follows:

"Where is Rolf?" "I do not know, father; he left me in the mountains." "I will have Rolf shot if he cannot take better care than that of my
only child." "Then, father, you will have your only child shot at the same time, for
without Rolf I cannot live; and if even one single dart is aimed at
him, I will be there to receive it, and to shield his true and faithful
heart." "So!--Then Rolf shall not be shot, but he shall be driven from the
castle." "In that case, father, you will see me go away also; and I will give
myself up to serve him in forests, in mountains, in caves." "So'--Well, then, Rolf must remain here." "That is just what I think, father." "Were you riding quite alone?" "No, father; but with a strange pilgrim. He said that he knew you very
well--perhaps too well." And thereupon Sintram began to relate and to
describe all that had passed with the pale man. "I know him also very well," said Biorn. "He is half crazed and half
wise, as we sometimes are astonished at seeing that people can be. But
do thou, my boy, go to rest after thy wild journey. I give you my word
that Rolf shall be kindly received if he arrive here; and that if he do
not come soon, he shall be sought for in the mountains." "I trust to your word, father," said Sintram, half humble, half proud;
and he did after the command of the grim lord of the castle. CHAPTER 4



Towards evening Sintram awoke. He saw the good Rolf sitting at his
bedside, and looked up in the old man's kind face with a smile of
unusually innocent brightness. But soon again his dark brows were knit,
and he asked, "How did my father receive you, Rolf? Did he say a harsh
word to you?" "No, my dear young lord, he did not; indeed he did not speak to me
at all. At first he looked very wrathful; but he checked himself,
and ordered a servant to bring me food and wine to refresh me, and
afterwards to take me to your room." "He might have kept his word better. But he is my father, and I must
not judge him too hardly. I will now go down to the evening meal." So
saying, he sprang up and threw on his furred mantle. But Rolf stopped him, and said, entreatingly: "My dear young master,
you would do better to take your meal to-day alone here in your own
apartment; for there is a guest with your father, in whose company
I should be very sorry to see you. If you will remain here, I will
entertain you with pleasant tales and songs." "There is nothing in the world which I should like better, dear Rolf,"
answered Sintram; "but it does not befit me to shun any man. Tell me,
whom should I find with my father?" "Alas!" said the old man, "you have already found him in the mountain. Formerly, when I used to ride about the country with Biorn, we often met
with him, but I was forbidden to tell you anything about him; and this
is the first time that he has ever come to the castle." "The crazy pilgrim!" replied Sintram; and he stood awhile in deep
thought, as if considering the matter. At last, rousing himself, he
said, "Dear old friend, I would most willingly stay here this evening
all alone with you and your stories and songs, and all the pilgrims in
the world should not entice me from this quiet room. But one thing must
be considered. I feel a kind of dread of that pale, tall man; and by
such fears no knight's son can ever suffer himself to be overcome. So be
not angry, dear Rolf, if I determine to go and look that strange palmer
in the face." And he shut the door of the chamber behind him, and with
firm and echoing steps proceeded to the hall. The pilgrim and the knight were sitting opposite to each other at the
great table, on which many lights were burning; and it was fearful,
amongst all the lifeless armour, to see those two tall grim men move,
and eat, and drink. As the pilgrim looked up on the boy's entrance, Biorn said: "You know
him already: he is my only child, and fellow-traveller this morning." The palmer fixed an earnest look on Sintram, and answered, shaking his
head, "I know not what you mean." Then the boy burst forth, impatiently, "It must be confessed that you
deal very unfairly by us! You say that you know my father but too much,
and now it seems that you know me altogether too little. Look me in the
face: who allowed you to ride on his horse, and in return had his good
steed driven almost wild? Speak, if you can!" Biorn smiled, shaking his head, but well pleased, as was his wont, with
his son's wild behaviour; while the pilgrim shuddered as if terrified
and overcome by some fearful irresistible power. At length, with a
trembling voice, he said these words: "Yes, yes, my dear young lord, you
are surely quite right; you are perfectly right in everything which you
may please to assert." Then the lord of the castle laughed aloud, and said: "Why, thou strange
pilgrim, what is become of all thy wonderfully fine speeches and
warnings now? Has the boy all at once struck thee dumb and powerless? Beware, thou prophet-messenger, beware!" But the palmer cast a fearful look on Biorn, which seemed to quench
the light of his fiery eyes, and said solemnly, in a thundering voice,
"Between me and thee, old man, the case stands quite otherwise. We have
nothing to reproach each other with. And now suffer me to sing a song to
you on the lute." He stretched out his hand, and took down from the wall
a forgotten and half-strung lute, which was hanging there; and, with
surprising skill and rapidity, having put it in a state fit for use, he
struck some chords, and raised this song to the low melancholy tones of
the instrument:


                  "The flow'ret was mine own, mine own,
                   But I have lost its fragrance rare,
                   And knightly name and freedom fair,
                     Through sin, through sin alone. The flow'ret was thine own, thine own,
                   Why cast away what thou didst win? Thou knight no more, but slave of sin,
                     Thou'rt fearfully alone!" "Have a care!" shouted he at the close in a pealing voice, as he pulled
the strings so mightily that they all broke with a clanging wail, and
a cloud of dust rose from the old lute, which spread round him like a
mist. Sintram had been watching him narrowly whilst he was singing, and more
and more did he feel convinced that it was impossible that this man and
his fellow-traveller of the morning could be one and the same. Nay, the
doubt rose to certainty, when the stranger again looked round at
him with the same timid, anxious air, and with many excuses and low
reverences hung the lute in its old place, and then ran out of the hall
as if bewildered with terror, in strange contrast with the proud and
stately bearing which he had shown to Biorn. The eyes of the boy were now directed to his father, and he saw that he
had sunk back senseless in his seat, as if struck by a blow. Sintram's
cries called Rolf and other attendants into the hall; and only by great
labour did their united efforts awake the lord of the castle. His looks
were still wild and disordered; but he allowed himself to be taken to
rest, quiet and yielding. CHAPTER 5



An illness followed this sudden attack; and during the course of it the
stout old knight, in the midst of his delirious ravings, did not cease
to affirm confidently that he must and should recover. He laughed
proudly when his fever-fits came on, and rebuked them for daring to
attack him so needlessly. Then he murmured to himself, "That was not
the right one yet; there must still be another one out in the cold
mountains." Always at such words Sintram involuntarily shuddered; they seemed to
strengthen his notion that he who had ridden with him, and he who had
sat at table in the castle, were two quite distinct persons; and he
knew not why, but this thought was inexpressibly awful to him. Biorn
recovered, and appeared to have entirely forgotten his adventure with
the palmer. He hunted in the mountains; he carried on his usual wild
warfare with his neighbours; and Sintram, as he grew up, became his
almost constant companion; whereby each year a fearful strength of body
and spirit was unfolded in the youth. Every one trembled at the sight
of his sharp pallid features, his dark rolling eyes, his tall, muscular,
and somewhat lean form; and yet no one hated him--not even those whom he
distressed or injured in his wildest humours. This might arise in part
out of regard to old Rolf, who seldom left him for long, and who always
held a softening influence over him; but also many of those who had
known the Lady Verena while she still lived in the world affirmed that a
faint reflection of her heavenly expression floated over the very unlike
features of her son, and that by this their hearts were won. Once, just at the beginning of spring, Biorn and his son were hunting
in the neighbourhood of the sea-coast, over a tract of country which did
not belong to them; drawn thither less by the love of sport than by the
wish of bidding defiance to a chieftain whom they detested, and thus
exciting a feud. At that season of the year, when his winter dreams had
just passed off, Sintram was always unusually fierce and disposed for
warlike adventures. And this day he was enraged at the chieftain for not
coming in arms from his castle to hinder their hunting; and he cursed,
in the wildest words, his tame patience and love of peace. Just then one
of his wild young companions rushed towards him, shouting joyfully: "Be
content my dear young lord! I will wager that all is coming about as
we and you wish; for as I was pursuing a wounded deer down to the
sea-shore, I saw a sail and a vessel filled with armed men making for
the shore. Doubtless your enemy purposes to fall upon you from the
coast." Joyfully and secretly Sintram called all his followers together, being
resolved this time to take the combat on himself alone, and then to
rejoin his father, and astonish him with the sight of captured foes and
other tokens of victory. The hunters, thoroughly acquainted with every cliff and rock on the
coast, hid themselves round the landing-place; and soon the strange
vessel hove nearer with swelling sails, till at length it came to
anchor, and its crew began to disembark in unsuspicious security. At
the head of them appeared a knight of high degree, in blue steel armour
richly inlaid with gold. His head was bare, for he carried his costly
golden helmet hanging on his left arm. He looked royally around him; and
his countenance, which dark brown locks shaded, was pleasant to behold;
and a well-trimmed moustache fringed his mouth, from which, as he
smiled, gleamed forth two rows of pearl-white teeth. A feeling came across Sintram that he must already have seen this knight
somewhere; and he stood motionless for a few moments. But suddenly he
raised his hand, to make the agreed signal of attack. In vain did the
good Rolf, who had just succeeded in getting up to him, whisper in his
ear that these could not be the foes whom he had taken them for, but
that they were unknown, and certainly high and noble strangers. "Let them be who they may," replied the wild youth, "they have enticed
me here to wait, and they shall pay the penalty of thus fooling me. Say
not another word, if you value your life." And immediately he gave the
signal, a thick shower of javelins followed from all sides, and the
Norwegian warriors rushed forth with flashing swords. They found their
foes as brave, or somewhat braver, than they could have desired. More
fell on the side of those who made than of those who received the
assault; and the strangers appeared to understand surprisingly the
Norwegian manner of fighting. The knight in steel armour had not in his
haste put on his helmet; but it seemed as if he in no wise needed such
protection, for his good sword afforded him sufficient defence even
against the spears and darts which were incessantly hurled at him, as
with rapid skill he received them on the shining blade, and dashed them
far away, shivered into fragments. Sintram could not at the first onset penetrate to where this shining
hero was standing, as all his followers, eager after such a noble prey,
thronged closely round him; but now the way was cleared enough for
him to spring towards the brave stranger, shouting a war-cry, and
brandishing his sword above his head. "Gabrielle!" cried the knight, as he dexterously parried the heavy blow
which was descending, and with one powerful sword-thrust he laid the
youth prostrate on the ground; then placing his knee on Sintram's
breast, he drew forth a flashing dagger, and held it before his eyes as
he lay astonished. All at once the men-at-arms stood round like walls. Sintram felt that no hope remained for him. He determined to die as it
became a bold warrior; and without giving one sign of emotion, he looked
on the fatal weapon with a steady gaze. As he lay with his eyes cast upwards, he fancied that there appeared
suddenly from heaven a wondrously beautiful female form in a bright
attire of blue and gold. "Our ancestors told truly of the Valkyrias,"
murmured he. "Strike, then, thou unknown conqueror." But with this the knight did not comply, neither was it a Valkyria who
had so suddenly appeared, but the beautiful wife of the stranger,
who, having advanced to the high edge of the vessel, had thus met the
upraised look of Sintram. "Folko," cried she, in the softest tone, "thou knight without reproach! I know that thou sparest the vanquished." The knight sprang up, and with courtly grace stretched out his hand to
the conquered youth, saying, "Thank the noble lady of Montfaucon for
your life and liberty. But if you are so totally devoid of all goodness
as to wish to resume the combat, here am I; let it be yours to begin." Sintram sank, deeply ashamed, on his knees, and wept; for he had often
heard speak of the high renown of the French knight Folko of Montfaucon,
who was related to his father's house, and of the grace and beauty of
his gentle lady Gabrielle. CHAPTER 6



The Lord of Montfaucon looked with astonishment at his strange foe; and
as he gazed on him more and more, recollections arose in his mind of
that northern race from whom he was descended, and with whom he had
always maintained friendly relations. A golden bear's claw, with which
Sintram's cloak was fastened, at length made all clear to him. "Have you not," said he, "a valiant and far-famed kinsman, called the
Sea-king Arinbiorn, who carries on his helmet golden vulture-wings? And
is not your father the knight Biorn? For surely the bear's claw on your
mantle must be the cognisance of your house." Sintram assented to all this, in deep and humble shame. The Knight of Montfaucon raised him from the ground, and said gravely,
yet gently, "We are, then, of kin the one to the other; but I could
never have believed that any one of our noble house would attack
a peaceful man without provocation, and that, too, without giving
warning." "Slay me at once," answered Sintram, "if indeed I am worthy to die by so
noble hands. I can no longer endure the light of day." "Because you have been overcome?" asked Montfaucon. Sintram shook his
head. "Or is it, rather, because you have committed an unknightly action?" The glow of shame that overspread the youth's countenance said yes to
this. "But you should not on that account wish to die," continued Montfaucon. "You should rather wish to live, that you may prove your repentance, and
make your name illustrious by many noble deeds; for you are endowed with
a bold spirit and with strength of limb, and also with the eagle-glance
of a chieftain. I should have made you a knight this very hour, if you
had borne yourself as bravely in a good cause as you have just now in
a bad. See to it, that I may do it soon. You may yet become a vessel of
high honour." A joyous sound of shawms and silver rebecks interrupted his discourse. The lady Gabrielle, bright as the morning, had now come down from the
ship, surrounded by her maidens; and, instructed in a few words by Folko
who was his late foe, she took the combat as some mere trial of arms,
saying, "You must not be cast down, noble youth, because my wedded lord
has won the prize; for be it known to you, that in the whole world there
is but one knight who can boast of not having been overcome by the Baron
of Montfaucon. And who can say," continued she, sportively, "whether
even that would have happened, had he not set himself to win back the
magic ring from me, his lady-love, destined to him, as well by the
choice of my own heart as by the will of Heaven!" Folko, smiling, bent his head over the snow-white hand of his lady; and
then bade the youth conduct them to his father's castle. Rolf took upon himself to see to the disembarking of the horses and
valuables of the strangers, filled with joy at the thought that an angel
in woman's form had appeared to soften his beloved young master, and
perhaps even to free him from that early curse. Sintram sent messengers in all directions to seek for his father, and
to announce to him the arrival of his noble guests. They therefore
found the old knight in his castle, with everything prepared for their
reception. Gabrielle could not enter the vast dark-looking building
without a slight shudder, which was increased when she saw the rolling
fiery eyes of its lord; even the pale, dark-haired Sintram seemed to her
very fearful; and she sighed to herself, "Oh! what an awful abode have
you brought me to visit, my knight! Would that we were once again in my
sunny Gascony, or in your knightly Normandy!" But the grave yet courteous reception, the deep respect paid to her
grace and beauty, and to the high fame of Folko, helped to re-assure
her; and soon her bird-like pleasure in novelties was awakened through
the strange significant appearance of this new world. And besides, it
could only be for a passing moment that any womanly fears found a place
in her breast when her lord was near at hand, for well did she know what
effectual protection that brave Baron was ever ready to afford to all
those who were dear to him, or committed to his charge. Soon afterwards Rolf passed through the great hall in which Biorn and
his guests were seated, conducting their attendants, who had charge of
the baggage, to their rooms. Gabrielle caught sight of her favourite
lute, and desired a page to bring it to her, that she might see if the
precious instrument had been injured by the sea-voyage. As she bent over
it with earnest attention, and her taper fingers ran up and down
the strings, a smile, like the dawn of spring, passed over the dark
countenances of Biorn and his son; and both said, with an involuntary
sigh, "Ah! if you would but play on that lute, and sing to it! It would
be but too beautiful!" The lady looked up at them, well pleased, and
smiling her assent, she began this song:--


             "Songs and flowers are returning,
                And radiant skies of May,
              Earth her choicest gifts is yielding,
                But one is past away. The spring that clothes with tend'rest green
                Each grove and sunny plain,
              Shines not for my forsaken heart,
                Brings not my joys again. Warble not so, thou nightingale,
                Upon thy blooming spray,
              Thy sweetness now will burst my heart,
                I cannot bear thy lay. For flowers and birds are come again,
                And breezes mild of May,
              But treasured hopes and golden hours
                Are lost to me for aye!" The two Norwegians sat plunged in melancholy thought; but especially
Sintram's eyes began to brighten with a milder expression, his cheeks
glowed, every feature softened, till those who looked at him could
have fancied they saw a glorified spirit. The good Rolf, who had stood
listening to the song, rejoiced thereat from his heart, and devoutly
raised his hands in pious gratitude to heaven. But Gabrielle's
astonishment suffered her not to take her eyes from Sintram. At last she
said to him, "I should much like to know what has so struck you in that
little song. It is merely a simple lay of the spring, full of the
images which that sweet season never fails to call up in the minds of my
countrymen." "But is your home really so lovely, so wondrously rich in song?" cried
the enraptured Sintram. "Then I am no longer surprised at your heavenly
beauty, at the power which you exercise over my hard, wayward heart! For
a paradise of song must surely send such angelic messengers through the
ruder parts of the world." And so saying, he fell on his knees before
the lady in an attitude of deep humility. Folko looked on all the while
with an approving smile, whilst Gabrielle, in much embarrassment, seemed
hardly to know how to treat the half-wild, half-tamed young stranger. After some hesitation, however, she held out her fair hand to him, and
said as she gently raised him: "Surely one who listens with such delight
to music must himself know how to awaken its strains. Take my lute, and
let us hear a graceful inspired song." But Sintram drew back, and would not take the instrument; and he said,
"Heaven forbid that my rough untutored hand should touch those delicate
strings! For even were I to begin with some soft strains, yet before
long the wild spirit which dwells in me would break out, and there would
be an end of the form and sound of the beautiful instrument. No, no;
suffer me rather to fetch my own huge harp, strung with bears' sinews
set in brass, for in truth I do feel myself inspired to play and sing." Gabrielle murmured a half-frightened assent; and Sintram having quickly
brought his harp, began to strike it loudly, and to sing these words
with a voice no less powerful:


             "Sir knight, sir knight, oh! whither away
              With thy snow-white sail on the foaming spray?" Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! "Too long have I trod upon ice and snow;
              I seek the bowers where roses blow." Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! He steer'd on his course by night and day
              Till he cast his anchor in Naples Bay. Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! There wander'd a lady upon the strand,
              Her fair hair bound with a golden band. Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! "Hail to thee! hail to thee! lady bright,
              Mine own shalt thou be ere morning light." Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers'

             "Not so, sir knight," the lady replied,
             "For you speak to the margrave's chosen bride." Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! "Your lover may come with his shield and spear,
              And the victor shall win thee, lady dear!" Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! "Nay, seek for another bride, I pray;
              Most fair are the maidens of Naples Bay." Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! "No, lady; for thee my heart doth burn,
              And the world cannot now my purpose turn." Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! Then came the young margrave, bold and brave;
              But low was he laid in a grassy grave. Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! And then the fierce Northman joyously cried,
             "Now shall I possess lands, castle, and bride!" Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers! Sintram's song was ended, but his eyes glared wildly, and the vibrations
of the harp-strings still resounded in a marvellous manner. Biorn's
attitude was again erect; he stroked his long beard and rattled his
sword, as if in great delight at what he had just heard. Much shuddered
Gabrielle before the wild song and these strange forms, but only till
she cast a glance on the Lord of Montfaucon, sat there smiling in all
his hero strength, unmoved, the rough uproar passed by him like an
autumnal storm. CHAPTER 7



Some weeks after this, in the twilight of evening, Sintram, very
disturbed, came down to the castle-garden. Although the presence of
Gabrielle never failed to soothe and calm him, yet if she left the
apartment for even a few instants, the fearful wildness of his spirit
seemed to return with renewed strength. So even now, after having long
and kindly read legends of the olden times to his father Biorn, she had
retired to her chamber. The tones of her lute could be distinctly heard
in the garden below; but the sounds only drove the bewildered youth more
impetuously through the shades of the ancient elms. Stooping suddenly
to avoid some overhanging branches, he unexpectedly came upon something
against which he had almost struck, and which, at first sight, he took
for a small bear standing on its hind legs, with a long and strangely
crooked horn on its head. He drew back in surprise and fear. It
addressed him in a grating man's voice: "Well, my brave young knight,
whence come you? whither go you? wherefore so terrified?" And then first
he saw that he had before him a little old man so wrapped up in a rough
garment of fur, that scarcely one of his features was visible, and
wearing in his cap a strange-looking long feather. "But whence come YOU and whither go YOU?" returned the angry Sintram. "For of you such questions should be asked. What have you to do in our
domains, you hideous little being?" "Well, well," sneered the other one, "I am thinking that I am quite big
enough as I am--one cannot always be a giant. And as to the rest, why
should you find fault that I go here hunting for snails? Surely snails
do not belong to the game which your high mightinesses consider that
you alone have a right to follow! Now, on the other hand, I know how to
prepare from them an excellent high-flavoured drink; and I have taken
enough for to-day: marvellous fat little beasts, with wise faces like
a man's, and long twisted horns on their heads. Would you like to see
them? Look here!" And then he began to unfasten and fumble about his fur garment; but
Sintram, filled with disgust and horror, said, "Psha! I detest such
animals! Be quiet, and tell me at once who and what you yourself are." "Are you so bent upon knowing my name?" replied the little man. "Let it
content you that I am master of all secret knowledge, and well versed in
the most intricate depths of ancient history. Ah! my young sir, if you
would only hear them! But you are afraid of me." "Afraid of you!" cried Sintram, with a wild laugh. "Many a better man than you has been so before now," muttered the little
Master; "but they did not like being told of it any more than you do." "To prove that you are mistaken," said Sintram, "I will remain here with
you till the moon stands high in the heavens. But you must tell me one
of your stories the while." The little man, much pleased, nodded his head; and as they paced
together up and down a retired elm-walk, he began discoursing as
follows:--

"Many hundred years ago a young knight, called Paris of Troy, lived in
that sunny land of the south where are found the sweetest songs, the
brightest flowers, and the most beautiful ladies. You know a song that
tells of that fair land, do you not, young sir? 'Sing heigh, sing ho,
for that land of flowers.'" Sintram bowed his head in assent, and sighed
deeply. "Now," resumed the little Master, "it happened that Paris led
that kind of life which is not uncommon in those countries, and of which
their poets often sing--he would pass whole months together in the
garb of a peasant, piping in the woods and mountains and pasturing
his flocks. Here one day three beautiful sorceresses appeared to him,
disputing about a golden apple; and from him they sought to know which
of them was the most beautiful, since to her the golden fruit was to be
awarded. The first knew how to give thrones, and sceptres, and crowns;
the second could give wisdom and knowledge; and the third could prepare
philtres and love-charms which could not fail of securing the affections
of the fairest of women. Each one in turn proffered her choicest gifts
to the young shepherd, in order that, tempted by them, he might adjudge
the apple to her. But as fair women charmed him more than anything else
in the world, he said that the third was the most beautiful--her name
was Venus. The two others departed in great displeasure; but Venus
bid him put on his knightly armour and his helmet adorned with waving
feathers, and then she led him to a famous city called Sparta, where
ruled the noble Duke Menelaus. His young Duchess Helen was the loveliest
woman on earth, and the sorceress offered her to Paris in return for
the golden apple. He was most ready to have her and wished for nothing
better; but he asked how he was to gain possession of her." "Paris must have been a sorry knight," interrupted Sintram. "Such things
are easily settled. The husband is challenged to a single combat, and he
that is victorious carries off the wife." "But Duke Menelaus was the host of the young knight," said the narrator. "Listen to me, little Master," cried Sintram; "he might have asked the
sorceress for some other beautiful woman, and then have mounted his
horse, or weighed anchor, and departed." "Yes, yes; it is very easy to say so," replied the old man. "But if you
only knew how bewitchingly lovely this Duchess Helen was, no room was
left for change." And then he began a glowing description of the charms
of this wondrously beautiful woman, but likening the image to Gabrielle
so closely, feature for feature, that Sintram, tottering, was forced to
lean against a tree. The little Master stood opposite to him grinning,
and asked, "Well now, could you have advised that poor knight Paris to
fly from her?" "Tell me at once what happened next," stammered Sintram. "The sorceress acted honourably towards Paris," continued the old man. "She declared to him that if he would carry away the lovely duchess to
his own city Troy, he might do so, and thus cause the ruin of his whole
house and of his country; but that during ten years he would be able to
defend himself in Troy, and rejoice in the sweet love of Helen." "And he accepted those terms, or he was a fool!" cried the youth. "To be sure he accepted them," whispered the little Master. "I would
have done so in his place! And do you know, young sir, the look of
things then was just as they are happening to-day. The newly-risen moon,
partly veiled by clouds, was shining dimly through the thick branches of
the trees in the silence of evening. Leaning against an old tree, as you
now are doing, stood the young enamoured knight Paris, and at his side
the enchantress Venus, but so disguised and transformed, that she did
not look much more beautiful than I do. And by the silvery light of the
moon, the form of the beautiful beloved one was seen sweeping by alone
amidst the whispering boughs." He was silent, and like as in the mirror
of his deluding words, Gabrielle just then actually herself appeared,
musing as she walked alone down the alley of elms. "Man,--fearful Master,--by what name shall I call you? To what would you
drive me?" muttered the trembling Sintram. "Thou knowest thy father's strong stone castle on the Moon-rocks?" replied the old man. "The castellan and the garrison are true and
devoted to thee. It could stand a ten years' siege; and the little gate
which leads to the hills is open, as was that of the citadel of Sparta
for Paris." And, in fact, the youth saw through a gate, left open he knew not how,
the dim, distant mountains glittering in the moonlight. "And if he did
not accept, he was a fool," said the little Master, with a grin, echoing
Sintram's former words. At that moment Gabrielle stood close by him. She was within reach of his
grasp, had he made the least movement; and a moonbeam, suddenly breaking
forth, transfigured, as it were, her heavenly beauty. The youth had
already bent forward--


             "My Lord and God, I pray,
              Turn from his heart away
                  This world's turmoil;
              And call him to Thy light,
              Be it through sorrow's night,
                  Through pain or toil." These words were sung by old Rolf at that very time, as he lingered
on the still margin of the castle fish-pond, where he prayed alone to
Heaven, full of foreboding care. They reached Sintram's ear; he stood
as if spellbound and made the Sign of the Cross. Immediately the little
master fled away, jumping uncouthly on one leg, through the gates and
shutting them after him with a yell. Gabrielle shuddered, terrified at the wild noise. Sintram approached her
softly, and said, offering his arm to her: "Suffer me to lead you back
to the castle. The night in these northern regions is often wild and
fearful." CHAPTER 8



They found the two knights drinking wine within. Folko was relating
stories in his usual mild and cheerful manner, and Biorn was listening
with a moody air, but yet as if, against his will, the dark cloud might
pass away before that bright and gentle courtesy. Gabrielle saluted the
baron with a smile, and signed to him to continue his discourse, as she
took her place near the knight Biorn, full of watchful kindness. Sintram
stood by the hearth, abstracted and melancholy; and the embers, as he
stirred them, cast a strange glow over his pallid features. "And of all the German trading-towns," continued Montfaucon, "the
largest and richest is Hamburgh. In Normandy we willingly see their
merchants land on our coasts, and those excellent people never fail to
prove themselves our friends when we seek their advice and assistance. When I first visited Hamburgh, every honour and respect was paid to me. I found its inhabitants engaged in a war with a neighbouring count, and
immediately I used my sword for them, vigorously and successfully." "Your sword! your knightly sword!" interrupted Biorn; and the old wonted
fire flashed from his eyes. "Against a knight, and for shopkeepers!" "Sir knight," replied Folko, calmly, "the barons of Montfaucon have ever
used their swords as they chose, without the interference of another;
and as I have received this good custom, so do I wish to hand it on. If
you agree not to this, so speak it freely out. But I forbid every rude
word against the men of Hamburgh, since I have declared them to be my
friends." Biorn cast down his haughty eyes, and their fire faded away. In a low
voice he said, "Proceed, noble baron. You are right, and I am wrong." Then Folko stretched out his hand to him across the table, and resumed
his narration: "Amongst all my beloved Hamburghers the dearest to me are
two men of marvellous experience--a father and son. What have they not
seen and done in the remotest corners of the earth, and instituted
in their native town! Praise be to God, my life cannot be called
unfruitful; but, compared with the wise Gotthard Lenz and his
stout-hearted son Rudlieb, I look upon myself as an esquire who has
perhaps been some few times to tourneys, and, besides that, has never
hunted out his own forests. They have converted, subdued, gladdened,
dark men whom I know not how to name; and the wealth which they have
brought back with them has all been devoted to the common weal, as if
fit for no other purpose. On their return from their long and perilous
sea-voyages, they hasten to an hospital which has been founded by them,
and where they undertake the part of overseers, and of careful and
patient nurses. Then they proceed to select the most fitting spots
whereon to erect new towers and fortresses for the defence of their
beloved country. Next they repair to the houses where strangers and
travellers receive hospitality at their cost; and at last they return to
their own abode, to entertain their guests, rich and noble like kings,
and simple and unconstrained like shepherds. Many a tale of their
wondrous adventures serves to enliven these sumptuous feasts. Amongst
others, I remember to have heard my friends relate one at which my hair
stood on end. Possibly I may gain some more complete information on the
subject from you. It appears that several years ago, just about the time
of the Christmas festival, Gotthard and Rudlieb were shipwrecked on
the coast of Norway, during a violent winter tempest. They could never
exactly ascertain the situation of the rocks on which their vessel
stranded; but so much is certain, that very near the sea-shore stood a
huge castle, to which the father and son betook themselves, seeking for
that assistance and shelter which Christian people are ever willing
to afford each other in case of need. They went alone, leaving their
followers to watch the injured ship. The castle-gates were thrown open,
and they thought all was well. But on a sudden the court-yard was filled
with armed men, who with one accord aimed their sharp iron-pointed
spears at the defenceless strangers, whose dignified remonstrances
and mild entreaties were only heard in sullen silence or with
scornful jeerings. After a while a knight came down the stairs, with
fire-flashing eyes. They hardly knew whether to think they saw a
spectre, or a wild heathen; he gave a signal, and the fatal spears
closed around them. At that instant the soft tones of a woman's voice
fell on their ear, calling on the Saviour's holy name for aid; at the
sound, the spectres in the court-yard rushed madly one against the
other, the gates burst open, and Gotthard and Rudlieb fled away,
catching a glimpse as they went of an angelic woman who appeared at one
of the windows of the castle. They made every exertion to get their ship
again afloat, choosing to trust themselves to the sea rather than to
that barbarous coast; and at last, after manifold dangers, they landed
at Denmark. They say that some heathen must have owned the cruel castle;
but I hold it to be some ruined fortress, deserted by men, in which
hellish spectres were wont to hold their nightly meetings. What heathen
could be found so demon-like as to offer death to shipwrecked strangers,
instead of refreshment and shelter?" Biorn gazed fixedly on the ground, as though he were turned into stone
but Sintram came towards the table, and said, "Father, let us seek out
this godless abode, and lay it level with the dust. I cannot tell how,
but somehow I feel quite sure that the accursed deed of which we have
just heard is alone the cause of my frightful dreams." Enraged at his son, Biorn rose up, and would perhaps again have uttered
some dreadful words; but Heaven decreed otherwise, for just at that
moment the pealing notes a trumpet were heard, which drowned the angry
tones his voice, the great doors opened slowly, and a herald entered the
hall. He bowed reverently, and then said, "I am sent by Jarl Eric the
Aged. He returned two days ago from his expedition to the Grecian seas. His wish had been to take vengeance on the island which is called
Chios, where fifty years ago his father was slain by the soldiers of the
Emperor. But your kinsman, the sea-king Arinbiorn, who was lying there
at anchor, tried to pacify him. To this Jarl Eric would not listen;
so the sea-king said next that he would never suffer Chios to be laid
waste, because it was an island where the lays of an old Greek bard,
called Homer, were excellently sung, and where more-over a very choice
wine was made. Words proving of no avail, a combat ensued; in which
Arinbiorn had so much the advantage that Jarl Eric lost two of his
ships, and only with difficulty escaped in one which had already
sustained great damage. Eric the Aged has now resolved to take revenge
on some of the sea-king's race, since Arinbiorn himself is seldom on the
spot. Will you, Biorn of the Fiery Eyes, at once pay as large a penalty
in cattle, and money, and goods, as it may please the Jarl to demand? Or will you prepare to meet him with an armed force at Niflung's Heath
seven days hence?" Biorn bowed his head quietly, and replied in a mild tone, "Seven days
hence at Niflung's Heath." He then offered to the herald a golden goblet
full of rich wine, and added, "Drink that, and then carry off with thee
the cup which thou hast emptied." "The Baron of Montfaucon likewise sends greeting to thy chieftain, Jarl
Eric," interposed Folko; "and engages to be also at Niflung's Heath, as
the hereditary friend of the sea-king, and also as the kinsman and guest
of Biorn of the Fiery Eyes." The herald was seen to tremble at the name of Montfaucon; he bowed very
low, cast an anxious, reverential look at the baron, and left the hall. Gabrielle looked on her knight, smiling lovingly and securely, for she
well knew his victorious prowess; and she only asked, "Where shall I
remain, whilst you go forth to battle, Folko?" "I had hoped," answered Biorn, "that you would be well contented to stay
in this castle, lovely lady; I leave my son to guard you and attend on
you." Gabrielle hesitated an instant; and Sintram, who had resumed his
position near the fire, muttered to himself as he fixed his eyes on the
bright flames which were flashing up, "Yes, yes, so it will probably
happen. I can fancy that Duke Menelaus had just left Sparta on some
warlike expedition, when the young knight Paris met the lovely Helen
that evening in the garden." But Gabrielle, shuddering although she knew not why, said quickly,
"Without you, Folko? And must I forego the joy of seeing you fight? or
the honour of tending you, should you chance to receive a wound?" Folko bowed, gracefully thanking his lady, and replied, "Come with your
knight, since such is your pleasure, and be to him a bright guiding
star. It is a good old northern custom that ladies should be present at
knightly combats, and no true warrior of the north will fail to respect
the place whence beams the light of their eyes. Unless, indeed,"
continued he with an inquiring look at Biorn, "unless Jarl Eric is not
worthy of his forefather?" "A man of honour," said Biorn confidently. "Then array yourself, my fairest love," said the delighted Folko; "array
yourself and come forth with us to the battle-field to behold and judge
our deeds." "Come forth with us to the battle," echoed Sintram in a sudden transport
of joy. And they all dispersed in calm cheerfulness; Sintram betaking himself
again to the wood, while the others retired to rest. CHAPTER 9



It was a wild dreary tract of country that, which bore the name of
Niflung's Heath. According to tradition, the young Niflung, son
of Hogni, the last of his race, had there ended darkly a sad and
unsuccessful life. Many ancient grave-stones were still standing round
about; and in the few oak-trees scattered here and there over the plain,
huge eagles had built their nests. The beating of their heavy wings as
they fought together, and their wild screams, were heard far off in
more thickly-peopled regions; and at the sound children would tremble
in their cradles, and old men quake with fear as they slumbered over the
blazing hearth. As the seventh night, the last before the day of combat, was just
beginning, two large armies were seen descending from the hills in
opposite directions; that which came from the west was commanded by Eric
the Aged, that from the east by Biorn of the Fiery Eyes. They appeared
thus early in compliance with the custom which required that adversaries
should always present themselves at the appointed field of battle before
the time named, in order to prove that they rather sought than dreaded
the fight. Folko forthwith pitched on the most convenient spot the tent
of blue samite fringed with gold, which he carried with him to shelter
his gentle lady; whilst Sintram, in the character of herald, rode
over to Jarl Eric to announce to him that the beauteous Gabrielle of
Montfaucon was present in the army of the knight Biorn, and would the
next morning be present as a judge of the combat. Jarl Eric bowed low on receiving this pleasing message; and ordered his
bards to strike up a lay, the words of which ran as follows:--


             "Warriors bold of Eric's band,
              Gird your glittering armour on,
              Stand beneath to-morrow's sun,
                                      In your might. Fairest dame that ever gladden'd
              Our wild shores with beauty's vision,
              May thy bright eyes o'er our combat,
                                      Judge the right! Tidings of yon noble stranger
              Long ago have reach'd our ears,
              Wafted upon southern breezes,
                                      O'er the wave. Now midst yonder hostile ranks,
              In his warlike pride he meets us,
              Folko comes! Fight, men of Eric,
                                      True and brave!" These wondrous tones floated over the plain, and reached the tent
of Gabrielle. It was no new thing to her to hear her knight's fame
celebrated on all sides; but now that she listened to his praises
bursting forth in the stillness of night from the mouth of his enemies,
she could scarce refrain from kneeling at the feet of the mighty
chieftain. But he with courteous tenderness held her up, and pressing
his lips fervently on her soft hand, he said, "My deeds, O lovely lady,
belong to thee, and not to me!" Now the night had passed away, and the east was glowing; and on
Niflung's Heath there was waving, and resounding, and glowing too. Knights put on their rattling armour, war-horses began to neigh, the
morning draught went round in gold and silver goblets, while war-songs
and the clang of harps resounded in the midst. A joyous march was heard
in Biorn's camp, as Montfaucon, with his troops and retainers, clad in
bright steel armour, conducted their lady up to a neighbouring hill,
where she would be safe from the spears which would soon be flying in
all directions, and whence she could look freely over the battle-field. The morning sun, as it were in homage, played over her beauty; and as
she came in view of the camp of Jarl Eric, his soldiers lowered their
weapons, whilst the chieftains bent low the crests of their huge
helmets. Two of Montfaucon's pages remained in attendance on Gabrielle;
for so noble a service not unwillingly bridling their love of fighting. Both armies passed in front of her, saluting her and singing as they
went; they then placed themselves in array, and the fight began. The spears flew from the hands of the stout northern warriors, rattling
against the broad shields under which they sheltered themselves, or
sometimes clattering as they met in the air; at intervals, on one side
or the other, a man was struck, and fell silent in his blood. Then the
Knight of Montfaucon advanced with his troop of Norman horsemen--even
as he dashed past, he did not fail to lower his shining sword to salute
Gabrielle; and then with an exulting war-cry, which burst from many a
voice, they charged the left wing of the enemy. Eric's foot-soldiers,
kneeling firmly, received them with fixed javelins--many a noble horse
fell wounded to death, and in falling brought his rider with him to the
ground; others again crushed their foes under them in their death-fall. Folko rushed through--he and his war-steed unwounded--followed by
a troop of chosen knights. Already were they falling into
disorder--already were Biorn's warriors giving shouts of victory--when
a troop of horse, headed by Jarl Eric himself, advanced against the
valiant baron; and whilst his Normans, hastily assembled, assisted
him in repelling this new attack, the enemy's infantry were gradually
forming themselves into a thick mass, which rolled on and on. All these
movements seemed caused by a warrior whose loud piercing shout was in
the midst. And scarcely were the troops formed into this strange
array, when suddenly they spread themselves out on all sides, carrying
everything before them with the irresistible force of the burning
torrent from Hecla. Biorn's soldiers, who had thought to enclose their enemies, lost courage
and gave way before this wondrous onset. The knight himself in vain
attempted to stem the tide of fugitives, and with difficulty escaped
being carried away by it. Sintram stood looking on this scene of confusion with mute indignation;
friends and foes passed by him, all equally avoiding him, and dreading
to come in contact with one whose aspect was so fearful, nay, almost
unearthly, in his motionless rage. He aimed no blow either to right or
left; his powerful battle-axe rested in his hand; but his eyes flashed
fire, and seemed to be piercing the enemy's ranks through and through,
as if he would find out who it was that had conjured up this sudden
warlike spirit. He succeeded. A small man clothed in strange-looking
armour, with large golden horns on his helmet, and a long visor
advancing in front of it, was leaning on a two-edged curved spear, and
seemed to be looking with derision at the flight of Biorn's troops as
they were pursued by their victorious foes. "That is he," cried Sintram;
"he who will drive us from the field before the eyes of Gabrielle!" And
with the swiftness of an arrow he flew towards him with a wild shout. The combat was fierce, but not of long duration. To the wondrous
dexterity of his adversary, Sintram opposed his far superior size; and
he dealt so fearful a blow on the horned helmet, that a stream of blood
rushed forth, the small man fell as if stunned, and after some frightful
convulsive movements, his limbs appeared to stiffen in death. His fall gave the signal for that of all Eric's army. Even those who
had not seen him fall, suddenly lost their courage and eagerness for the
battle, and retreated with uncertain steps, or ran in wild affright on
the spears of their enemies. At the same time Montfaucon was dispersing
Jarl Eric's cavalry, after a desperate conflict--had hurled their chief
from the saddle, and taken him prisoner with his own hand. Biorn of the
Fiery Eyes stood victorious in the middle of the field of battle. The
day was won. CHAPTER 10



In sight of both armies, with glowing cheeks and looks of modest
humility, Sintram was conducted by the brave baron up the hill where
Gabrielle stood in all the lustre of her beauty. Both warriors bent the
knee before her, and Folko said, solemnly, "Lady, this valiant youth of
a noble race has deserved the reward of this day's victory. I pray you
let him receive it from your fair hand." Gabrielle bowed courteously, took off her scarf of blue and gold, and
fastened it to a bright sword, which a page brought to her on a cushion
of cloth of silver. She then, with a smile, presented the noble gift to
Sintram, who was bending forward to receive it, when suddenly Gabrielle
drew back, and turning to Folko, said, "Noble baron, should not he on
whom I bestow a scarf and sword be first admitted into the order of
knighthood?" Light as a feather, Folko sprang up, and bowing low before
his lady, gave the youth the accolade with solemn earnestness. Then
Gabrielle buckled on his sword, saying, "For the honour of God and the
service of virtuous ladies, young knight. I saw you fight, I saw you
conquer, and my earnest prayers followed you. Fight and conquer often
again, as you have done this day, that the beams of your renown may
shine over my far-distant country." And at a sign from Folko, she
offered her tender lips for the new knight to kiss. Thrilling all over,
and full of a holy joy, Sintram arose in deep silence, and hot tears
streamed down his softened countenance, whilst the shout and the
trumpets of the assembled troops greeted the youth with stunning
applause. Old Rolf stood silently on one side, and as he looked in the
mild beaming eyes of his foster-child, he calmly and piously returned
thanks:


             "The strife at length hath found its end,
              Rich blessings now shall heaven send! The evil foe is slain!" Biorn and Jarl Eric had the while been talking together eagerly, but
not unkindly. The conqueror now led his vanquished enemy up the hill
and presented him to the baron and Gabrielle, saying, "Instead of two
enemies you now see two sworn allies; and I request you, my beloved
guests and kinsfolk, to receive him graciously as one who henceforward
belongs to us." "He was so always," added Eric, smiling; "I sought, indeed, revenge;
but I have now had enough of defeats both by sea and land. Yet I
thank Heaven that neither in the Grecian seas, to the sea-king, nor in
Niflung's Heath, to you, have I yielded ingloriously." The Lord of Montfaucon assented cordially, and heartily and solemnly was
reconciliation made. Then Jarl Eric addressed Gabrielle with so noble a
grace, that with a smile of wonder she gazed on the gigantic grey hero,
and gave him her beautiful hand to kiss. Meanwhile Sintram was speaking earnestly to his good Rolf; and at
length he was heard to say, "But before all, be sure that you bury
that wonderfully brave knight whom my battle-axe smote. Choose out the
greenest hill for his resting-place, and the loftiest oak to shade
his grave. Also, I wish you to open his visor, and to examine his
countenance carefully, that so, though mortally smitten, we may not bury
him alive; and moreover, that you may be able to describe to me him to
whom I owe the noblest prize of victory." Rolf bowed readily, and went. "Our young knight is speaking there of one amongst the slain of whom I
should like to hear more," said Folko, turning to Jarl Eric. "Who, dear
Jarl, was that wonderful chieftain who led on your troops so skilfully,
and who at last fell under Sintram's powerful battle-axe?" "You ask me more than I know how to answer," replied Jarl Eric. "About
three nights ago this stranger made his appearance amongst us. I was
sitting with my chieftains and warriors round the hearth, forging our
armour, and singing the while. Suddenly, above the din of our hammering
and our singing, we heard so loud a noise that it silenced us in a
moment, and we sat motionless as if we had been turned into stone. Before long the sound was repeated; and at last we made out that it must
be caused by some person blowing a huge horn outside the castle, seeking
for admittance. I went down myself to the gate, and as I passed through
the court-yard all my dogs were so terrified by the extraordinary noise,
as to be howling and crouching in their kennels instead of barking. I
chid them, and called to them, but even the fiercest would not follow
me. Then, thought I, I must show you the way to set to work; so I
grasped my sword firmly, I set my torch on the ground close beside me,
and I let the gates fly open without further delay. For I well knew that
it would be no easy matter for any one to come in against my will. A
loud laugh greeted me, and I heard these words, 'Well, well, what mighty
preparations are these before one small man can find the shelter he
seeks!' And in truth I did feel myself redden with shame when I saw the
small stranger standing opposite to me quite alone. I called to him to
come in at once, and offered my hand to him; but he still showed
some displeasure, and would not give me his in return. As he went up,
however, he became more friendly--he showed me the golden horn on which
he sounded that blast, and which he carried screwed on his helmet, as
well as another exactly like it. When he was sitting with us in the
hall, he behaved in a very strange manner--sometimes he was merry,
sometimes cross; by turns courteous and rude in his demeanour, without
any one being able to see a motive for such constant changes. I
longed to know where he came from; but how could I ask my guest such a
question? He told us as much as this, that he was starved with cold in
our country, and that his own was much warmer. Also he appeared well
acquainted with the city of Constantinople, and related fearful stories
of how brothers, uncles, nephews, nay, even fathers and sons, thrust
each other from the throne, blinded, cut out tongues, and murdered. At
length he said his own name--it sounded harmonious, like a Greek name,
but none of us could remember it. Before long he displayed his skill as
an armourer. He understood marvellously well how to handle the red-hot
iron, and how to form it into more murderous weapons than any I had
ever before seen. I would not suffer him to go on making them, for I was
resolved to meet you in the field with equal arms, and such as we are
all used to in our northern countries. Then he laughed, and said he
thought it would be quite possible to be victorious without them, by
skilful movements and the like if only I would entrust the command of my
infantry to him, I was sure of victory. Then I thought that he who makes
arms well must also wield them well--yet I required some proof of his
powers. Ye lords, he came off victorious in trials of strength such as
you can hardly imagine; and although the fame of young Sintram, as a
bold and brave warrior, is spread far and wide, yet I can scarce believe
that he could slay such an one as my Greek ally." He would have continued speaking, but the good Rolf came hastily back
with a few followers, the whole party so ghastly pale, that all eyes
were involuntarily fixed on them, and looked anxiously to hear what
tidings they had brought. Rolf stood still, silent and trembling. "Take courage, my old friend!" cried Sintram. "Whatever thou mayest have
to tell is truth and light from thy faithful mouth." "My dear master," began the old man, "be not angry, but as to burying
that strange warrior whom you slew, it is a thing impossible. Would
that we had never opened that wide hideous visor! For so horrible a
countenance grinned at us from underneath it, so distorted by death, and
with so hellish an expression, that we hardly kept our senses. We could
not by any possibility have touched him. I would rather be sent to kill
wolves and bears in the desert, and look on whilst fierce birds of prey
feast on their carcases." All present shuddered, and were silent for a time, till Sintram nerved
himself to say, "Dear, good old man, why use such wild words as I never
till now heard thee utter? But tell me, Jarl Eric, did your ally appear
altogether so awful while he was yet alive?" "Not as far as I know," answered Jarl Eric, looking inquiringly at his
companions, who were standing around. They said the same thing; but on
farther questioning, it appeared that neither the chieftain, nor the
knights, nor the soldiers, could say exactly what the stranger was like. "We must then find it out for ourselves, and bury the corpse," said
Sintram; and he signed to the assembled party to follow him. All did so
except the Lord of Montfaucon, whom the whispered entreaty of Gabrielle
kept at her side. He lost nothing thereby. For though Niflung's Heath
was searched from one end to the other many times, yet the body of the
unknown warrior was no longer to be found. CHAPTER 11



The joyful calm which came over Sintram on this day appeared to be more
than a passing gleam. If too, at times, a thought of the knight Paris
and Helen would inflame his heart with bolder and wilder wishes, it
needed but one look at his scarf and sword, and the stream of his inner
life glided again clear as a mirror, and serene within. "What can any
man wish for more than has been already bestowed on me?" would he say to
himself at such times in still delight. And thus it went on for a long
while. The beautiful northern autumn had already begun to redden the leaves of
the oaks and elms round the castle, when one day it chanced that Sintram
was sitting in company with Folko and Gabrielle in almost the very same
spot in the garden where he had before met that mysterious being whom,
without knowing why, he had named the little Master. But on this day
how different did everything appear! The sun was sinking slowly over
the sea, the mist of an autumnal evening was rising from the fields
and meadows around, towards the hill on which stood the huge castle. Gabrielle, placing her lute in Sintram's hands, said to him, "Dear
friend, so mild and gentle as you now are, I may well dare to entrust to
you my tender little darling. Let me again hear you sing that lay of the
land of flowers; for I am sure that it will now sound much sweeter than
when you accompanied it with the vibrations of your fearful harp." The young knight bowed as he prepared to obey the lady's commands. With
a grace and softness hitherto unwonted, the tones resounded from his
lips, and the wild song appeared to transform itself, and to bloom into
a garden of the blessed. Tears stood in Gabrielle's eyes; and Sintram,
as he gazed on the pearly brightness, poured forth tones of yet richer
sweetness. When the last notes were sounded, Gabrielle's angelic voice
was heard to echo them; and as she repeated,


             "Sing heigh, sing ho, for that land of flowers,"


Sintram put down the lute, and sighed with a thankful glance towards the
stars, now rising in the heavens. Then Gabrielle, turning towards her
lord, murmured these words: "Oh, how long have we been far away from
our own shining castles and bright gardens! Oh, for that land of the
sweetest flowers!" Sintram could scarce believe that he heard aright, so suddenly did he
feel himself as if shut out from paradise. But his last hope vanished
before the courteous assurances of Folko that he would endeavour to
fulfil his lady's wishes the very next week, and that their ship was
lying off the shore ready to put to sea. She thanked him with a kiss
imprinted softly on his forehead; and leaning on his arm, she bent her
steps, singing and smiling, towards the castle. Sintram, troubled in mind, as though turned into stone, remained behind
forgotten. At length, when night was now in the sky, he started up
wildly, ran up and down the garden, as if all his former madness had
again taken possession of him; and then rushed out and wandered upon
the wild moonlit hills. There he dashed his sword against the trees and
bushes, so that on all sides was heard a sound of crashing and falling. The birds of night flew about him screeching in wild alarm; and the
deer, startled by the noise, sprang away and took refuge in the thickest
coverts. On a sudden old Rolf appeared, returning home from a visit to the
chaplain of Drontheim, to whom he had been relating, with tears of joy,
how Sintram was softened by the presence of the angel Gabrielle,
yea, almost healed, and how he dared to hope that the evil dreams had
yielded. And now the sword, as it whizzed round the furious youth, had
well-nigh wounded the good old man. He stopped short, and clasping
his hand, he said, with a deep sigh, "Alas, Sintram! my foster-child,
darling of my heart, what has come over thee, thus fearfully stirring
thee to rage?" The youth stood awhile as if spell-bound; he looked in his old friend's
face with a fixed and melancholy gaze, and his eyes became dim, like
expiring watch-fires seen through a thick cloud of mist. At length
he sighed forth these words, almost inaudibly: "Good Rolf, good Rolf,
depart from me! thy garden of heaven is no home for me; and if sometimes
a light breeze blow open its golden gates, so that I can look in and see
the flowery meadow-land where the dear angels dwell, then straightway
between them and me come the cold north wind and the icy storm, and the
sounding doors fly together, and I remain without, lonely, in endless
winter." "Beloved young knight, oh, listen to me--listen to the good angel within
you! Do you not bear in your hand that very sword with which the pure
lady girded you? does not her scarf wave over your raging breast? Do you
not recollect how you used to say, that no man could wish for more than
had fallen to you?" "Yes, Rolf, I have said that," replied Sintram, sinking on the mossy
turf, bitterly weeping. Tears also ran over the old man's white beard. Before long the youth stood again erect, his tears ceased to flow, his
looks were fearful, cold, and grim; and he said, "You see, Rolf, I have
passed blessed peaceful days, and I thought that the powers of evil
would never again have dominion over me. So, perchance, it might have
been, as day would ever be did the Sun ever stand in the sky. But ask
the poor benighted Earth, wherefore she looks so dark! Bid her again
smile as she was wont to do! Old man, she cannot smile; and now that
the gentle compassionate Moon has disappeared behind the clouds with her
only funeral veil, she cannot even weep. And in this hour of darkness
all that is wild and mad wakes up. So, stop me not, I tell thee, stop me
not! Hurra, behind, behind the pale Moon!" His voice changed to a hoarse
murmur at these last words, storm-like. He tore away from the trembling
old man, and rushed through the forest. Rolf knelt down and prayed, and
wept silently. CHAPTER 12



Where the sea-beach was wildest, and the cliffs most steep and rugged,
and close by the remains of three shattered oaks, haply marking where,
in heathen times, human victims had been sacrificed, now stood Sintram,
leaning, as if exhausted, on his drawn sword, and gazing intently on
the dancing waves. The moon had again shone forth; and as her pale beams
fell on his motionless figure through the quivering branches of the
trees, he might have been taken for some fearful idol-image. Suddenly
some one on the left half raised himself out of the high withered
grass, uttered a faint groan, and again lay down. Then between the two
companions began this strange talk:

"Thou that movest thyself so strangely in the grass, dost thou belong to
the living or to the dead?" "As one may take it. I am dead to heaven and joy--I live for hell and
anguish." "Methinks that I have heard thee before." "Oh, yes." "Art thou a troubled spirit? and was thy life-blood poured out here of
old in sacrifice to idols?" "I am a troubled spirit; but no man ever has, or ever can, shed my
blood. I have been cast down--oh, into a frightful abyss!" "And didst thou break there thy neck?" "I live,--and shall live longer than thou." "Almost thou seemest to me the crazy pilgrim with the dead men's bones." "I am not he, though often we are companions,--ay, walk together right
near and friendly. But to you be it said, he thinks me mad. If sometimes
I urge him, and say to him, 'Take!' then he hesitates and points
upwards towards the stars. And again, if I say, 'Take not!' then, to a
certainty, he seizes on it in some awkward manner, and so he spoils
my best joys and pleasures. But, in spite of this, we remain in some
measure brothers in arms, and, indeed, all but kinsmen." "Give me hold of thy hand, and let me help thee to get up." "Ho, ho! my active young sir, that might bring you no good. Yet, in
fact, you have already helped to raise me. Give heed awhile." Wilder and ever wilder were the strugglings on the ground; thick clouds
hurried over the moon and the stars, on a long unknown wild journey; and
Sintram's thoughts grew no less wild and stormy, while far and near an
awful howling could be heard amidst the trees and the grass. At length
the mysterious being arose from the ground. As if with a fearful
curiosity, the moon, through a rent in the clouds, cast a beam upon
Sintram's companion, and made clear to the shuddering youth that the
little Master stood, by him. "Avaunt!" cried he, "I will listen no more to thy evil stories about the
knight Paris: they would end by driving me quite mad." "My stories about Paris are not needed for that!" grinned the little
Master. "It is enough that the Helen of thy heart should be journeying
towards Montfaucon. Believe me, madness has thee already, head and
heart. Or wouldest thou that she should remain? For that, however, thou
must be more courteous to me than thou art now." Therewith he raised his voice towards the sea, as if fiercely rebuking
it, so that Sintram could not but shudder and tremble before the dwarf. But he checked himself, and grasping his sword-hilt with both hands, he
said, contemptuously: "Thou and Gabrielle! what acquaintance hast thou
with Gabrielle?" "Not much," was the reply. And the little Master might be seen to quake
with fear and rage as he continued: "I cannot well bear the name of
thy Helen; do not din it in my ears ten times in a breath. But if the
tempest should increase? If the waves should swell, and roll on till
they form a foaming ring round the whole coast of Norway? The voyage to
Montfaucon must in that case be altogether given up, and thy Helen would
remain here, at least through the long, long, dark winter." "If! if!" replied Sintram, with scorn. "Is the sea thy bond-slave? Are
the storms thy fellow-workmen?" "They are rebels, accursed rebels," muttered the little Master in his
red beard. "Thou must lend me thy aid, sir knight, if I am to subdue
them; but thou hast not the heart for it." "Boaster, evil boaster!" answered the youth; "what dost thou ask of me?" "Not much, sir knight; nothing at all for one who has strength and
ardour of soul. Thou needest only look at the sea steadily and keenly
for one half-hour, without ever ceasing to wish with all thy might that
it should foam and rage and swell, and never again rest till winter has
laid its icy hold upon your mountains. Then winter is enough to hinder
Duke Menelaus from his voyage to Montfaucon. And now give me a lock
of your black hair, which is blowing so wildly about your head, like
ravens' or vultures' wings." The youth drew his sharp dagger, madly cut off a lock of his hair,
threw it to the strange being, and now gazed, as he desired, powerfully
wishing, on the waves of the sea. And softly, quite softly, did the
waters stir themselves, as one whispers in troubled dreams who would
gladly rest and cannot. Sintram was on the point of giving up, when in
the moonbeams a ship appeared, with white-swelling sails, towards the
south. Anguish came over him, that Gabrielle would soon thus quickly
sail away; he wished again with all his power, and fixed his eyes
intently on the watery abyss. "Sintram," a voice might have said to
him--"ah, Sintram, art thou indeed the same who so lately wert gazing on
the moistened heaven of the eyes of Gabrielle?" And now the waters heaved more mightily, and the howling tempest swept
over the ocean; the breakers, white with foam, became visible in the
moonlight. Then the little Master threw the lock of Sintram's hair up
towards the clouds, and, as it was blown to and fro by the blast of
wind, the storm burst in all its fury, so that sea and sky were covered
with one thick cloud, and far off might be heard the cries of distress
from many a sinking vessel. But the crazy pilgrim with the dead men's bones rose up in the midst of
the waves, close to the shore, gigantic, tall, fearfully rocking; the
boat in which he stood was hidden from sight, so mightily raged the
waves round about it. "Thou must save him, little Master--thou must certainly save him," cried
Sintram's voice, angrily entreating, through the roaring of the winds
and waves. But the dwarf replied, with a laugh: "Be quite at rest for
him; he will be able to save himself. The waves can do him no harm. Seest thou? They are only begging of him, and therefore they jump up so
boldly round him; and he gives them bountiful alms--very bountiful, that
I can assure thee." In fact, as it seemed, the pilgrim threw some bones into the sea, and
passed scatheless on his way. Sintram felt his blood run cold with
horror, and he rushed wildly towards the castle. His companion had
either fled or vanished away. CHAPTER 13



In the castle, Biorn and Gabrielle and Folko of Montfaucon were sitting
round the great stone table, from which, since the arrival of his noble
guests, those suits of armour had been removed, formerly the established
companions of the lord of the castle, and placed all together in a heap
in the adjoining room. At this time, while the storm was beating so
furiously against doors and windows, it seemed as if the ancient armour
were also stirring in the next room, and Gabrielle several times half
rose from her seat in great alarm, fixing her eyes on the small iron
door, as though she expected to see an armed spectre issue therefrom,
bending with his mighty helmet through the low vaulted doorway. The knight Biorn smiled grimly, and said, as if he had guessed her
thoughts: "Oh, he will never again come out thence; I have put an end to
that for ever." His guests stared at him doubtingly; and with a strange air of
unconcern, as though the storm had awakened all the fierceness of his
soul, he began the following history:

"I was once a happy man myself; I could smile, as you do, and I could
rejoice in the morning as you do; that was before the hypocritical
chaplain had so bewildered the wise mind of my lovely wife with his
canting talk, that she went into a cloister, and left me alone with our
wild boy. That was not fair usage from the fair Verena. Well, so it was,
that in the first days of her dawning beauty, before I knew her, many
knights sought her hand, amongst whom was Sir Weigand the Slender;
and towards him the gentle maiden showed herself the most favourably
inclined. Her parents were well aware that Weigand's rank and station
were little below their own, and that his early fame as a warrior
without reproach stood high; so that before long Verena and he were
accounted as affianced. It happened one day that they were walking
together in the orchard, when a shepherd was driving his flock up the
mountain beyond. The maiden saw a little snow-white lamb frolicking
gaily, and longed for it. Weigand vaults over the railings, overtakes
the shepherd, and offers him two gold bracelets for the lamb. But the
shepherd will not part with it, and scarcely listens to the knight,
going quietly the while up the mountain-side, with Weigand close upon
him. At last Weigand loses patience. He threatens; and the shepherd,
sturdy and proud like all of his race in our northern land, threatens
in return. Suddenly Weigand's sword resounds upon his head,--the stroke
should have fallen flat, but who can control a fiery horse or a drawn
sword? The bleeding shepherd, with a cloven skull, falls down the
precipice; his frightened flock bleats on the mountain. Only the little
lamb runs in its terror to the orchard, pushes itself through the
garden-rails, and lies at Verena's feet, as if asking for help, all
red with its master's blood. She took it up in her arms, and from that
moment never suffered Weigand the Slender to appear again before her
face. She continued to cherish the little lamb, and seemed to take
pleasure in nothing else in the world, and became pale and turned
towards heaven, as the lilies are. She would soon have taken the veil,
but just then I came to aid her father in a bloody war, and rescued
him from his enemies. The old man represented this to her, and, softly
smiling, she gave me her lovely hand. His grief would not suffer the
unhappy Weigand to remain in his own country. It drove him forth as a
pilgrim to Asia, whence our forefathers came, and there he did wonderful
deeds, both of valour and self-abasement. Truly, my heart was strangely
weak when I heard him spoken of at that time. After some years he
returned, and wished to build a church or monastery on that mountain
towards the west, whence the walls of my castle are distinctly seen. It was said that he wished to become a priest there, but it fell out
otherwise. For some pirates had sailed from the southern seas, and,
hearing of the building of this monastery, their chief thought to
find much gold belonging to the lord of the castle and to the master
builders, or else, if he surprised and carried them off, to extort from
them a mighty ransom. He did not yet know northern courage and northern
weapons; but he soon gained that knowledge. Having landed in the creek
under the black rocks, he made his way through a by-path up to the
building, surrounded it, and thought in himself that the affair was now
ended. Ha! then out rushed Weigand and his builders, and fell upon them
with swords and hatchets and hammers. The heathens fled away to their
ships, with Weigand behind to take vengeance on them. In passing by our
castle he caught a sight of Verena on the terrace, and, for the first
time during so many years, she bestowed a courteous and kind salutation
on the glowing victor. At that moment a dagger, hurled by one of the
pirates in the midst of his hasty flight, struck Weigand's uncovered
head, and he fell to the ground bleeding and insensible. We completed
the rout of the heathens: then I had the wounded knight brought into the
castle; and my pale Verena glowed as lilies in the light of the morning
sun, and Weigand opened his eyes with a smile when he was brought near
her. He refused to be taken into any room but the small one close to
this where the armour is now placed; for he said that he felt as if
it were a cell like that which he hoped soon to inhabit in his quiet
cloister. All was done after his wish: my sweet Verena nursed him, and
he appeared at first to be on the straightest road to recovery; but his
head continued weak and liable to be confused by the slightest emotion,
his walk was rather a falling than a walking, and his cheeks were
colourless. We could not let him go. When we were sitting here together
in the evening, he used always to come tottering into the hall through
the low doorway; and my heart was sad and wrathful too, when the soft
eyes of Verena beamed so sweetly on him, and a glow like that of the
evening sky hovered over her lily cheeks. But I bore it, and I could
have borne it to the end of our lives,--when, alas! Verena went into a
cloister!" His head fell so heavily on his folded hands, that the stone table
seemed to groan beneath it, and he remained a long while motionless as a
corpse. When he again raised himself up, his eyes glared fearfully as he
looked round the hall, and he said to Folko: "Your beloved Hamburghers,
Gotthard Lenz, and Rudlieb his son, they have much to answer for! Who
bid them come and be shipwrecked so close to my castle?" Folko cast a piercing look on him, and a fearful inquiry was on the
point of escaping his lips, but another look at the trembling Gabrielle
made him silent, at least for the present moment, and the knight Biorn
continued his narrative. "Verena was with her nuns, I was left alone, and my despair had driven
me throughout the day through forest and brook and mountain. In the
twilight I returned to my deserted castle, and scarcely was I in the
hall, when the little door creaked, and Weigand, who had slept through
all, crept towards me and asked: 'Where can Verena be?' Then I became as
mad, and howled to him, 'She is gone mad, and so am I, and you also, and
now we are all mad!' Merciful Heaven, the wound on his head burst open,
and a dark stream flowed over his face--ah! how different from the
redness when Verena met him at the castle-gate; and he rushed forth,
raving mad, into the wilderness without, and ever since has wandered all
around as a crazy pilgrim." He was silent, and so were Folko and Gabrielle, all three pale and cold
like images of the dead. At length the fearful narrator added in a low
voice, and as if he were quite exhausted: "He has visited me since that
time, but he will never again come through the little door. Have I not
established peace and order in my castle?" CHAPTER 14



Sintram had not returned home, when those of the castle betook
themselves to rest in deep bewilderment. No one thought of him, for
every heart was filled with strange forebodings, and with uncertain
cares. Even the heroic breast of the Knight of Montfaucon heaved in
doubt. Old Rolf still remained without, weeping in the forest, heedless of the
storm which beat on his unprotected head, while he waited for his young
master. But he had gone a very different way; and when the morning
dawned, he entered the castle from the opposite side. Gabrielle's slumbers had been sweet during the whole night. It had
seemed to her that angels with golden wings had blown away the wild
histories of the evening before, and had wafted to her the bright
flowers, the sparkling sea, and the green hills of her own home. She
smiled, and drew her breath calmly and softly, whilst the magical
tempest raged and howled through the forests, and continued to battle
with the troubled sea. But in truth when she awoke in the morning,
and heard still the rattling of the windows, and saw the clouds, as if
dissolved in mist and steam, still hiding the face of the heavens, she
could have wept for anxiety and sadness, especially when she heard from
her maidens that Folko had already left their apartment clad in full
armour as if prepared for a combat. At the same time she heard the sound
of the heavy tread of armed men in the echoing halls, and, on inquiring,
found that the Knight of Montfaucon had assembled all his retainers to
be in readiness to protect their lady. Wrapped in a cloak of ermine, she stood trembling like a tender flower
just sprung up out of the snow, tottering beneath a winter's storm. Then
Sir Folko entered the room, in all his shining armour, and peacefully
carrying his golden helmet with the long shadowy plumes in his hand. He
saluted Gabrielle with cheerful serenity, and at a sign from him, her
attendants retired, while the men-at-arms without were heard quietly
dispersing. "Lady," said he, as he took his seat beside her, on a couch to which
he led her, already re-assured by his presence: "lady, will you forgive
your knight for having left you to endure some moments of anxiety; but
honour and stern justice called him. Now all is set in order, quietly
and peacefully; dismiss your fears and every thought that has troubled
you, as things which are no more." "But you and Biorn?" asked Gabrielle. "On the word of a knight," replied
he, "all is well there." And thereupon he began to talk over indifferent
subjects with his usual ease and wit; but Gabrielle, bending towards
him, said with deep emotion:

"O Folko, my knight, the flower of my life, my protector and my dearest
hope on earth, tell me all, if thou mayst. But if a promise binds thee,
it is different. Thou knowest that I am of the race of Portamour, and
I would ask nothing from my knight which could cast even a breath of
suspicion on his spotless shield." Folko thought gravely for one instant; then looking at her with a bright
smile, he said: "It is not that, Gabrielle; but canst thou bear what
I have to disclose? Wilt thou not sink down under it, as a slender fir
gives way under a mass of snow?" She raised herself somewhat proudly, and said: "I have already reminded
thee of the name of my father's house. Let me now add, that I am the
wedded wife of the Baron of Montfaucon." "Then so let it be," replied Folko solemnly; "and if that must come
forth openly which should ever have remained hidden in the darkness
which belongs to such deeds of wickedness, at least let it come forth
less fearfully with a sudden flash. Know then, Gabrielle, that the
wicked knight who would have slain my friends Gotthard and Rudlieb is
none other than our kinsman and host, Biorn of the Fiery Eyes." Gabrielle shuddered and covered her eyes with her fair hands; but at the
end of a moment she looked up with a bewildered air, and said: "I have
heard wrong surely, although it is true that yesterday evening such a
thought struck me. For did not you say awhile ago that all was settled
and at peace between you and Biorn? Between the brave baron and such a
man after such a crime?" "You heard aright," answered Folko, looking with fond delight on the
delicate yet high-minded lady. "This morning with the earliest dawn I
went to him and challenged him to a mortal combat in the neighbouring
valley, if he were the man whose castle had well-nigh become an altar of
sacrifice to Gotthard and Rudlieb. He was already completely armed,
and merely saying, 'I am he,' he followed me to the forest. But when
he stood alone at the place of combat, he flung away his shield down
a giddy precipice, then his sword was hurled after it, and next with
gigantic strength he tore off his coat of mail, and said, 'Now fall
on, thou minister of vengeance; for I am a heavy sinner, and I dare
not fight with thee.' How could I then attack him? A strange truce
was agreed on between us. He is half as my vassal, and yet I solemnly
forgave him in my own name and in that of my friends. He was contrite,
and yet no tear was in his eye, no gentle word on his lips. He is only
kept under by the power with which I am endued by having right on my
side, and it is on that tenure that Biorn is my vassal. I know not,
lady, whether you can bear to see us together on these terms; if not, I
will ask for hospitality in some other castle; there are none in Norway
which would not receive us joyfully and honourably, and this wild
autumnal storm may put off our voyage for many a day. Only this I think,
that if we depart directly and in such a manner, the heart of this
savage man will break." "Where my noble lord remains, there I also remain joyfully under his
protection," replied Gabrielle; and again her heart glowed with rapture
at the greatness of her knight. CHAPTER 15



The noble lady had just unbuckled her knight's armour with her own
fair hands,--on the field of battle alone were pages or esquires bidden
handle Montfaucon's armour,--and now she was throwing over his shoulders
his mantle of blue velvet embroidered with gold, when the door opened
gently, and Sintram entered the room, humbly greeting them. Gabrielle
received him kindly, as she was wont, but suddenly turning pale, she
looked away and said:

"O Sintram, what has happened to you? And how can one single night have
so fearfully altered you?" Sintram stood still, thunderstruck, and feeling as if he himself did
not know what had befallen him. Then Folko took him by the hand, led him
towards a bright polished shield, and said very earnestly, "Look here at
yourself, young knight!" At the first glance Sintram drew back horrified. He fancied that he saw
the little Master before him with that single upright feather sticking
out of his cap; but he at length perceived that the mirror was only
showing him his own image and none other, and that his own wild dagger
had given him this strange and spectre-like aspect, as he could not deny
to himself. "Who has done that to you?" asked Folko, yet more grave and solemn. "And
what terror makes your disordered hair stand on end?" Sintram knew not what to answer. He felt as if a judgment were coming
on him, and a shameful degrading from his knightly rank. Suddenly Folko
drew him away from the shield, and taking him towards the rattling
window, he asked: "Whence comes this tempest?" Still Sintram kept silence. His limbs began to tremble under him; and
Gabrielle, pale and terrified, whispered, "O Folko, my knight, what has
happened? Oh, tell me; are we come into an enchanted castle?" "The land of our northern ancestors," replied Folko with solemnity, "is
full of mysterious knowledge. But we may not, for all that, call its
people enchanters; still this youth has cause to watch himself narrowly;
he whom the evil one has touched by so much as one hair of his head..."

Sintram heard no more; with a deep groan he staggered out of the room. As he left it, he met old Rolf, still almost benumbed by the cold and
storms of the night. Now, in his joy at again seeing his young master,
he did not remark his altered appearance; but as he accompanied him to
his sleeping-room he said, "Witches and spirits of the tempest must
have taken up their abode on the sea-shore. I am certain that such wild
storms never arise without some devilish arts." Sintram fell into a fainting-fit, from which Rolf could with difficulty
recover him sufficiently to appear in the great hall at the mid-day
hour. But before he went down, he caused a shield to be brought, saw
himself therein, and cut close round, in grief and horror, the rest of
his long black hair, so that he made himself look almost like a monk;
and thus he joined the others already assembled round the table. They all looked at him with surprise; but old Biorn rose up and said
fiercely, "Are you going to betake yourself to the cloister, as well as
the fair lady your mother?" A commanding look from the Baron of Montfaucon checked any further
outbreak; and as if in apology, Biorn added, with a forced smile, "I was
only thinking if any accident had befallen him, like Absalom's, and if
he had been obliged to save himself from being strangled by parting with
all his hair." "You should not jest with holy things," answered the baron severely,
and all were silent. No sooner was the repast ended, than Folko and
Gabrielle, with a grave and courteous salutation, retired to their
apartments. CHAPTER 16



Life in the castle took from this time quite another form. Those two
bright beings, Folko and Gabrielle, spent most part of the day in their
apartments, and when they showed themselves, it was with quiet dignity
and grave silence, while Biorn and Sintram stood before them in humble
fear. Nevertheless, Biorn could not bear the thought of his guests
seeking shelter in any other knight's abode. When Folko once spoke of
it, something like a tear stood in the wild man's eye. His head sank,
and he said softly, "As you please; but I feel that if you go, I shall
run among the rocks for days." And thus they all remained together; for the storm continued to rage
with such increasing fury over the sea, that no sea voyage could be
thought of, and the oldest man in Norway could not call to mind such
an autumn. The priests examined all the runic books, the bards looked
through their lays and tales, and yet they could find no record of the
like. Biorn and Sintram braved the tempest; but during the few hours
in which Folko and Gabrielle showed themselves, the father and son were
always in the castle, as if respectfully waiting upon them; the rest
of the day--nay, often through whole nights, they rushed through the
forests and over the rocks in pursuit of bears. Folko the while called
up all the brightness of his fancy, all his courtly grace, in order to
make Gabrielle forget that she was living in this wild castle, and that
the long, hard northern winter was setting in, which would ice them in
for many a month. Sometimes he would relate bright tales; then he would
play the liveliest airs to induce Gabrielle to lead a dance with her
attendants; then, again, handing his lute to one of the women, he would
himself take a part the dance, well knowing to express thereby after
some new fashion his devotion to his lady. Another time he would have
the spacious halls of the castle prepared for his armed retainers to
go through their warlike exercises, and Gabrielle always adjudged the
reward to the conqueror. Folko often joined the circle of combatants; so
that he only met their attacks, defending himself, but depriving no one
of the prize. The Norwegians, who stood around as spectators, used
to compare him to the demi-god Baldur, one of the heroes of their old
traditions, who was wont to let the darts of his companions be all
hurled against him, conscious that he was invulnerable, and of his own
indwelling strength. At the close of one of these martial exercises, old Rolf advanced
towards Folko, and beckoning him with an humble look, said softly, "They
call you the beautiful mighty Baldur,--and they are right. But even the
beautiful mighty Baldur did not escape death. Take heed to yourself." Folko looked at him wondering. "Not that I know of any treachery,"
continued the old man; "or that I can even foresee the likelihood of
any. God keep a Norwegian from such a fear. But when you stand before
me in all the brightness of your glory, the fleetingness of everything
earthly weighs down my mind, and I cannot refrain from saying, 'Take
heed, noble baron! oh, take heed! Even the most beautiful glory comes to
an end.'" "Those are wise and pious thoughts," replied Folko calmly, "and I will
treasure them in a pure heart." The good Rolf was often with Folko and Gabrielle, and made a connecting
link between the two widely differing parties in the castle. For how
could he have ever forsaken his own Sintram! Only in the wild hunting
expeditions through the howling storms and tempests he no longer was
able to follow his young lord. At length the icy reign of winter began in all its glory. On this
account a return to Normandy was impossible, and therefore the magical
storm was lulled. The hills and valleys shone brilliantly in their white
attire of snow, and Folko used sometimes, with skates on his feet, to
draw his lady in a light sledge over the glittering frozen lakes and
streams. On the other hand, the bear-hunts of the lord of the castle and
his son took a still more desperate and to them joyous course. About this time,--when Christmas was drawing near, and Sintram was
seeking to overpower his dread of the awful dreams by the most daring
expeditions,--about this time, Folko and Gabrielle stood together on
one of the terraces of the castle. The evening was mild; the snow-clad
fields were glowing in the red light of the setting sun; from below
there were heard men's voices singing songs of ancient heroic times,
while they worked in the armourer's forge. At last the songs died away,
the beating of hammers ceased, and, without the speakers being seen, or
there being any possibility of distinguishing them by their voices, the
following discourse arose:--

"Who is the bravest amongst all those whose race derives its origin from
our renowned land?" "It is Folko of Montfaucon." "Rightly said; but tell me, is there anything from which even this bold
baron draws back?" "In truth there is one thing,--and we who have never left Norway face it
quite willingly and joyfully." "And that is--?" "A bear-hunt in winter, over trackless plains of snow, down frightful
ice-covered precipices." "Truly thou answerest aright, my comrade. He who knows not how to fasten
our skates on his feet, how to turn in them to the right or left at a
moment's warning, he may be a valiant knight in other respects, but he
had better keep away from our hunting parties, and remain with his timid
wife in her apartments." At which the speakers were heard to laugh well
pleased, and then to betake themselves again to their armourer's work. Folko stood long buried in thought. A glow beyond that of the evening
sky reddened his cheek. Gabrielle also remained silent, considering she
knew not what. At last she took courage, and embracing her beloved, she
said: "To-morrow thou wilt go forth to hunt the bear, wilt thou not? and
thou wilt bring the spoils of the chase to thy lady?" The knight gave a joyful sign of assent; and the rest of the evening was
spent in dances and music. CHAPTER 17



"See, my noble lord," said Sintram the next morning, when Folko had
expressed his wish of going out with him, "these skates of ours give
such wings to our course, that we go down the mountain-side swiftly as
the wind; and even in going up again we are too quick for any one to be
able to pursue us, and on the plains no horse can keep up with us; and
yet they can only be worn with safety by those who are well practised. It seems as though some strange spirit dwelt in them, which is fearfully
dangerous to any that have not learnt the management of them in their
childhood. Folko answered somewhat proudly: "Do you suppose that this is the first
time that I have been amongst your mountains? Years ago I have joined in
this sport, and, thank Heaven, there is no knightly exercise which does
not speedily become familiar to me." Sintram did not venture to make any further objections, and still less
did old Biorn. They both felt relieved when they saw with what skill and
ease Folko buckled the skates on his feet, without suffering any one to
assist him. This day they hunted up the mountain in pursuit of a fierce
bear which had often before escaped from them. Before long it was
necessary that they should separate, and Sintram offered himself as
companion to Folko, who, touched by the humble manner of the youth, and
his devotion to him, forgot all that had latterly seemed mysterious
in the pale altered being before him, and agreed heartily. As now they
continued to climb higher and higher up the mountain, and saw from
many a giddy height the rocks and crags below them looking like a vast
expanse of sea suddenly turned into ice whilst tossed by a violent
tempest, the noble Montfaucon drew his breath more freely. He poured
forth war-songs and love-longs in the clear mountain air, and the
startled echoes repeated from rock to rock the lays of his Frankish
home. 