



Produced by Douglas B. Killings. The Fall of Troy


by

Quintus Smyrnaeus


("Quintus of Smyrna")

Fl. 4th Century A.D. Originally written in Greek, sometime about the middle of the 4th
Century A.D. Translation by A.S. Way, 1913. *****************************************************************

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY:

ORIGINAL TEXT--

Way, A.S. (Ed. & Trans. ): "Quintus Smyrnaeus: The Fall of Troy"
(Loeb Classics #19; Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA,
1913). Greek text with side-by-side English translation. OTHER TRANSLATIONS--

Combellack, Frederick M. (Trans. ): "The War at Troy: What Homer
Didn't Tell" (University of Oklahoma Press, Norman OK, 1968). RECOMMENDED READING--

Fitzgerald, Robert (Trans. ): "Homer: The Iliad" (Viking Press,
New York, 1968). *****************************************************************


INTRODUCTION

Homer's "Iliad" begins towards the close of the last of the ten
years of the Trojan War: its incidents extend over some fifty
days only, and it ends with the burial of Hector. The things
which came before and after were told by other bards, who between
them narrated the whole "cycle" of the events of the war, and so
were called the Cyclic Poets. Of their works none have survived;
but the story of what befell between Hector's funeral and the
taking of Troy is told in detail, and well told, in a poem about
half as long as the "Iliad". Some four hundred years after
Christ there lived at Smyrna a poet of whom we know scarce
anything, save that his first name was Quintus. He had saturated
himself with the spirit of Homer, he had caught the ring of his
music, and he perhaps had before him the works of those Cyclic
Poets whose stars had paled before the sun. We have practically no external evidence as to the date or place
of birth of Quintus of Smyrna, or for the sources whence he drew
his materials. His date is approximately settled by two passages
in the poem, viz. vi. 531 sqq., in which occurs an illustration
drawn from the man-and-beast fights of the amphitheatre, which
were suppressed by Theodosius I. (379-395 A.D.); and xiii. 335
sqq., which contains a prophecy, the special particularity of
which, it is maintained by Koechly, limits its applicability to
the middle of the fourth century A.D.

His place of birth, and the precise locality, is given by himself
in xii. 308-313, and confirmatory evidence is afforded by his
familiarity, of which he gives numerous instances, with many
natural features of the western part of Asia Minor. With respect to his authorities, and the use he made of their
writings, there has been more difference of opinion. Since his
narrative covers the same ground as the "Aethiopis" ("Coming of
Memnon") and the "Iliupersis" ("Destruction of Troy") of Arctinus
(circ. 776 B.C. ), and the "Little Iliad" of Lesches (circ. 700
B.C. ), it has been assumed that the work of Quintus "is little
more than an amplification or remodelling of the works of these
two Cyclic Poets." This, however, must needs be pure conjecture,
as the only remains of these poets consist of fragments amounting
to no more than a very few lines from each, and of the "summaries
of contents" made by the grammarian Proclus (circ. 140 A.D.),
which, again, we but get at second-hand through the "Bibliotheca"
of Photius (ninth century). Now, not merely do the only
descriptions of incident that are found in the fragments differ
essentially from the corresponding incidents as described by
Quintus, but even in the summaries, meagre as they are, we find,
as German critics have shown by exhaustive investigation, serious
discrepancies enough to justify us in the conclusion that, even
if Quintus had the works of the Cyclic poets before him, which is
far from certain, his poem was no mere remodelling of theirs, but
an independent and practically original work. Not that this
conclusion disposes by any means of all difficulties. If Quintus
did not follow the Cyclic poets, from what source did he draw his
materials? The German critic unhesitatingly answers, "from
Homer." As regards language, versification, and general spirit,
the matter is beyond controversy; but when we come to consider
the incidents of the story, we find deviations from Homer even
more serious than any of those from the Cyclic poets. And the
strange thing is, that each of these deviations is a manifest
detriment to the perfection of his poem; in each of them the
writer has missed, or has rejected, a magnificent opportunity. With regard to the slaying of Achilles by the hand of Apollo
only, and not by those of Apollo and Paris, he might have pleaded
that Homer himself here speaks with an uncertain voice (cf. "Iliad" xv. 416-17, xxii. 355-60, and xxi. 277-78). But, in
describing the fight for the body of Achilles ("Odyssey" xxiv. 36
sqq. ), Homer makes Agamemnon say:

     "So we grappled the livelong day, and we had not refrained
          us then,
     But Zeus sent a hurricane, stilling the storm of the battle
          of men." Now, it is just in describing such natural phenomena, and in
blending them with the turmoil of battle, that Quintus is in his
element; yet for such a scene he substitutes what is, by
comparison, a lame and impotent conclusion. Of that awful cry
that rang over the sea heralding the coming of Thetis and the
Nymphs to the death-rites of her son, and the panic with which it
filled the host, Quintus is silent. Again, Homer ("Odyssey" iv. 274-89) describes how Helen came in the night with Deiphobus, and
stood by the Wooden Horse, and called to each of the hidden
warriors with the voice of his own wife. This thrilling scene
Quintus omits, and substitutes nothing of his own. Later on, he
makes Menelaus slay Deiphobus unresisting, "heavy with wine,"
whereas Homer ("Odyssey" viii. 517-20) makes him offer such a
magnificent resistance, that Odysseus and Menelaus together could
not kill him without the help of Athena. In fact, we may say
that, though there are echoes of the "Iliad" all through the
poem, yet, wherever Homer has, in the "Odyssey", given the
outline-sketch of an effective scene, Quintus has uniformly
neglected to develop it, has sometimes substituted something much
weaker--as though he had not the "Odyssey" before him! For this we have no satisfactory explanation to offer. He may
have set his own judgment above Homer--a most unlikely hypothesis:
he may have been consistently following, in the framework of his
story, some original now lost to us: there may be more, and longer,
lacunae in the text than any editors have ventured to indicate: but,
whatever theory we adopt, it must be based on mere conjecture. The Greek text here given is that of Koechly (1850) with many of
Zimmermann's emendations, which are acknowledged in the notes. Passages enclosed in square brackets are suggestions of Koechly
for supplying the general sense of lacunae. Where he has made no
such suggestion, or none that seemed to the editors to be
adequate, the lacuna has been indicated by asterisks, though here
too a few words have been added in the translation, sufficient to
connect the sense. --A. S. Way



CONTENTS


BOOK

    I  How died for Troy the Queen of the Amazons,
       Penthesileia. II  How Memnon, Son of the Dawn, for Troy's sake fell
       in the Battle. III  How by the shaft of a God laid low was Hero Achilles. IV  How in the Funeral Games of Achilles heroes contended. V  How the Arms of Achilles were cause of madness and
       death unto Aias. VI  How came for the helping of Troy Eurypylus,
       Hercules' grandson. VII  How the Son of Achilles was brought to the War
       from the Isle of Scyros. VIII  How Hercules' Grandson perished in fight with the
       Son of Achilles. IX  How from his long lone exile returned to the war
       Philoctetes. X  How Paris was stricken to death, and in vain sought
       help of Oenone. XI  How the sons of Troy for the last time fought from
       her walls and her towers. XII  How the Wooden Horse was fashioned, and brought
       into Troy by her people. XIII  How Troy in the night was taken and sacked with fire
       and slaughter. XIV  How the conquerors sailed from Troy unto judgment
       of tempest and shipwreck. BOOK I:

How died for Troy the Queen of the Amazons, Penthesileia. When godlike Hector by Peleides slain
  Passed, and the pyre had ravined up his flesh,
  And earth had veiled his bones, the Trojans then
  Tarried in Priam's city, sore afraid
  Before the might of stout-heart Aeacus' son:
  As kine they were, that midst the copses shrink
  From faring forth to meet a lion grim,
  But in dense thickets terror-huddled cower;
  So in their fortress shivered these to see
  That mighty man. Of those already dead
  They thought of all whose lives he reft away
  As by Scamander's outfall on he rushed,
  And all that in mid-flight to that high wall
  He slew, how he quelled Hector, how he haled
  His corse round Troy;--yea, and of all beside
  Laid low by him since that first day whereon
  O'er restless seas he brought the Trojans doom. Ay, all these they remembered, while they stayed
  Thus in their town, and o'er them anguished grief
  Hovered dark-winged, as though that very day
  All Troy with shrieks were crumbling down in fire. Then from Thermodon, from broad-sweeping streams,
  Came, clothed upon with beauty of Goddesses,
  Penthesileia--came athirst indeed
  For groan-resounding battle, but yet more
  Fleeing abhorred reproach and evil fame,
  Lest they of her own folk should rail on her
  Because of her own sister's death, for whom
  Ever her sorrows waxed, Hippolyte,
  Whom she had struck dead with her mighty spear,
  Not of her will--'twas at a stag she hurled. So came she to the far-famed land of Troy. Yea, and her warrior spirit pricked her on,
  Of murder's dread pollution thus to cleanse
  Her soul, and with such sacrifice to appease
  The Awful Ones, the Erinnyes, who in wrath
  For her slain sister straightway haunted her
  Unseen: for ever round the sinner's steps
  They hover; none may 'scape those Goddesses. And with her followed twelve beside, each one
  A princess, hot for war and battle grim,
  Far-famous each, yet handmaids unto her:
  Penthesileia far outshone them all. As when in the broad sky amidst the stars
  The moon rides over all pre-eminent,
  When through the thunderclouds the cleaving heavens
  Open, when sleep the fury-breathing winds;
  So peerless was she mid that charging host. Clonie was there, Polemusa, Derinoe,
  Evandre, and Antandre, and Bremusa,
  Hippothoe, dark-eyed Harmothoe,
  Alcibie, Derimacheia, Antibrote,
  And Thermodosa glorying with the spear. All these to battle fared with warrior-souled
  Penthesileia: even as when descends
  Dawn from Olympus' crest of adamant,
  Dawn, heart-exultant in her radiant steeds
  Amidst the bright-haired Hours; and o'er them all,
  How flawless-fair soever these may be,
  Her splendour of beauty glows pre-eminent;
  So peerless amid all the Amazons Unto
  Troy-town Penthesileia came. To right, to left, from all sides hurrying thronged
  The Trojans, greatly marvelling, when they saw
  The tireless War-god's child, the mailed maid,
  Like to the Blessed Gods; for in her face
  Glowed beauty glorious and terrible. Her smile was ravishing: beneath her brows
  Her love-enkindling eyes shone like to stars,
  And with the crimson rose of shamefastness
  Bright were her cheeks, and mantled over them
  Unearthly grace with battle-prowess clad. Then joyed Troy's folk, despite past agonies,
  As when, far-gazing from a height, the hinds
  Behold a rainbow spanning the wide sea,
  When they be yearning for the heaven-sent shower,
  When the parched fields be craving for the rain;
  Then the great sky at last is overgloomed,
  And men see that fair sign of coming wind
  And imminent rain, and seeing, they are glad,
  Who for their corn-fields' plight sore sighed before;
  Even so the sons of Troy when they beheld
  There in their land Penthesileia dread
  Afire for battle, were exceeding glad;
  For when the heart is thrilled with hope of good,
  All smart of evils past is wiped away:
  So, after all his sighing and his pain,
  Gladdened a little while was Priam's soul. As when a man who hath suffered many a pang
  From blinded eyes, sore longing to behold
  The light, and, if he may not, fain would die,
  Then at the last, by a cunning leech's skill,
  Or by a God's grace, sees the dawn-rose flush,
  Sees the mist rolled back from before his eyes,--
  Yea, though clear vision come not as of old,
  Yet, after all his anguish, joys to have
  Some small relief, albeit the stings of pain
  Prick sharply yet beneath his eyelids;--so
  Joyed the old king to see that terrible queen--
  The shadowy joy of one in anguish whelmed
  For slain sons. Into his halls he led the Maid,
  And with glad welcome honoured her, as one
  Who greets a daughter to her home returned
  From a far country in the twentieth year;
  And set a feast before her, sumptuous
  As battle-glorious kings, who have brought low
  Nations of foes, array in splendour of pomp,
  With hearts in pride of victory triumphing. And gifts he gave her costly and fair to see,
  And pledged him to give many more, so she
  Would save the Trojans from the imminent doom. And she such deeds she promised as no man
  Had hoped for, even to lay Achilles low,
  To smite the wide host of the Argive men,
  And cast the brands red-flaming on the ships. Ah fool!--but little knew she him, the lord
  Of ashen spears, how far Achilles' might
  In warrior-wasting strife o'erpassed her own! But when Andromache, the stately child
  Of king Eetion, heard the wild queen's vaunt,
  Low to her own soul bitterly murmured she:
  "Ah hapless! why with arrogant heart dost thou
  Speak such great swelling words? No strength is thine
  To grapple in fight with Peleus' aweless son. Nay, doom and swift death shall he deal to thee. Alas for thee! What madness thrills thy soul? Fate and the end of death stand hard by thee! Hector was mightier far to wield the spear
  Than thou, yet was for all his prowess slain,
  Slain for the bitter grief of Troy, whose folk
  The city through looked on him as a God. My glory and his noble parents' glory
  Was he while yet he lived--O that the earth
  Over my dead face had been mounded high,
  Or ever through his throat the breath of life
  Followed the cleaving spear! But now have I
  Looked--woe is me!--on grief unutterable,
  When round the city those fleet-footed steeds
  Haled him, steeds of Achilles, who had made
  Me widowed of mine hero-husband, made
  My portion bitterness through all my days." So spake Eetion's lovely-ankled child
  Low to her own soul, thinking on her lord. So evermore the faithful-hearted wife
  Nurseth for her lost love undying grief. Then in swift revolution sweeping round
  Into the Ocean's deep stream sank the sun,
  And daylight died. So when the banqueters
  Ceased from the wine-cup and the goodly feast,
  Then did the handmaids spread in Priam's halls
  For Penthesileia dauntless-souled the couch
  Heart-cheering, and she laid her down to rest;
  And slumber mist-like overveiled her eyes [depths
  Like sweet dew dropping round. From heavens' blue
  Slid down the might of a deceitful dream
  At Pallas' hest, that so the warrior-maid
  Might see it, and become a curse to Troy
  And to herself, when strained her soul to meet;
  The whirlwind of the battle. In this wise
  The Trito-born, the subtle-souled, contrived:
  Stood o'er the maiden's head that baleful dream
  In likeness of her father, kindling her
  Fearlessly front to front to meet in fight
  Fleetfoot Achilles. And she heard the voice,
  And all her heart exulted, for she weened
  That she should on that dawning day achieve
  A mighty deed in battle's deadly toil
  Ah, fool, who trusted for her sorrow a dream
  Out of the sunless land, such as beguiles
  Full oft the travail-burdened tribes of men,
  Whispering mocking lies in sleeping ears,
  And to the battle's travail lured her then! But when the Dawn, the rosy-ankled, leapt
  Up from her bed, then, clad in mighty strength
  Of spirit, suddenly from her couch uprose
  Penthesileia. Then did she array
  Her shoulders in those wondrous-fashioned arms
  Given her of the War-god. First she laid
  Beneath her silver-gleaming knees the greaves
  Fashioned of gold, close-clipping the strong limbs. Her rainbow-radiant corslet clasped she then
  About her, and around her shoulders slung,
  With glory in her heart, the massy brand
  Whose shining length was in a scabbard sheathed
  Of ivory and silver. Next, her shield
  Unearthly splendid, caught she up, whose rim
  Swelled like the young moon's arching chariot-rail
  When high o'er Ocean's fathomless-flowing stream
  She rises, with the space half filled with light
  Betwixt her bowing horns. So did it shine
  Unutterably fair. Then on her head
  She settled the bright helmet overstreamed
  With a wild mane of golden-glistering hairs. So stood she, lapped about with flaming mail,
  In semblance like the lightning, which the might,
  The never-wearied might of Zeus, to earth
  Hurleth, what time he showeth forth to men
  Fury of thunderous-roaring rain, or swoop
  Resistless of his shouting host of winds. Then in hot haste forth of her bower to pass
  Caught she two javelins in the hand that grasped
  Her shield-band; but her strong right hand laid hold
  On a huge halberd, sharp of either blade,
  Which terrible Eris gave to Ares' child
  To be her Titan weapon in the strife
  That raveneth souls of men. Laughing for glee
  Thereover, swiftly flashed she forth the ring
  Of towers. Her coming kindled all the sons
  Of Troy to rush into the battle forth
  Which crowneth men with glory. Swiftly all
  Hearkened her gathering-ery, and thronging came,
  Champions, yea, even such as theretofore
  Shrank back from standing in the ranks of war
  Against Achilles the all-ravager. But she in pride of triumph on she rode
  Throned on a goodly steed and fleet, the gift
  Of Oreithyia, the wild North-wind's bride,
  Given to her guest the warrior-maid, what time
  She came to Thrace, a steed whose flying feet
  Could match the Harpies' wings. Riding thereon
  Penthesileia in her goodlihead
  Left the tall palaces of Troy behind. And ever were the ghastly-visaged Fates
  Thrusting her on into the battle, doomed
  To be her first against the Greeks--and last! To right, to left, with unreturning feet
  The Trojan thousands followed to the fray,
  The pitiless fray, that death-doomed warrior-maid,
  Followed in throngs, as follow sheep the ram
  That by the shepherd's art strides before all. So followed they, with battle-fury filled,
  Strong Trojans and wild-hearted Amazons. And like Tritonis seemed she, as she went
  To meet the Giants, or as flasheth far
  Through war-hosts Eris, waker of onset-shouts. So mighty in the Trojans' midst she seemed,
  Penthesileia of the flying feet. Then unto Cronos' Son Laomedon's child
  Upraised his hands, his sorrow-burdened hands,
  Turning him toward the sky-encountering fane
  Of Zeus of Ida, who with sleepless eyes
  Looks ever down on Ilium; and he prayed:
  "Father, give ear! Vouchsafe that on this day
  Achaea's host may fall before the hands
  Of this our warrior-queen, the War-god's child;
  And do thou bring her back unscathed again
  Unto mine halls: we pray thee by the love
  Thou bear'st to Ares of the fiery heart
  Thy son, yea, to her also! is she not
  Most wondrous like the heavenly Goddesses? And is she not the child of thine own seed? Pity my stricken heart withal! Thou know'st
  All agonies I have suffered in the deaths
  Of dear sons whom the Fates have torn from me
  By Argive hands in the devouring fight. Compassionate us, while a remnant yet
  Remains of noble Dardanus' blood, while yet
  This city stands unwasted! Let us know
  From ghastly slaughter and strife one breathing-space!" In passionate prayer he spake:--lo, with shrill scream
  Swiftly to left an eagle darted by
  And in his talons bare a gasping dove. Then round the heart of Priam all the blood
  Was chilled with fear. Low to his soul he said:
  "Ne'er shall I see return alive from war
  Penthesileia!" On that selfsame day
  The Fates prepared his boding to fulfil;
  And his heart brake with anguish of despair. Marvelled the Argives, far across the plain
  Seeing the hosts of Troy charge down on them,
  And midst them Penthesileia, Ares' child. These seemed like ravening beasts that mid the hills
  Bring grimly slaughter to the fleecy flocks;
  And she, as a rushing blast of flame she seemed
  That maddeneth through the copses summer-scorched,
  When the wind drives it on; and in this wise
  Spake one to other in their mustering host:
  "Who shall this be who thus can rouse to war
  The Trojans, now that Hector hath been slain--
  These who, we said, would never more find heart
  To stand against us? Lo now, suddenly
  Forth are they rushing, madly afire for fight! Sure, in their midst some great one kindleth them
  To battle's toil! Thou verily wouldst say
  This were a God, of such great deeds he dreams! Go to, with aweless courage let us arm
  Our own breasts: let us summon up our might
  In battle-fury. We shall lack not help
  Of Gods this day to close in fight with Troy." So cried they; and their flashing battle-gear
  Cast they about them: forth the ships they poured
  Clad in the rage of fight as with a cloak. Then front to front their battles closed, like beasts
  Of ravin, locked in tangle of gory strife. Clanged their bright mail together, clashed the spears,
  The corslets, and the stubborn-welded shields
  And adamant helms. Each stabbed at other's flesh
  With the fierce brass: was neither ruth nor rest,
  And all the Trojan soil was crimson-red. Then first Penthesileia smote and slew
  Molion; now Persinous falls, and now
  Eilissus; reeled Antitheus 'neath her spear
  The pride of Lernus quelled she: down she bore
  Hippalmus 'neath her horse-hoofs; Haemon's son
  Died; withered stalwart Elasippus' strength. And Derinoe laid low Laogonus,
  And Clonie Menippus, him who sailed
  Long since from Phylace, led by his lord
  Protesilaus to the war with Troy. Then was Podarces, son of Iphiclus,
  Heart-wrung with ruth and wrath to see him lie
  Dead, of all battle-comrades best-beloved. Swiftly at Clonie he hurled, the maid
  Fair as a Goddess: plunged the unswerving lance
  'Twixt hip and hip, and rushed the dark blood forth
  After the spear, and all her bowels gushed out. Then wroth was Penthesileia; through the brawn
  Of his right arm she drave the long spear's point,
  She shore atwain the great blood-brimming veins,
  And through the wide gash of the wound the gore
  Spirted, a crimson fountain. With a groan
  Backward he sprang, his courage wholly quelled
  By bitter pain; and sorrow and dismay
  Thrilled, as he fled, his men of Phylace. A short way from the fight he reeled aside,
  And in his friends' arms died in little space. Then with his lance Idomeneus thrust out,
  And by the right breast stabbed Bremusa. Stilled
  For ever was the beating of her heart. She fell, as falls a graceful-shafted pine
  Hewn mid the hills by woodmen: heavily,
  Sighing through all its boughs, it crashes down. So with a wailing shriek she fell, and death
  Unstrung her every limb: her breathing soul
  Mingled with multitudinous-sighing winds. Then, as Evandre through the murderous fray
  With Thermodosa rushed, stood Meriones,
  A lion in the path, and slew: his spear
  Right to the heart of one he drave, and one
  Stabbed with a lightning sword-thrust 'twixt the hips:
  Leapt through the wounds the life, and fled away. Oileus' fiery son smote Derinoe
  'Twixt throat and shoulder with his ruthless spear;
  And on Alcibie Tydeus' terrible son
  Swooped, and on Derimacheia: head with neck
  Clean from the shoulders of these twain he shore
  With ruin-wreaking brand. Together down
  Fell they, as young calves by the massy axe
  Of brawny flesher felled, that, shearing through
  The sinews of the neck, lops life away. So, by the hands of Tydeus' son laid low
  Upon the Trojan plain, far, far away
  From their own highland-home, they fell. Nor these
  Alone died; for the might of Sthenelus
  Down on them hurled Cabeirus' corse, who came
  From Sestos, keen to fight the Argive foe,
  But never saw his fatherland again. Then was the heart of Paris filled with wrath
  For a friend slain. Full upon Sthenelus
  Aimed he a shaft death-winged, yet touched him not,
  Despite his thirst for vengeance: otherwhere
  The arrow glanced aside, and carried death
  Whither the stern Fates guided its fierce wing,
  And slew Evenor brazen-tasleted,
  Who from Dulichium came to war with Troy. For his death fury-kindled was the son
  Of haughty Phyleus: as a lion leaps
  Upon the flock, so swiftly rushed he: all
  Shrank huddling back before that terrible man. Itymoneus he slew, and Hippasus' son
  Agelaus: from Miletus brought they war
  Against the Danaan men by Nastes led,
  The god-like, and Amphimachus mighty-souled. On Mycale they dwelt; beside their home
  Rose Latmus' snowy crests, stretched the long glens
  Of Branchus, and Panormus' water-meads. Maeander's flood deep-rolling swept thereby,
  Which from the Phrygian uplands, pastured o'er
  By myriad flocks, around a thousand forelands
  Curls, swirls, and drives his hurrying ripples on
  Down to the vine-clad land of Carian men
  These mid the storm of battle Meges slew,
  Nor these alone, but whomsoe'er his lance
  Black-shafted touched, were dead men; for his breast
  The glorious Trito-born with courage thrilled
  To bring to all his foes the day of doom. And Polypoetes, dear to Ares, slew
  Dresaeus, whom the Nymph Neaera bare
  To passing-wise Theiodamas for these
  Spread was the bed of love beside the foot
  Of Sipylus the Mountain, where the Gods
  Made Niobe a stony rock, wherefrom
  Tears ever stream: high up, the rugged crag
  Bows as one weeping, weeping, waterfalls
  Cry from far-echoing Hermus, wailing moan
  Of sympathy: the sky-encountering crests
  Of Sipylus, where alway floats a mist
  Hated of shepherds, echo back the cry. Weird marvel seems that Rock of Niobe
  To men that pass with feet fear-goaded: there
  They see the likeness of a woman bowed,
  In depths of anguish sobbing, and her tears
  Drop, as she mourns grief-stricken, endlessly. Yea, thou wouldst say that verily so it was,
  Viewing it from afar; but when hard by
  Thou standest, all the illusion vanishes;
  And lo, a steep-browed rock, a fragment rent
  From Sipylus--yet Niobe is there,
  Dreeing her weird, the debt of wrath divine,
  A broken heart in guise of shattered stone. All through the tangle of that desperate fray
  Stalked slaughter and doom. The incarnate Onset-shout
  Raved through the rolling battle; at her side
  Paced Death the ruthless, and the Fearful Faces,
  The Fates, beside them strode, and in red hands
  Bare murder and the groans of dying men. That day the beating of full many a heart,
  Trojan and Argive, was for ever stilled,
  While roared the battle round them, while the fury
  Of Penthesileia fainted not nor failed;
  But as amid long ridges of lone hills
  A lioness, stealing down a deep ravine,
  Springs on the kine with lightning leap, athirst
  For blood wherein her fierce heart revelleth;
  So on the Danaans leapt that warrior-maid. And they, their souls were cowed: backward they shrank,
  And fast she followed, as a towering surge
  Chases across the thunder-booming sea
  A flying bark, whose white sails strain beneath
  The wind's wild buffering, and all the air
  Maddens with roaring, as the rollers crash
  On a black foreland looming on the lee
  Where long reefs fringe the surf-tormented shores. So chased she, and so dashed the ranks asunder
  Triumphant-souled, and hurled fierce threats before:
  "Ye dogs, this day for evil outrage done
  To Priam shall ye pay! No man of you
  Shall from mine hands deliver his own life,
  And win back home, to gladden parents eyes,
  Or comfort wife or children. Ye shall lie
  Dead, ravined on by vultures and by wolves,
  And none shall heap the earth-mound o'er your clay. Where skulketh now the strength of Tydeus' son,
  And where the might of Aeacus' scion? Where is Aias' bulk? Ye vaunt them mightiest men
  Of all your rabble. Ha! they will not dare
  With me to close in battle, lest I drag
  Forth from their fainting frames their craven souls!" Then heart-uplifted leapt she on the foe,
  Resistless as a tigress, crashing through
  Ranks upon ranks of Argives, smiting now
  With that huge halberd massy-headed, now
  Hurling the keen dart, while her battle-horse
  Flashed through the fight, and on his shoulder bare
  Quiver and bow death-speeding, close to her hand,
  If mid that revel of blood she willed to speed
  The bitter-biting shaft. Behind her swept
  The charging lines of men fleet-footed, friends
  And brethren of the man who never flinched
  From close death-grapple, Hector, panting all
  The hot breath of the War-god from their breasts,
  All slaying Danaans with the ashen spear,
  Who fell as frost-touched leaves in autumn fall
  One after other, or as drops of rain. And aye went up a moaning from earth's breast
  All blood-bedrenched, and heaped with corse on corse. Horses pierced through with arrows, or impaled
  On spears, were snorting forth their last of strength
  With screaming neighings. Men, with gnashing teeth
  Biting the dust, lay gasping, while the steeds
  Of Trojan charioteers stormed in pursuit,
  Trampling the dying mingled with the dead
  As oxen trample corn in threshing-floors. Then one exulting boasted mid the host
  Of Troy, beholding Penthesileia rush
  On through the foes' array, like the black storm
  That maddens o'er the sea, what time the sun
  Allies his might with winter's Goat-horned Star;
  And thus, puffed up with vain hope, shouted he:
  "O friends, in manifest presence down from heaven
  One of the deathless Gods this day hath come
  To fight the Argives, all of love for us,
  Yea, and with sanction of almighty Zeus,
  He whose compassion now remembereth
  Haply strong-hearted Priam, who may boast
  For his a lineage of immortal blood. For this, I trow, no mortal woman seems,
  Who is so aweless-daring, who is clad
  In splendour-flashing arms: nay, surely she
  Shall be Athene, or the mighty-souled
  Enyo--haply Eris, or the Child
  Of Leto world-renowned. O yea, I look
  To see her hurl amid yon Argive men
  Mad-shrieking slaughter, see her set aflame
  Yon ships wherein they came long years agone
  Bringing us many sorrows, yea, they came
  Bringing us woes of war intolerable. Ha! to the home-land Hellas ne'er shall these
  With joy return, since Gods on our side fight." In overweening exultation so
  Vaunted a Trojan. Fool!--he had no vision
  Of ruin onward rushing upon himself
  And Troy, and Penthesileia's self withal. For not as yet had any tidings come
  Of that wild fray to Aias stormy-souled,
  Nor to Achilles, waster of tower and town. But on the grave-mound of Menoetius' son
  They twain were lying, with sad memories
  Of a dear comrade crushed, and echoing
  Each one the other's groaning. One it was
  Of the Blest Gods who still was holding back
  These from the battle-tumult far away,
  Till many Greeks should fill the measure up
  Of woeful havoc, slain by Trojan foes
  And glorious Penthesileia, who pursued
  With murderous intent their rifled ranks,
  While ever waxed her valour more and more,
  And waxed her might within her: never in vain
  She aimed the unswerving spear-thrust: aye she pierced
  The backs of them that fled, the breasts of such
  As charged to meet her. All the long shaft dripped
  With steaming blood. Swift were her feet as wind
  As down she swooped. Her aweless spirit failed
  For weariness nor fainted, but her might
  Was adamantine. The impending Doom,
  Which roused unto the terrible strife not yet
  Achilles, clothed her still with glory; still
  Aloof the dread Power stood, and still would shed
  Splendour of triumph o'er the death-ordained
  But for a little space, ere it should quell
  That Maiden 'neath the hands of Aeaeus' son. In darkness ambushed, with invisible hand
  Ever it thrust her on, and drew her feet
  Destruction-ward, and lit her path to death
  With glory, while she slew foe after foe. As when within a dewy garden-close,
  Longing for its green springtide freshness, leaps
  A heifer, and there rangeth to and fro,
  When none is by to stay her, treading down
  All its green herbs, and all its wealth of bloom,
  Devouring greedily this, and marring that
  With trampling feet; so ranged she, Ares' child,
  Through reeling squadrons of Achaea's sons,
  Slew these, and hunted those in panic rout. From Troy afar the women marvelling gazed
  At the Maid's battle-prowess. Suddenly
  A fiery passion for the fray hath seized
  Antimachus' daughter, Meneptolemus' wife,
  Tisiphone. Her heart waxed strong, and filled
  With lust of fight she cried to her fellows all,
  With desperate-daring words, to spur them on
  To woeful war, by recklessness made strong. "Friends, let a heart of valour in our breasts
  Awake! Let us be like our lords, who fight
  With foes for fatherland, for babes, for us,
  And never pause for breath in that stern strife! Let us too throne war's spirit in our hearts! Let us too face the fight which favoureth none! For we, we women, be not creatures cast
  In diverse mould from men: to us is given
  Such energy of life as stirs in them. Eyes have we like to theirs, and limbs: throughout
  Fashioned we are alike: one common light
  We look on, and one common air we breathe:
  With like food are we nourished--nay, wherein
  Have we been dowered of God more niggardly
  Than men? Then let us shrink not from the fray
  See ye not yonder a woman far excelling
  Men in the grapple of fight? Yet is her blood
  Nowise akin to ours, nor fighteth she
  For her own city. For an alien king
  She warreth of her own heart's prompting, fears
  The face of no man; for her soul is thrilled
  With valour and with spirit invincible. But we--to right, to left, lie woes on woes
  About our feet: this mourns beloved sons,
  And that a husband who for hearth and home
  Hath died; some wail for fathers now no more;
  Some grieve for brethren and for kinsmen lost. Not one but hath some share in sorrow's cup. Behind all this a fearful shadow looms,
  The day of bondage! Therefore flinch not ye
  From war, O sorrow-laden! Better far
  To die in battle now, than afterwards
  Hence to be haled into captivity
  To alien folk, we and our little ones,
  In the stern grip of fate leaving behind
  A burning city, and our husbands' graves." So cried she, and with passion for stern war
  Thrilled all those women; and with eager speed
  They hasted to go forth without the wall
  Mail-clad, afire to battle for their town
  And people: all their spirit was aflame. As when within a hive, when winter-tide
  Is over and gone, loud hum the swarming bees
  What time they make them ready forth to fare
  To bright flower-pastures, and no more endure
  To linger therewithin, but each to other
  Crieth the challenge-cry to sally forth;
  Even so bestirred themselves the women of Troy,
  And kindled each her sister to the fray. The weaving-wool, the distaff far they flung,
  And to grim weapons stretched their eager hands. And now without the city these had died
  In that wild battle, as their husbands died
  And the strong Amazons died, had not one voice
  Of wisdom cried to stay their maddened feet,
  When with dissuading words Theano spake:
  "Wherefore, ah wherefore for the toil and strain
  Of battle's fearful tumult do ye yearn,
  Infatuate ones? Never your limbs have toiled
  In conflict yet. In utter ignorance
  Panting for labour unendurable,
  Ye rush on all-unthinking; for your strength
  Can never be as that of Danaan men,
  Men trained in daily battle. Amazons
  Have joyed in ruthless fight, in charging steeds,
  From the beginning: all the toil of men
  Do they endure; and therefore evermore
  The spirit of the War-god thrills them through. 'They fall not short of men in anything:
  Their labour-hardened frames make great their hearts
  For all achievement: never faint their knees
  Nor tremble. Rumour speaks their queen to be
  A daughter of the mighty Lord of War. Therefore no woman may compare with her
  In prowess--if she be a woman, not
  A God come down in answer to our prayers. Yea, of one blood be all the race of men,
  Yet unto diverse labours still they turn;
  And that for each is evermore the best
  Whereto he bringeth skill of use and wont. Therefore do ye from tumult of the fray
  Hold you aloof, and in your women's bowers
  Before the loom still pace ye to and fro;
  And war shall be the business of our lords. Lo, of fair issue is there hope: we see
  The Achaeans falling fast: we see the might
  Of our men waxing ever: fear is none
  Of evil issue now: the pitiless foe
  Beleaguer not the town: no desperate need
  There is that women should go forth to war." So cried she, and they hearkened to the words
  Of her who had garnered wisdom from the years;
  So from afar they watched the fight. But still
  Penthesileia brake the ranks, and still
  Before her quailed the Achaeans: still they found
  Nor screen nor hiding-place from imminent death. As bleating goats are by the blood-stained jaws
  Of a grim panther torn, so slain were they. In each man's heart all lust of battle died,
  And fear alone lived. This way, that way fled
  The panic-stricken: some to earth had flung
  The armour from their shoulders; some in dust
  Grovelled in terror 'neath their shields: the steeds
  Fled through the rout unreined of charioteers. In rapture of triumph charged the Amazons,
  With groan and scream of agony died the Greeks. Withered their manhood was in that sore strait;
  Brief was the span of all whom that fierce maid
  Mid the grim jaws of battle overtook. As when with mighty roaring bursteth down
  A storm upon the forest-trees, and some
  Uprendeth by the roots, and on the earth
  Dashes them down, the tail stems blossom-crowned,
  And snappeth some athwart the trunk, and high
  Whirls them through air, till all confused they lie
  A ruin of splintered stems and shattered sprays;
  So the great Danaan host lay, dashed to dust
  By doom of Fate, by Penthesileia's spear. But when the very ships were now at point
  To be by hands of Trojans set aflame,
  Then battle-bider Aias heard afar
  The panic-cries, and spake to Aeacus' son:
  "Achilles, all the air about mine ears
  Is full of multitudinous eries, is full
  Of thunder of battle rolling nearer aye. Let us go forth then, ere the Trojans win
  Unto the ships, and make great slaughter there
  Of Argive men, and set the ships aflame. Foulest reproach such thing on thee and me
  Should bring; for it beseems not that the seed
  Of mighty Zeus should shame the sacred blood
  Of hero-fathers, who themselves of old
  With Hercules the battle-eager sailed
  To Troy, and smote her even at her height
  Of glory, when Laomedon was king. Ay, and I ween that our hands even now
  Shall do the like: we too are mighty men." He spake: the aweless strength of Aeacus' son
  Hearkened thereto, for also to his ears
  By this the roar of bitter battle came. Then hasted both, and donned their warrior-gear
  All splendour-gleaming: now, in these arrayed
  Facing that stormy-tossing rout they stand. Loud clashed their glorious armour: in their souls
  A battle-fury like the War-god's wrath
  Maddened; such might was breathed into these twain
  By Atrytone, Shaker of the Shield,
  As on they pressed. With joy the Argives saw
  The coming of that mighty twain: they seemed
  In semblance like Aloeus' giant sons
  Who in the old time made that haughty vaunt
  Of piling on Olympus' brow the height
  Of Ossa steeply-towering, and the crest
  Of sky-encountering Pelion, so to rear
  A mountain-stair for their rebellious rage
  To scale the highest heaven. Huge as these
  The sons of Aeacus seemed, as forth they strode
  To stem the tide of war. A gladsome sight
  To friends who have fainted for their coming, now
  Onward they press to crush triumphant foes. Many they slew with their resistless spears;
  As when two herd-destroying lions come
  On sheep amid the copses feeding, far
  From help of shepherds, and in heaps on heaps
  Slay them, till they have drunken to the full
  Of blood, and filled their maws insatiate
  With flesh, so those destroyers twain slew on,
  Spreading wide havoc through the hosts of Troy. There Deiochus and gallant Hyllus fell
  By Alas slain, and fell Eurynomus
  Lover of war, and goodly Enyeus died. But Peleus' son burst on the Amazons
  Smiting Antandre, Polemusa then,
  Antibrote, fierce-souled Hippothoe,
  Hurling Harmothoe down on sisters slain. Then hard on all their-reeling ranks he pressed
  With Telamon's mighty-hearted son; and now
  Before their hands battalions dense and strong
  Crumbled as weakly and as suddenly
  As when in mountain-folds the forest-brakes
  Shrivel before a tempest-driven fire. When battle-eager Penthesileia saw
  These twain, as through the scourging storm of war
  Like ravening beasts they rushed, to meet them there
  She sped, as when a leopard grim, whose mood
  Is deadly, leaps from forest-coverts forth,
  Lashing her tail, on hunters closing round,
  While these, in armour clad, and putting trust
  In their long spears, await her lightning leap;
  So did those warriors twain with spears upswung
  Wait Penthesileia. Clanged the brazen plates
  About their shoulders as they moved. And first
  Leapt the long-shafted lance sped from the hand
  Of goodly Penthesileia. Straight it flew
  To the shield of Aeacus' son, but glancing thence
  This way and that the shivered fragments sprang
  As from a rock-face: of such temper were
  The cunning-hearted Fire-god's gifts divine. Then in her hand the warrior-maid swung up
  A second javelin fury-winged, against
  Aias, and with fierce words defied the twain:
  "Ha, from mine hand in vain one lance hath leapt! But with this second look I suddenly
  To quell the strength and courage of two foes,--
  Ay, though ye vaunt you mighty men of war
  Amid your Danaans! Die ye shall, and so
  Lighter shall be the load of war's affliction
  That lies upon the Trojan chariot-lords. Draw nigh, come through the press to grips with me,
  So shall ye learn what might wells up in breasts
  Of Amazons. With my blood is mingled war! No mortal man begat me, but the Lord
  Of War, insatiate of the battle-cry. Therefore my might is more than any man's." With scornful laughter spake she: then she hurled
  Her second lance; but they in utter scorn
  Laughed now, as swiftly flew the shaft, and smote
  The silver greave of Aias, and was foiled
  Thereby, and all its fury could not scar
  The flesh within; for fate had ordered not
  That any blade of foes should taste the blood
  Of Aias in the bitter war. But he
  Recked of the Amazon naught, but turned him thence
  To rush upon the Trojan host, and left
  Penthesileia unto Peleus' son
  Alone, for well he knew his heart within
  That she, for all her prowess, none the less
  Would cost Achilles battle-toil as light,
  As effortless, as doth the dove the hawk. Then groaned she an angry groan that she had sped
  Her shafts in vain; and now with scoffing speech
  To her in turn the son of Peleus spake:
  "Woman, with what vain vauntings triumphing
  Hast thou come forth against us, all athirst
  To battle with us, who be mightier far
  Than earthborn heroes? We from Cronos' Son,
  The Thunder-roller, boast our high descent. Ay, even Hector quailed, the battle-swift,
  Before us, e'en though far away he saw
  Our onrush to grim battle. Yea, my spear
  Slew him, for all his might. But thou--thine heart
  Is utterly mad, that thou hast greatly dared
  To threaten us with death this day! On thee
  Thy latest hour shall swiftly come--is come! Thee not thy sire the War-god now shall pluck
  Out of mine hand, but thou the debt shalt pay
  Of a dark doom, as when mid mountain-folds
  A pricket meets a lion, waster of herds. What, woman, hast thou heard not of the heaps
  Of slain, that into Xanthus' rushing stream
  Were thrust by these mine hands?--or hast thou heard
  In vain, because the Blessed Ones have stol'n
  Wit and discretion from thee, to the end
  That Doom's relentless gulf might gape for thee?" He spake; he swung up in his mighty hand
  And sped the long spear warrior-slaying, wrought
  By Chiron, and above the right breast pierced
  The battle-eager maid. The red blood leapt
  Forth, as a fountain wells, and all at once
  Fainted the strength of Penthesileia's limbs;
  Dropped the great battle-axe from her nerveless hand;
  A mist of darkness overveiled her eyes,
  And anguish thrilled her soul. Yet even so
  Still drew she difficult breath, still dimly saw
  The hero, even now in act to drag
  Her from the swift steed's back. Confusedly
  She thought: "Or shall I draw my mighty sword,
  And bide Achilles' fiery onrush, or
  Hastily cast me from my fleet horse down
  To earth, and kneel unto this godlike man,
  And with wild breath promise for ransoming
  Great heaps of brass and gold, which pacify
  The hearts of victors never so athirst
  For blood, if haply so the murderous might
  Of Aeacus' son may hearken and may spare,
  Or peradventure may compassionate
  My youth, and so vouchsafe me to behold
  Mine home again?--for O, I long to live!" So surged the wild thoughts in her; but the Gods
  Ordained it otherwise. Even now rushed on
  In terrible anger Peleus' son: he thrust
  With sudden spear, and on its shaft impaled
  The body of her tempest-footed steed,
  Even as a man in haste to sup might pierce
  Flesh with the spit, above the glowing hearth
  To roast it, or as in a mountain-glade
  A hunter sends the shaft of death clear through
  The body of a stag with such winged speed
  That the fierce dart leaps forth beyond, to plunge
  Into the tall stem of an oak or pine. So that death-ravening spear of Peleus' son
  Clear through the goodly steed rushed on, and pierced
  Penthesileia. Straightway fell she down
  Into the dust of earth, the arms of death,
  In grace and comeliness fell, for naught of shame
  Dishonoured her fair form. Face down she lay
  On the long spear outgasping her last breath,
  Stretched upon that fleet horse as on a couch;
  Like some tall pine snapped by the icy mace
  Of Boreas, earth's forest-fosterling
  Reared by a spring to stately height, amidst
  Long mountain-glens, a glory of mother earth;
  So from the once fleet steed low fallen lay
  Penthesileia, all her shattered strength
  Brought down to this, and all her loveliness. Now when the Trojans saw the Warrior-queen
  Struck down in battle, ran through all their lines
  A shiver of panic. Straightway to their walls
  Turned they in flight, heart-agonized with grief. As when on the wide sea, 'neath buffetings
  Of storm-blasts, castaways whose ship is wrecked
  Escape, a remnant of a crew, forspent
  With desperate conflict with the cruel sea:
  Late and at last appears the land hard by,
  Appears a city: faint and weary-limbed
  With that grim struggle, through the surf they strain
  To land, sore grieving for the good ship lost,
  And shipmates whom the terrible surge dragged down
  To nether gloom; so, Troyward as they fled
  From battle, all those Trojans wept for her,
  The Child of the resistless War-god, wept
  For friends who died in groan-resounding fight. Then over her with scornful laugh the son
  Of Peleus vaunted: "In the dust lie there
  A prey to teeth of dogs, to ravens' beaks,
  Thou wretched thing! Who cozened thee to come
  Forth against me? And thoughtest thou to fare
  Home from the war alive, to bear with thee
  Right royal gifts from Priam the old king,
  Thy guerdon for slain Argives? Ha, 'twas not
  The Immortals who inspired thee with this thought,
  Who know that I of heroes mightiest am,
  The Danaans' light of safety, but a woe
  To Trojans and to thee, O evil-starred! Nay, but it was the darkness-shrouded Fates
  And thine own folly of soul that pricked thee on
  To leave the works of women, and to fare
  To war, from which strong men shrink shuddering back." So spake he, and his ashen spear the son
  Of Peleus drew from that swift horse, and from
  Penthesileia in death's agony. Then steed and rider gasped their lives away
  Slain by one spear. Now from her head he plucked
  The helmet splendour-flashing like the beams
  Of the great sun, or Zeus' own glory-light. Then, there as fallen in dust and blood she lay,
  Rose, like the breaking of the dawn, to view
  'Neath dainty-pencilled brows a lovely face,
  Lovely in death. The Argives thronged around,
  And all they saw and marvelled, for she seemed
  Like an Immortal. In her armour there
  Upon the earth she lay, and seemed the Child
  Of Zeus, the tireless Huntress Artemis
  Sleeping, what time her feet forwearied are
  With following lions with her flying shafts
  Over the hills far-stretching. She was made
  A wonder of beauty even in her death
  By Aphrodite glorious-crowned, the Bride
  Of the strong War-god, to the end that he,
  The son of noble Peleus, might be pierced
  With the sharp arrow of repentant love. The warriors gazed, and in their hearts they prayed
  That fair and sweet like her their wives might seem,
  Laid on the bed of love, when home they won. Yea, and Achilles' very heart was wrung
  With love's remorse to have slain a thing so sweet,
  Who might have borne her home, his queenly bride,
  To chariot-glorious Phthia; for she was
  Flawless, a very daughter of the Gods,
  Divinely tall, and most divinely fair. Then Ares' heart was thrilled with grief and rage
  For his child slain. Straight from Olympus down
  He darted, swift and bright as thunderbolt
  Terribly flashing from the mighty hand Of
  Zeus, far leaping o'er the trackless sea,
  Or flaming o'er the land, while shuddereth
  All wide Olympus as it passeth by. So through the quivering air with heart aflame
  Swooped Ares armour-clad, soon as he heard
  The dread doom of his daughter. For the Gales,
  The North-wind's fleet-winged daughters, bare to him,
  As through the wide halls of the sky he strode,
  The tidings of the maiden's woeful end. Soon as he heard it, like a tempest-blast
  Down to the ridges of Ida leapt he: quaked
  Under his feet the long glens and ravines
  Deep-scored, all Ida's torrent-beds, and all
  Far-stretching foot-hills. Now had Ares brought
  A day of mourning on the Myrmidons,
  But Zeus himself from far Olympus sent
  Mid shattering thunders terror of levin-bolts
  Which thick and fast leapt through the welkin down
  Before his feet, blazing with fearful flames. And Ares saw, and knew the stormy threat
  Of the mighty-thundering Father, and he stayed
  His eager feet, now on the very brink
  Of battle's turmoil. As when some huge crag
  Thrust from a beetling cliff-brow by the winds
  And torrent rains, or lightning-lance of Zeus,
  Leaps like a wild beast, and the mountain-glens
  Fling back their crashing echoes as it rolls
  In mad speed on, as with resistless swoop
  Of bound on bound it rushes down, until
  It cometh to the levels of the plain,
  And there perforce its stormy flight is stayed;

  So Ares, battle-eager Son of Zeus,
  Was stayed, how loth soe'er; for all the Gods
  To the Ruler of the Blessed needs must yield,
  Seeing he sits high-throned above them all,
  Clothed in his might unspeakable. Yet still
  Many a wild thought surged through Ares' soul,
  Urging him now to dread the terrible threat
  Of Cronos' wrathful Son, and to return
  Heavenward, and now to reck not of his Sire,
  But with Achilles' blood to stain those hands,
  The battle-tireless. At the last his heart
  Remembered how that many and many a son
  Of Zeus himself in many a war had died,
  Nor in their fall had Zeus availed them aught. Therefore he turned him from the Argives--else,
  Down smitten by the blasting thunderbolt,
  With Titans in the nether gloom he had lain,
  Who dared defy the eternal will of Zeus. Then did the warrior sons of Argos strip
  With eager haste from corpses strown all round
  The blood-stained spoils. But ever Peleus' son
  Gazed, wild with all regret, still gazed on her,
  The strong, the beautiful, laid in the dust;
  And all his heart was wrung, was broken down
  With sorrowing love, deep, strong as he had known
  When that beloved friend Patroclus died. Loud jeered Thersites, mocking to his face:
  "Thou sorry-souled Achilles! art not shamed
  To let some evil Power beguile thine heart
  To pity of a pitiful Amazon
  Whose furious spirit purposed naught but ill
  To us and ours? Ha, woman-mad art thou,
  And thy soul lusts for this thing, as she were
  Some lady wise in household ways, with gifts
  And pure intent for honoured wedlock wooed! Good had it been had her spear reached thine heart,
  The heart that sighs for woman-creatures still! Thou carest not, unmanly-souled, not thou,
  For valour's glorious path, when once thine eye
  Lights on a woman! Sorry wretch, where now
  Is all thy goodly prowess? where thy wit? And where the might that should beseem a king
  All-stainless? Dost not know what misery
  This self-same woman-madness wrought for Troy? Nothing there is to men more ruinous
  Than lust for woman's beauty; it maketh fools
  Of wise men. But the toil of war attains
  Renown. To him that is a hero indeed
  Glory of victory and the War-god's works
  Are sweet. 'Tis but the battle-blencher craves
  The beauty and the bed of such as she!" So railed he long and loud: the mighty heart
  Of Peleus' son leapt into flame of wrath. A sudden buffet of his resistless hand
  Smote 'neath the railer's ear, and all his teeth
  Were dashed to the earth: he fell upon his face:
  Forth of his lips the blood in torrent gushed:
  Swift from his body fled the dastard soul
  Of that vile niddering. Achaea's sons
  Rejoiced thereat, for aye he wont to rail
  On each and all with venomous gibes, himself
  A scandal and the shame of all the host. Then mid the warrior Argives cried a voice:
  "Not good it is for baser men to rail
  On kings, or secretly or openly;
  For wrathful retribution swiftly comes. The Lady of Justice sits on high; and she
  Who heapeth woe on woe on humankind,
  Even Ate, punisheth the shameless tongue." So mid the Danaans cried a voice: nor yet
  Within the mighty soul of Peleus' son
  Lulled was the storm of wrath, but fiercely he spake:
  "Lie there in dust, thy follies all forgot! 'Tis not for knaves to beard their betters: once
  Thou didst provoke Odysseus' steadfast soul,
  Babbling with venomous tongue a thousand gibes,
  And didst escape with life; but thou hast found
  The son of Peleus not so patient-souled,
  Who with one only buffet from his hand
  Unkennels thy dog's soul! A bitter doom
  Hath swallowed thee: by thine own rascalry
  Thy life is sped. Hence from Achaean men,
  And mouth out thy revilings midst the dead!" So spake the valiant-hearted aweless son
  Of Aeacus. But Tydeus' son alone
  Of all the Argives was with anger stirred
  Against Achilles for Thersites slain,
  Seeing these twain were of the self-same blood,
  The one, proud Tydeus' battle-eager son,
  The other, seed of godlike Agrius:
  Brother of noble Oeneus Agrius was;
  And Oeneus in the Danaan land begat
  Tydeus the battle-eager, son to whom
  Was stalwart Diomedes. Therefore wroth
  Was he for slain Thersites, yea, had raised
  Against the son of Peleus vengeful hands,
  Except the noblest of Aehaea's sons
  Had thronged around him, and besought him sore,
  And held him back therefrom. With Peleus' son
  Also they pleaded; else those mighty twain,
  The mightiest of all Argives, were at point
  To close with clash of swords, so stung were they
  With bitter wrath; yet hearkened they at last
  To prayers of comrades, and were reconciled. Then of their pity did the Atreid kings--
  For these too at the imperial loveliness
  Of Penthesileia marvelled--render up
  Her body to the men of Troy, to bear
  Unto the burg of Ilus far-renowned
  With all her armour. For a herald came
  Asking this boon for Priam; for the king
  Longed with deep yearning of the heart to lay
  That battle-eager maiden, with her arms,
  And with her war-horse, in the great earth-mound
  Of old Laomedon. And so he heaped
  A high broad pyre without the city wall:
  Upon the height thereof that warrior-queen
  They laid, and costly treasures did they heap
  Around her, all that well beseems to burn
  Around a mighty queen in battle slain. And so the Fire-god's swift-upleaping might,
  The ravening flame, consumed her. All around
  The people stood on every hand, and quenched
  The pyre with odorous wine. Then gathered they
  The bones, and poured sweet ointment over them,
  And laid them in a casket: over all
  Shed they the rich fat of a heifer, chief
  Among the herds that grazed on Ida's slope. And, as for a beloved daughter, rang
  All round the Trojan men's heart-stricken wail,
  As by the stately wall they buried her
  On an outstanding tower, beside the bones
  Of old Laomedon, a queen beside
  A king. This honour for the War-god's sake
  They rendered, and for Penthesileia's own. And in the plain beside her buried they
  The Amazons, even all that followed her
  To battle, and by Argive spears were slain. For Atreus' sons begrudged not these the boon
  Of tear-besprinkled graves, but let their friends,
  The warrior Trojans, draw their corpses forth,
  Yea, and their own slain also, from amidst
  The swath of darts o'er that grim harvest-field. Wrath strikes not at the dead: pitied are foes
  When life has fled, and left them foes no more. Far off across the plain the while uprose
  Smoke from the pyres whereon the Argives laid
  The many heroes overthrown and slain
  By Trojan hands what time the sword devoured;
  And multitudinous lamentation wailed
  Over the perished. But above the rest
  Mourned they o'er brave Podarces, who in fight
  Was no less mighty than his hero-brother
  Protesilaus, he who long ago
  Fell, slain of Hector: so Podarces now,
  Struck down by Penthesileia's spear, hath cast
  Over all Argive hearts the pall of grief. Wherefore apart from him they laid in clay
  The common throng of slain; but over him
  Toiling they heaped an earth-mound far-descried
  In memory of a warrior aweless-souled. And in a several pit withal they thrust
  The niddering Thersites' wretched corse. Then to the ships, acclaiming Aeacus' son,
  Returned they all. But when the radiant day
  Had plunged beneath the Ocean-stream, and night,
  The holy, overspread the face of earth,
  Then in the rich king Agamemnon's tent
  Feasted the might of Peleus' son, and there
  Sat at the feast those other mighty ones
  All through the dark, till rose the dawn divine. BOOK II

How Memnon, Son of the Dawn, for Troy's sake fell in the Battle. When o'er the crests of the far-echoing hills
  The splendour of the tireless-racing sun
  Poured o'er the land, still in their tents rejoiced
  Achaea's stalwart sons, and still acclaimed
  Achilles the resistless. But in Troy
  Still mourned her people, still from all her towers
  Seaward they strained their gaze; for one great fear
  Gripped all their hearts--to see that terrible man
  At one bound overleap their high-built wall,
  Then smite with the sword all people therewithin,
  And burn with fire fanes, palaces, and homes. And old Thymoetes spake to the anguished ones:
  "Friends, I have lost hope: mine heart seeth not
  Or help, or bulwark from the storm of war,
  Now that the aweless Hector, who was once
  Troy's mighty champion, is in dust laid low. Not all his might availed to escape the Fates,
  But overborne he was by Achilles' hands,
  The hands that would, I verily deem, bear down
  A God, if he defied him to the fight,
  Even as he overthrew this warrior-queen
  Penthesileia battle-revelling,
  From whom all other Argives shrank in fear. Ah, she was marvellous! When at the first
  I looked on her, meseemed a Blessed One
  From heaven had come down hitherward to bring
  Light to our darkness--ah, vain hope, vain dream! Go to, let us take counsel, what to do
  Were best for us. Or shall we still maintain
  A hopeless fight against these ruthless foes,
  Or shall we straightway flee a city doomed? Ay, doomed!--for never more may we withstand
  Argives in fighting field, when in the front
  Of battle pitiless Achilles storms." Then spake Laomedon's son, the ancient king:
  "Nay, friend, and all ye other sons of Troy,
  And ye our strong war-helpers, flinch we not
  Faint-hearted from defence of fatherland! Yet let us go not forth the city-gates
  To battle with yon foe. Nay, from our towers
  And from our ramparts let us make defence,
  Till our new champion come, the stormy heart
  Of Memnon. Lo, he cometh, leading on
  Hosts numberless, Aethiopia's swarthy sons. By this, I trow, he is nigh unto our gates;
  For long ago, in sore distress of soul,
  I sent him urgent summons. Yea, and he
  Promised me, gladly promised me, to come
  To Troy, and make all end of all our woes. And now, I trust, he is nigh. Let us endure
  A little longer then; for better far
  It is like brave men in the fight to die
  Than flee, and live in shame mid alien folk." So spake the old king; but Polydamas,
  The prudent-hearted, thought not good to war
  Thus endlessly, and spake his patriot rede:
  "If Memnon have beyond all shadow of doubt
  Pledged him to thrust dire ruin far from us,
  Then do I gainsay not that we await
  The coming of that godlike man within
  Our walls--yet, ah, mine heart misgives me, lest,
  Though he with all his warriors come, he come
  But to his death, and unto thousands more,
  Our people, nought but misery come thereof;
  For terribly against us leaps the storm
  Of the Achaeans' might. But now, go to,
  Let us not flee afar from this our Troy
  To wander to some alien land, and there,
  In the exile's pitiful helplessness, endure
  All flouts and outrage; nor in our own land
  Abide we till the storm of Argive war
  O'erwhelm us. Nay, even now, late though it be,
  Better it were for us to render back
  Unto the Danaans Helen and her wealth,
  Even all that glory of women brought with her
  From Sparta, and add other treasure--yea,
  Repay it twofold, so to save our Troy
  And our own souls, while yet the spoiler's hand
  Is laid not on our substance, and while yet
  Troy hath not sunk in gulfs of ravening flame. I pray you, take to heart my counsel! None
  Shall, well I wot, be given to Trojan men
  Better than this. Ah, would that long ago
  Hector had hearkened to my pleading, when
  I fain had kept him in the ancient home!" So spake Polydamas the noble and strong,
  And all the listening Trojans in their hearts
  Approved; yet none dared utter openly
  The word, for all with trembling held in awe
  Their prince and Helen, though for her sole sake
  Daily they died. But on that noble man
  Turned Paris, and reviled him to his face:
  "Thou dastard battle-blencher Polydamas! Not in thy craven bosom beats a heart
  That bides the fight, but only fear and panic. Yet dost thou vaunt thee--quotha!--still our best
  In counsel!--no man's soul is base as thine! Go to, thyself shrink shivering from the strife! Cower, coward, in thine halls! But all the rest,
  We men, will still go armour-girt, until
  We wrest from this our truceless war a peace
  That shall not shame us! 'Tis with travail and toil
  Of strenuous war that brave men win renown;
  But flight?--weak women choose it, and young babes! Thy spirit is like to theirs. No whit I trust
  Thee in the day of battle--thee, the man
  Who maketh faint the hearts of all the host!" So fiercely he reviled: Polydamas
  Wrathfully answered; for he shrank not, he,
  From answering to his face. A caitiff hound,
  A reptile fool, is he who fawns on men
  Before their faces, while his heart is black
  With malice, and, when they be gone, his tongue
  Backbites them. Openly Polydamas
  Flung back upon the prince his taunt and scoff:
  "O thou of living men most mischievous! Thy valour--quotha!--brings us misery! Thine heart endures, and will endure, that strife
  Should have no limit, save in utter ruin
  Of fatherland and people for thy sake! Ne'er may such wantwit valour craze my soul! Be mine to cherish wise discretion aye,
  A warder that shall keep mine house in peace." Indignantly he spake, and Paris found
  No word to answer him, for conscience woke
  Remembrance of all woes he had brought on Troy,
  And should bring; for his passion-fevered heart
  Would rather hail quick death than severance
  From Helen the divinely fair, although
  For her sake was it that the sons of Troy
  Even then were gazing from their towers to see
  The Argives and Achilles drawing nigh. But no long time thereafter came to them
  Memnon the warrior-king, and brought with him
  A countless host of swarthy Aethiops. From all the streets of Troy the Trojans flocked
  Glad-eyed to gaze on him, as seafarers,
  With ruining tempest utterly forspent,
  See through wide-parting clouds the radiance
  Of the eternal-wheeling Northern Wain;
  So joyed the Troyfolk as they thronged around,
  And more than all Laomedon's son, for now
  Leapt in his heart a hope, that yet the ships
  Might by those Aethiop men be burned with fire;
  So giantlike their king was, and themselves
  So huge a host, and so athirst for fight. Therefore with all observance welcomed he
  The strong son of the Lady of the Dawn
  With goodly gifts and with abundant cheer. So at the banquet King and Hero sat
  And talked, this telling of the Danaan chiefs,
  And all the woes himself had suffered, that
  Telling of that strange immortality
  By the Dawn-goddess given to his sire,
  Telling of the unending flow and ebb
  Of the Sea-mother, of the sacred flood
  Of Ocean fathomless-rolling, of the bounds
  Of Earth that wearieth never of her travail,
  Of where the Sun-steeds leap from orient waves,
  Telling withal of all his wayfaring
  From Ocean's verge to Priam's wall, and spurs
  Of Ida. Yea, he told how his strong hands
  Smote the great army of the Solymi
  Who barred his way, whose deed presumptuous brought
  Upon their own heads crushing ruin and woe. So told he all that marvellous tale, and told
  Of countless tribes and nations seen of him. And Priam heard, and ever glowed his heart
  Within him; and the old lips answering spake:
  "Memnon, the Gods are good, who have vouchsafed
  To me to look upon thine host, and thee
  Here in mine halls. O that their grace would so
  Crown this their boon, that I might see my foes
  All thrust to one destruction by thy spears. That well may be, for marvellous-like art thou
  To some invincible Deathless One, yea, more
  Than any earthly hero. Wherefore thou,
  I trust, shalt hurl wild havoc through their host. But now, I pray thee, for this day do thou
  Cheer at my feast thine heart, and with the morn
  Shalt thou go forth to battle worthy of thee." Then in his hands a chalice deep and wide
  He raised, and Memnon in all love he pledged
  In that huge golden cup, a gift of Gods;
  For this the cunning God-smith brought to Zeus,
  His masterpiece, what time the Mighty in Power
  To Hephaestus gave for bride the Cyprian Queen;
  And Zeus on Dardanus his godlike son
  Bestowed it, he on Erichthonius;
  Erichthonius to Tros the great of heart
  Gave it, and he with all his treasure-store
  Bequeathed it unto Ilus, and he gave
  That wonder to Laomedon, and he
  To Priam, who had thought to leave the same
  To his own son. Fate ordered otherwise. And Memnon clasped his hands about that cup
  So peerless-beautiful, and all his heart
  Marvelled; and thus he spake unto the King:
  "Beseems not with great swelling words to vaunt
  Amidst the feast, and lavish promises,
  But rather quietly to eat in hall,
  And to devise deeds worthy. Whether I
  Be brave and strong, or whether I be not,
  Battle, wherein a man's true might is seen,
  Shall prove to thee. Now would I rest, nor drink
  The long night through. The battle-eager spirit
  By measureless wine and lack of sleep is dulled." Marvelled at him the old King, and he said:
  "As seems thee good touching the banquet, do
  After thy pleasure. I, when thou art loth,
  Will not constrain thee. Yea, unmeet it is
  To hold back him who fain would leave the board,
  Or hurry from one's halls who fain would stay. So is the good old law with all true men." Then rose that champion from the board, and passed
  Thence to his sleep--his last! And with him went
  All others from the banquet to their rest:
  And gentle sleep slid down upon them soon. But in the halls of Zeus, the Lightning-lord,
  Feasted the gods the while, and Cronos' son,
  All-father, of his deep foreknowledge spake
  Amidst them of the issue of the strife:
  "Be it known unto you all, to-morn shall bring
  By yonder war affliction swift and sore;
  For many mighty horses shall ye see
  In either host beside their chariots slain,
  And many heroes perishing. Therefore ye
  Remember these my words, howe'er ye grieve
  For dear ones. Let none clasp my knees in prayer,
  Since even to us relentless are the fates." So warned he them, which knew before, that all
  Should from the battle stand aside, howe'er
  Heart-wrung; that none, petitioning for a son
  Or dear one, should to Olympus vainly come. So, at that warning of the Thunderer,
  The Son of Cronos, all they steeled their hearts
  To bear, and spake no word against their king;
  For in exceeding awe they stood of him. Yet to their several mansions and their rest
  With sore hearts went they. O'er their deathless eyes
  The blessing-bringer Sleep his light veils spread. When o'er precipitous crests of mountain-walls
  Leapt up broad heaven the bright morning-star
  Who rouseth to their toils from slumber sweet
  The binders of the sheaf, then his last sleep
  Unclasped the warrior-son of her who brings
  Light to the world, the Child of Mists of Night. Now swelled his mighty heart with eagerness
  To battle with the foe forthright. And Dawn
  With most reluctant feet began to climb
  Heaven's broad highway. Then did the Trojans gird
  Their battle-harness on; then armed themselves
  The Aethiop men, and all the mingled tribes
  Of those war-helpers that from many lands
  To Priam's aid were gathered. Forth the gates
  Swiftly they rushed, like darkly lowering clouds
  Which Cronos' Son, when storm is rolling up,
  Herdeth together through the welkin wide. Swiftly the whole plain filled. Onward they streamed
  Like harvest-ravaging locusts drifting on
  In fashion of heavy-brooding rain-clouds o'er
  Wide plains of earth, an irresistible host
  Bringing wan famine on the sons of men;
  So in their might and multitude they went. The city streets were all too strait for them
  Marching: upsoared the dust from underfoot. From far the Argives gazed, and marvelling saw
  Their onrush, but with speed arrayed their limbs
  In brass, and in the might of Peleus' son
  Put their glad trust. Amidst them rode he on
  Like to a giant Titan, glorying
  In steeds and chariot, while his armour flashed
  Splendour around in sudden lightning-gleams. It was as when the sun from utmost bounds
  Of earth-encompassing ocean comes, and brings
  Light to the world, and flings his splendour wide
  Through heaven, and earth and air laugh all around. So glorious, mid the Argives Peleus' son
  Rode onward. Mid the Trojans rode the while
  Memnon the hero, even such to see
  As Ares furious-hearted. Onward swept
  The eager host arrayed about their lord. Then in the grapple of war on either side
  Closed the long lines, Trojan and Danaan;
  But chief in prowess still the Aethiops were. Crashed they together as when surges meet
  On the wild sea, when, in a day of storm,
  From every quarter winds to battle rush. Foe hurled at foe the ashen spear, and slew:
  Screams and death-groans went up like roaring fire. As when down-thundering torrents shout and rave
  On-pouring seaward, when the madding rains
  Stream from God's cisterns, when the huddling clouds
  Are hurled against each other ceaselessly,
  And leaps their fiery breath in flashes forth;
  So 'neath the fighters' trampling feet the earth
  Thundered, and leapt the terrible battle-yell
  Through frenzied air, for mad the war-cries were. For firstfruits of death's harvest Peleus' son
  Slew Thalius and Mentes nobly born,
  Men of renown, and many a head beside
  Dashed he to dust. As in its furious swoop
  A whirlwind shakes dark chasms underground,
  And earth's foundations crumble and melt away
  Around the deep roots of the shuddering world,
  So the ranks crumbled in swift doom to the dust
  Before the spear and fury of Peleus's son. But on the other side the hero child
  Of the Dawn-goddess slew the Argive men,
  Like to a baleful Doom which bringeth down
  On men a grim and ghastly pestilence. First slew he Pheron; for the bitter spear
  Plunged through his breast, and down on him he hurled
  Goodly Ereuthus, battle-revellers both,
  Dwellers in Thryus by Alpheus' streams,
  Which followed Nestor to the god-built burg
  Of Ilium. But when he had laid these low,
  Against the son of Neleus pressed he on
  Eager to slay. Godlike Antilochus
  Strode forth to meet him, sped the long spear's flight,
  Yet missed him, for a little he swerved, but slew
  His Aethiop comrade, son of Pyrrhasus. Wroth for his fall, against Antilochus
  He leapt, as leaps a lion mad of mood
  Upon a boar, the beast that flincheth not
  From fight with man or brute, whose charge is a flash
  Of lightning; so was his swift leap. His foe
  Antilochus caught a huge stone from the ground,
  Hurled, smote him; but unshaken abode his strength,
  For the strong helm-crest fenced his head from death;
  But rang the morion round his brows. His heart
  Kindled with terrible fury at the blow
  More than before against Antilochus. Like seething cauldron boiled his maddened might. He stabbed, for all his cunning of fence, the son
  Of Nestor above the breast; the crashing spear
  Plunged to the heart, the spot of speediest death. Then upon all the Danaans at his fall
  Came grief; but anguish-stricken was the heart
  Of Nestor most of all, to see his child
  Slain in his sight; for no more bitter pang
  Smiteth the heart of man than when a son
  Perishes, and his father sees him die. Therefore, albeit unused to melting mood,
  His soul was torn with agony for the son
  By black death slain. A wild cry hastily
  To Thrasymedes did he send afar:
  "Hither to me, Thrasymedes war-renowned! Help me to thrust back from thy brother's corse,
  Yea, from mine hapless son, his murderer,
  That so ourselves may render to our dead
  All dues of mourning. If thou flinch for fear,
  No son of mine art thou, nor of the line
  Of Periclymenus, who dared withstand
  Hercules' self. Come, to the battle-toil! For grim necessity oftentimes inspires
  The very coward with courage of despair." Then at his cry that brother's heart was stung
  With bitter grief. Swift for his help drew nigh
  Phereus, on whom for his great prince's fall
  Came anguish. Charged these warriors twain to face
  Strong Memnon in the gory strife. As when
  Two hunters 'mid a forest's mountain-folds,
  Eager to take the prey, rush on to meet
  A wild boar or a bear, with hearts afire
  To slay him, but in furious mood he leaps
  On them, and holds at bay the might of men;
  So swelled the heart of Memnon. Nigh drew they,
  Yet vainly essayed to slay him, as they hurled
  The long spears, but the lances glanced aside
  Far from his flesh: the Dawn-queen turned them thence. Yet fell their spears not vainly to the ground:
  The lance of fiery-hearted Phereus, winged
  With eager speed, dealt death to Meges' son,
  Polymnius: Laomedon was slain
  By the wrath of Nestor's son for a brother dead,
  The dear one Memnon slew in battle-rout,
  And whom the slayer's war-unwearied hands
  Now stripped of his all-brazen battle-gear,
  Nought recking, he, of Thrasymedes' might,
  Nor of stout Phereus, who were unto him
  But weaklings. A great lion seemed he there
  Standing above a hart, as jackals they,
  That, howso hungry, dare not come too nigh. But hard thereby the father gazed thereon
  In agony, and cried the rescue-cry
  To other his war-comrades for their aid
  Against the foe. Himself too burned to fight
  From his war-car; for yearning for the dead
  Goaded him to the fray beyond his strength. Ay, and himself had been on his dear son
  Laid, numbered with the dead, had not the voice
  Of Memnon stayed him even in act to rush
  Upon him, for he reverenced in his heart
  The white hairs of an age-mate of his sire:
  "Ancient," he cried, "it were my shame to fight. With one so much mine elder: I am not
  Blind unto honour. Verily I weened
  That this was some young warrior, when I saw
  Thee facing thus the foe. My bold heart hoped
  For contest worthy of mine hand and spear. Nay, draw thou back afar from battle-toil
  And bitter death. Go, lest, how loth soe'er,
  I smite thee of sore need. Nay, fall not thou
  Beside thy son, against a mightier man
  Fighting, lest men with folly thee should charge,
  For folly it is that braves o'ermastering might." He spake, and answered him that warrior old:
  "Nay, Memnon, vain was that last word of thine. None would name fool the father who essayed,
  Battling with foes for his son's sake, to thrust
  The ruthless slayer back from that dear corpse,
  But ah that yet my strength were whole in me,
  That thou might'st know my spear! Now canst thou vaunt
  Proudly enow: a young man's heart is bold
  And light his wit. Uplifted is thy soul
  And vain thy speech. If in my strength of youth
  Thou hadst met me--ha, thy friends had not rejoiced,
  For all thy might! But me the grievous weight
  Of age bows down, like an old lion whom
  A cur may boldly drive back from the fold,
  For that he cannot, in his wrath's despite,
  Maintain his own cause, being toothless now,
  And strengthless, and his strong heart tamed by time. So well the springs of olden strength no more
  Now in my breast. Yet am I stronger still
  Than many men; my grey hairs yield to few
  That have within them all the strength of youth." So drew he back a little space, and left
  Lying in dust his son, since now no more
  Lived in the once lithe limbs the olden strength,
  For the years' weight lay heavy on his head. Back leapt Thrasymedes likewise, spearman good,
  And battle-eager Phereus, and the rest
  Their comrades; for that slaughter-dealing man
  Pressed hard on them. As when from mountains high
  A shouting river with wide-echoing din
  Sweeps down its fathomless whirlpools through the gloom,
  When God with tumult of a mighty storm
  Hath palled the sky in cloud from verge to verge,
  When thunders crash all round, when thick and fast
  Gleam lightnings from the huddling clouds, when fields
  Are flooded as the hissing rain descends,
  And all the air is filled with awful roar
  Of torrents pouring down the hill-ravines;
  So Memnon toward the shores of Hellespont
  Before him hurled the Argives, following hard
  Behind them, slaughtering ever. Many a man
  Fell in the dust, and left his life in blood
  'Neath Aethiop hands. Stained was the earth with gore
  As Danaans died. Exulted Memnon's soul
  As on the ranks of foemen ever he rushed,
  And heaped with dead was all the plain of Troy. And still from fight refrained he not; he hoped
  To be a light of safety unto Troy
  And bane to Danaans. But all the while
  Stood baleful Doom beside him, and spurred on
  To strife, with flattering smile. To right, to left
  His stalwart helpers wrought in battle-toil,
  Alcyoneus and Nychius, and the son
  Of Asius furious-souled; Meneclus' spear,
  Clydon and Alexippus, yea, a host
  Eager to chase the foe, men who in fight
  Quit them like men, exulting in their king. Then, as Meneclus on the Danaans charged,
  The son of Neleus slew him. Wroth for his friend,
  Whole throngs of foes fierce-hearted Memnon slew. As when a hunter midst the mountains drives
  Swift deer within the dark lines of his toils--
  The eager ring of beaters closing in
  Presses the huddled throng into the snares
  Of death: the dogs are wild with joy of the chase
  Ceaselessly giving tongue, the while his darts
  Leap winged with death on brocket and on hind;
  So Memnon slew and ever slew: his men
  Rejoiced, the while in panic stricken rout
  Before that glorious man the Argives fled. As when from a steep mountain's precipice-brow
  Leaps a huge crag, which all-resistless Zeus
  By stroke of thunderbolt hath hurled from the crest;
  Crash oakwood copses, echo long ravines,
  Shudders the forest to its rattle and roar,
  And flocks therein and herds and wild things flee
  Scattering, as bounding, whirling, it descends
  With deadly pitiless onrush; so his foes
  Fled from the lightning-flash of Memnon's spear. Then to the side of Aeacus' mighty son
  Came Nestor. Anguished for his son he cried:
  "Achilles, thou great bulwark of the Greeks,
  Slain is my child! The armour of my dead
  Hath Memnon, and I fear me lest his corse
  Be cast a prey to dogs. Haste to his help! True friend is he who still remembereth
  A friend though slain, and grieves for one no more." Achilles heard; his heart was thrilled with grief:
  He glanced across the rolling battle, saw
  Memnon, saw where in throngs the Argives fell
  Beneath his spear. Forthright he turned away
  From where the rifted ranks of Troy fell fast
  Before his hands, and, thirsting for the fight,
  Wroth for Antilochus and the others slain,
  Came face to face with Memnon. In his hands
  That godlike hero caught up from the ground
  A stone, a boundary-mark 'twixt fields of wheat,
  And hurled. Down on the shield of Peleus' son
  It crashed. But he, the invincible, shrank not
  Before the huge rock-shard, but, thrusting out
  His long lance, rushed to close with him, afoot,
  For his steeds stayed behind the battle-rout. On the right shoulder above the shield he smote
  And staggered him; but he, despite the wound,
  Fought on with heart unquailing. Swiftly he thrust
  And pricked with his strong spear Achilles' arm. Forth gushed the blood: rejoicing with vain joy
  To Aeacus' son with arrogant words he cried:
  "Now shalt thou in thy death fill up, I trow,
  Thy dark doom, overmastered by mine hands. Thou shalt not from this fray escape alive! Fool, wherefore hast thou ruthlessly destroyed
  Trojans, and vaunted thee the mightiest man
  Of men, a deathless Nereid's son? Ha, now
  Thy doom hath found thee! Of birth divine am I,
  The Dawn-queen's mighty son, nurtured afar
  By lily-slender Hesperid Maids, beside
  The Ocean-river. Therefore not from thee
  Nor from grim battle shrink I, knowing well
  How far my goddess-mother doth transcend
  A Nereid, whose child thou vauntest thee. To Gods and men my mother bringeth light;
  On her depends the issue of all things,
  Works great and glorious in Olympus wrought
  Whereof comes blessing unto men. But thine--
  She sits in barren crypts of brine: she dwells
  Glorying mid dumb sea-monsters and mid fish,
  Deedless, unseen! Nothing I reck of her,
  Nor rank her with the immortal Heavenly Ones." In stern rebuke spake Aeacus' aweless son:
  "Memnon, how wast thou so distraught of wit
  That thou shouldst face me, and to fight defy
  Me, who in might, in blood, in stature far
  Surpass thee? From supremest Zeus I trace
  My glorious birth; and from the strong Sea-god
  Nereus, begetter of the Maids of the Sea,
  The Nereids, honoured of the Olympian Gods. And chiefest of them all is Thetis, wise
  With wisdom world-renowned; for in her bowers
  She sheltered Dionysus, chased by might
  Of murderous Lycurgus from the earth. Yea, and the cunning God-smith welcomed she
  Within her mansion, when from heaven he fell. Ay, and the Lightning-lord she once released
  From bonds. The all-seeing Dwellers in the Sky
  Remember all these things, and reverence
  My mother Thetis in divine Olympus. Ay, that she is a Goddess shalt thou know
  When to thine heart the brazen spear shall pierce
  Sped by my might. Patroclus' death I avenged
  On Hector, and Antilochus on thee
  Will I avenge. No weakling's friend thou hast slain! But why like witless children stand we here
  Babbling our parents' fame and our own deeds? Now is the hour when prowess shall decide." Then from the sheath he flashed his long keen sword,
  And Memnon his; and swiftly in fiery fight
  Closed they, and rained the never-ceasing blows
  Upon the bucklers which with craft divine
  Hephaestus' self had fashioned. Once and again
  Clashed they together, and their cloudy crests
  Touched, mingling all their tossing storm of hair. And Zeus, for that he loved them both, inspired
  With prowess each, and mightier than their wont
  He made them, made them tireless, nothing like
  To men, but Gods: and gloated o'er the twain
  The Queen of Strife. In eager fury these
  Thrust swiftly out the spear, with fell intent
  To reach the throat 'twixt buckler-rim and helm,
  Thrust many a time and oft, and now would aim
  The point beneath the shield, above the greave,
  Now close beneath the corslet curious-wrought
  That lapped the stalwart frame: hard, fast they lunged,
  And on their shoulders clashed the arms divine. Roared to the very heavens the battle-shout
  Of warring men, of Trojans, Aethiops,
  And Argives mighty-hearted, while the dust
  Rolled up from 'neath their feet, tossed to the sky
  In stress of battle-travail great and strong. As when a mist enshrouds the hills, what time
  Roll up the rain-clouds, and the torrent-beds
  Roar as they fill with rushing floods, and howls
  Each gorge with fearful voices; shepherds quake
  To see the waters' downrush and the mist,
  Screen dear to wolves and all the wild fierce things
  Nursed in the wide arms of the forest; so
  Around the fighters' feet the choking dust
  Hung, hiding the fair splendour of the sun
  And darkening all the heaven. Sore distressed
  With dust and deadly conflict were the folk. Then with a sudden hand some Blessed One
  Swept the dust-pall aside; and the Gods saw
  The deadly Fates hurling the charging lines
  Together, in the unending wrestle locked
  Of that grim conflict, saw where never ceased
  Ares from hideous slaughter, saw the earth
  Crimsoned all round with rushing streams of blood,
  Saw where dark Havoc gloated o'er the scene,
  Saw the wide plain with corpses heaped, even all
  Bounded 'twixt Simois and Xanthus, where
  They sweep from Ida down to Hellespont. But when long lengthened out the conflict was
  Of those two champions, and the might of both
  In that strong tug and strain was equal-matched,
  Then, gazing from Olympus' far-off heights,
  The Gods joyed, some in the invincible son
  Of Peleus, others in the goodly child
  Of old Tithonus and the Queen of Dawn. Thundered the heavens on high from east to west,
  And roared the sea from verge to verge, and rocked
  The dark earth 'neath the heroes' feet, and quaked
  Proud Nereus' daughters all round Thetis thronged
  In grievous fear for mighty Achilles' sake;
  And trembled for her son the Child of the Mist
  As in her chariot through the sky she rode. Marvelled the Daughters of the Sun, who stood
  Near her, around that wondrous splendour-ring
  Traced for the race-course of the tireless sun
  By Zeus, the limit of all Nature's life
  And death, the dally round that maketh up
  The eternal circuit of the rolling years. And now amongst the Blessed bitter feud
  Had broken out; but by behest of Zeus
  The twin Fates suddenly stood beside these twain,
  One dark--her shadow fell on Memnon's heart;
  One bright--her radiance haloed Peleus' son. And with a great cry the Immortals saw,
  And filled with sorrow they of the one part were,
  They of the other with triumphant joy. Still in the midst of blood-stained battle-rout
  Those heroes fought, unknowing of the Fates
  Now drawn so nigh, but each at other hurled
  His whole heart's courage, all his bodily might. Thou hadst said that in the strife of that dread day
  Huge tireless Giants or strong Titans warred,
  So fiercely blazed the wildfire of their strife,
  Now, when they clashed with swords, now when they leapt
  Hurling huge stones. Nor either would give back
  Before the hail of blows, nor quailed. They stood
  Like storm-tormented headlands steadfast, clothed
  With might past words, unearthly; for the twain
  Alike could boast their lineage of high Zeus. Therefore 'twixt these Enyo lengthened out
  The even-balanced strife, while ever they
  In that grim wrestle strained their uttermost,
  They and their dauntless comrades, round their kings
  With ceaseless fury toiling, till their spears
  Stood shivered all in shields of warriors slain,
  And of the fighters woundless none remained;
  But from all limbs streamed down into the dust
  The blood and sweat of that unresting strain
  Of fight, and earth was hidden with the dead,
  As heaven is hidden with clouds when meets the sun
  The Goat-star, and the shipman dreads the deep. As charged the lines, the snorting chariot-steeds
  Trampled the dead, as on the myriad leaves
  Ye trample in the woods at entering-in
  Of winter, when the autumn-tide is past. Still mid the corpses and the blood fought on
  Those glorious sons of Gods, nor ever ceased
  From wrath of fight. But Eris now inclined
  The fatal scales of battle, which no more
  Were equal-poised. Beneath the breast-bone then
  Of godlike Memnon plunged Achilles' sword;
  Clear through his body all the dark-blue blade
  Leapt: suddenly snapped the silver cord of life. Down in a pool of blood he fell, and clashed
  His massy armour, and earth rang again. Then turned to flight his comrades panic-struck,
  And of his arms the Myrmidons stripped the dead,
  While fled the Trojans, and Achilles chased,
  As whirlwind swift and mighty to destroy. Then groaned the Dawn, and palled herself in clouds,
  And earth was darkened. At their mother's hest
  All the light Breathings of the Dawn took hands,
  And slid down one long stream of sighing wind
  To Priam's plain, and floated round the dead,
  And softly, swiftly caught they up, and bare
  Through silver mists the Dawn-queen's son, with hearts
  Sore aching for their brother's fall, while moaned
  Around them all the air. As on they passed,
  Fell many blood-gouts from those pierced limbs
  Down to the earth, and these were made a sign
  To generations yet to be. The Gods
  Gathered them up from many lands, and made
  Thereof a far-resounding river, named
  Of all that dwell beneath long Ida's flanks
  Paphlagoneion. As its waters flow
  'Twixt fertile acres, once a year they turn
  To blood, when comes the woeful day whereon
  Died Memnon. Thence a sick and choking reek
  Steams: thou wouldst say that from a wound unhealed
  Corrupting humours breathed an evil stench. Ay, so the Gods ordained: but now flew on
  Bearing Dawn's mighty son the rushing winds
  Skimming earth's face and palled about with night. Nor were his Aethiopian comrades left
  To wander of their King forlorn: a God
  Suddenly winged those eager souls with speed
  Such as should soon be theirs for ever, changed
  To flying fowl, the children of the air. Wailing their King in the winds' track they sped. As when a hunter mid the forest-brakes
  Is by a boar or grim-jawed lion slain,
  And now his sorrowing friends take up the corse,
  And bear it heavy-hearted; and the hounds
  Follow low-whimpering, pining for their lord
  In that disastrous hunting lost; so they
  Left far behind that stricken field of blood,
  And fast they followed after those swift winds

  With multitudinous moaning, veiled in mist
  Unearthly. Trojans over all the plain
  And Danaans marvelled, seeing that great host
  Vanishing with their King. All hearts stood still
  In dumb amazement. But the tireless winds
  Sighing set hero Memnon's giant corpse
  Down by the deep flow of Aesopus' stream,
  Where is a fair grove of the bright-haired Nymphs,
  The which round his long barrow afterward
  Aesopus' daughters planted, screening it
  With many and manifold trees: and long and loud
  Wailed those Immortals, chanting his renown,
  The son of the Dawn-goddess splendour-throned. Now sank the sun: the Lady of the Morn
  Wailing her dear child from the heavens came down. Twelve maidens shining-tressed attended her,
  The warders of the high paths of the sun
  For ever circling, warders of the night
  And dawn, and each world-ordinance framed of Zeus,
  Around whose mansion's everlasting doors
  From east to west they dance, from west to east,
  Whirling the wheels of harvest-laden years,
  While rolls the endless round of winter's cold,
  And flowery spring, and lovely summer-tide,
  And heavy-clustered autumn. These came down
  From heaven, for Memnon wailing wild and high;
  And mourned with these the Pleiads. Echoed round
  Far-stretching mountains, and Aesopus' stream. Ceaseless uprose the keen, and in their midst,
  Fallen on her son and clasping, wailed the Dawn;
  "Dead art thou, dear, dear child, and thou hast clad
  Thy mother with a pall of grief. Oh, I,
  Now thou art slain, will not endure to light
  The Immortal Heavenly Ones! No, I will plunge
  Down to the dread depths of the underworld,
  Where thy lone spirit flitteth to and fro,
  And will to blind night leave earth, sky, and sea,
  Till Chaos and formless darkness brood o'er all,
  That Cronos' Son may also learn what means
  Anguish of heart. For not less worship-worthy
  Than Nereus' Child, by Zeus's ordinance,
  Am I, who look on all things, I, who bring
  All to their consummation. Recklessly
  My light Zeus now despiseth! Therefore I
  Will pass into the darkness. Let him bring
  Up to Olympus Thetis from the sea
  To hold for him light forth to Gods and men! My sad soul loveth darkness more than day,
  Lest I pour light upon thy slayer's head:

  Thus as she cried, the tears ran down her face
  Immortal, like a river brimming aye:
  Drenched was the dark earth round the corse. The Night
  Grieved in her daughter's anguish, and the heaven
  Drew over all his stars a veil of mist
  And cloud, of love unto the Lady of Light. Meanwhile within their walls the Trojan folk
  For Memnon sorrowed sore, with vain regret
  Yearning for that lost king and all his host. Nor greatly joyed the Argives, where they lay
  Camped in the open plain amidst the dead. There, mingled with Achilles' praise, uprose
  Wails for Antilochus: joy clasped hands with grief. All night in groans and sighs most pitiful
  The Dawn-queen lay: a sea of darkness moaned
  Around her. Of the dayspring nought she recked:
  She loathed Olympus' spaces. At her side
  Fretted and whinnied still her fleetfoot steeds,
  Trampling the strange earth, gazing at their Queen
  Grief-stricken, yearning for the fiery course. Suddenly crashed the thunder of the wrath
  Of Zeus; rocked round her all the shuddering earth,
  And on immortal Eos trembling came. Swiftly the dark-skinned Aethiops from her sight
  Buried their lord lamenting. As they wailed
  Unceasingly, the Dawn-queen lovely-eyed
  Changed them to birds sweeping through air around
  The barrow of the mighty dead. And these
  Still do the tribes of men "The Memnons" call;
  And still with wailing cries they dart and wheel
  Above their king's tomb, and they scatter dust
  Down on his grave, still shrill the battle-cry,
  In memory of Memnon, each to each. But he in Hades' mansions, or perchance
  Amid the Blessed on the Elysian Plain,
  Laugheth. Divine Dawn comforteth her heart
  Beholding them: but theirs is toil of strife
  Unending, till the weary victors strike
  The vanquished dead, or one and all fill up
  The measure of their doom around his grave. So by command of Eos, Lady of Light,
  The swift birds dree their weird. But Dawn divine
  Now heavenward soared with the all-fostering Hours,
  Who drew her to Zeus' threshold, sorely loth,
  Yet conquered by their gentle pleadings, such
  As salve the bitterest grief of broken hearts. Nor the Dawn-queen forgat her daily course,
  But quailed before the unbending threat of Zeus,
  Of whom are all things, even all comprised
  Within the encircling sweep of Ocean's stream,
  Earth and the palace-dome of burning stars. Before her went her Pleiad-harbingers,
  Then she herself flung wide the ethereal gates,
  And, scattering spray of splendour, flashed there-through. BOOK III

How by the shaft of a God laid low was Hero Achilles. When shone the light of Dawn the splendour-throned,
  Then to the ships the Pylian spearmen bore
  Antilochus' corpse, sore sighing for their prince,
  And by the Hellespont they buried him
  With aching hearts. Around him groaning stood
  The battle-eager sons of Argives, all,
  Of love for Nestor, shrouded o'er with grief. But that grey hero's heart was nowise crushed
  By sorrow; for the wise man's soul endures
  Bravely, and cowers not under affliction's stroke. But Peleus' son, wroth for Antilochus
  His dear friend, armed for vengeance terrible
  Upon the Trojans. Yea, and these withal,
  Despite their dread of mighty Achilles' spear,
  Poured battle-eager forth their gates, for now
  The Fates with courage filled their breasts, of whom
  Many were doomed to Hades to descend,
  Whence there is no return, thrust down by hands
  Of Aeacus' son, who also was foredoomed
  To perish that same day by Priam's wall. Swift met the fronts of conflict: all the tribes
  Of Troy's host, and the battle-biding Greeks,
  Afire with that new-kindled fury of war. Then through the foe the son of Peleus made
  Wide havoc: all around the earth was drenched
  With gore, and choked with corpses were the streams
  Of Simois and Xanthus. Still he chased,
  Still slaughtered, even to the city's walls;
  For panic fell on all the host. And now
  All had he slain, had dashed the gates to earth,
  Rending them from their hinges, or the bolts,
  Hurling himself against them, had he snapped,
  And for the Danaans into Priam's burg
  Had made a way, had utterly destroyed
  That goodly town--but now was Phoebus wroth
  Against him with grim fury, when he saw
  Those countless troops of heroes slain of him. Down from Olympus with a lion-leap
  He came: his quiver on his shoulders lay,
  And shafts that deal the wounds incurable. Facing Achilles stood he; round him clashed
  Quiver and arrows; blazed with quenchless flame
  His eyes, and shook the earth beneath his feet. Then with a terrible shout the great God cried,
  So to turn back from war Achilles awed
  By the voice divine, and save from death the Trojans:
  "Back from the Trojans, Peleus' son! Beseems not
  That longer thou deal death unto thy foes,
  Lest an Olympian God abase thy pride." But nothing quailed the hero at the voice
  Immortal, for that round him even now
  Hovered the unrelenting Fates. He recked
  Naught of the God, and shouted his defiance. "Phoebus, why dost thou in mine own despite
  Stir me to fight with Gods, and wouldst protect
  The arrogant Trojans? Heretofore hast thou
  By thy beguiling turned me from the fray,
  When from destruction thou at the first didst save
  Hector, whereat the Trojans all through Troy
  Exulted. Nay, thou get thee back: return
  Unto the mansion of the Blessed, lest
  I smite thee--ay, immortal though thou be!" Then on the God he turned his back, and sped
  After the Trojans fleeing cityward,
  And harried still their flight; but wroth at heart
  Thus Phoebus spake to his indignant soul:
  "Out on this man! he is sense-bereft! But now
  Not Zeus himself nor any other Power
  Shall save this madman who defies the Gods!" From mortal sight he vanished into cloud,
  And cloaked with mist a baleful shaft he shot
  Which leapt to Achilles' ankle: sudden pangs
  With mortal sickness made his whole heart faint. He reeled, and like a tower he fell, that falls
  Smit by a whirlwind when an earthquake cleaves
  A chasm for rushing blasts from underground;
  So fell the goodly form of Aeacus' son. He glared, a murderous glance, to right, to left,
  [Upon the Trojans, and a terrible threat]
  Shouted, a threat that could not be fulfilled:
  "Who shot at me a stealthy-smiting shaft? Let him but dare to meet me face to face! So shall his blood and all his bowels gush out
  About my spear, and he be hellward sped! I know that none can meet me man to man
  And quell in fight--of earth-born heroes none,
  Though such an one should bear within his breast
  A heart unquailing, and have thews of brass. But dastards still in stealthy ambush lurk
  For lives of heroes. Let him face me then!--
  Ay! though he be a God whose anger burns
  Against the Danaans! Yea, mine heart forebodes
  That this my smiter was Apollo, cloaked
  In deadly darkness. So in days gone by
  My mother told me how that by his shafts
  I was to die before the Scaean Gates
  A piteous death. Her words were not vain words." Then with unflinching hands from out the wound
  Incurable he drew the deadly shaft
  In agonized pain. Forth gushed the blood; his heart
  Waxed faint beneath the shadow of coming doom. Then in indignant wrath he hurled from him
  The arrow: a sudden gust of wind swept by,
  And caught it up, and, even as he trod
  Zeus' threshold, to Apollo gave it back;
  For it beseemed not that a shaft divine,
  Sped forth by an Immortal, should be lost. He unto high Olympus swiftly came,
  To the great gathering of immortal Gods,
  Where all assembled watched the war of men,
  These longing for the Trojans' triumph, those
  For Danaan victory; so with diverse wills
  Watched they the strife, the slayers and the slain. Him did the Bride of Zeus behold, and straight
  Upbraided with exceeding bitter words:
  "What deed of outrage, Phoebus, hast thou done
  This day, forgetful of that day whereon
  To godlike Peleus' spousals gathered all
  The Immortals? Yea, amidst the feasters thou
  Sangest how Thetis silver-footed left
  The sea's abysses to be Peleus' bride;
  And as thou harpedst all earth's children came
  To hearken, beasts and birds, high craggy hills,
  Rivers, and all deep-shadowed forests came. All this hast thou forgotten, and hast wrought
  A ruthless deed, hast slain a godlike man,
  Albeit thou with other Gods didst pour
  The nectar, praying that he might be the son
  By Thetis given to Peleus. But that prayer
  Hast thou forgotten, favouring the folk
  Of tyrannous Laomedon, whose kine
  Thou keptest. He, a mortal, did despite
  To thee, the deathless! O, thou art wit-bereft! Thou favourest Troy, thy sufferings all forgot. Thou wretch, and doth thy false heart know not this,
  What man is an offence, and meriteth
  Suffering, and who is honoured of the Gods? Ever Achilles showed us reverence--yea,
  Was of our race. Ha, but the punishment
  Of Troy, I ween, shall not be lighter, though
  Aeacus' son have fallen; for his son
  Right soon shall come from Scyros to the war
  To help the Argive men, no less in might
  Than was his sire, a bane to many a foe. But thou--thou for the Trojans dost not care,
  But for his valour enviedst Peleus' son,
  Seeing he was the mightest of all men. Thou fool! how wilt thou meet the Nereid's eyes,
  When she shall stand in Zeus' hall midst the Gods,
  Who praised thee once, and loved as her own son?" So Hera spake, in bitterness of soul
  Upbraiding, but he answered her not a word,
  Of reverence for his mighty Father's bride;
  Nor could he lift his eyes to meet her eyes,
  But sat abashed, aloof from all the Gods
  Eternal, while in unforgiving wrath
  Scowled on him all the Immortals who maintained
  The Danaans' cause; but such as fain would bring
  Triumph to Troy, these with exultant hearts
  Extolled him, hiding it from Hera's eyes,
  Before whose wrath all Heaven-abiders shrank. But Peleus' son the while forgat not yet
  War's fury: still in his invincible limbs
  The hot blood throbbed, and still he longed for fight. Was none of all the Trojans dared draw nigh
  The stricken hero, but at distance stood,
  As round a wounded lion hunters stand
  Mid forest-brakes afraid, and, though the shaft
  Stands in his heart, yet faileth not in him
  His royal courage, but with terrible glare
  Roll his fierce eyes, and roar his grimly jaws;
  So wrath and anguish of his deadly hurt
  To fury stung Peleides' soul; but aye
  His strength ebbed through the god-envenomed wound. Yet leapt he up, and rushed upon the foe,
  And flashed the lightning of his lance; it slew
  The goodly Orythaon, comrade stout
  Of Hector, through his temples crashing clear:
  His helm stayed not the long lance fury-sped
  Which leapt therethrough, and won within the bones
  The heart of the brain, and spilt his lusty life. Then stabbed he 'neath the brow Hipponous
  Even to the eye-roots, that the eyeball fell
  To earth: his soul to Hades flitted forth. Then through the jaw he pierced Alcathous,
  And shore away his tongue: in dust he fell
  Gasping his life out, and the spear-head shot
  Out through his ear. These, as they rushed on him,
  That hero slew; but many a fleer's life
  He spilt, for in his heart still leapt the blood. But when his limbs grew chill, and ebbed away
  His spirit, leaning on his spear he stood,
  While still the Trojans fled in huddled rout
  Of panic, and he shouted unto them:
  "Trojan and Dardan cravens, ye shall not
  Even in my death, escape my merciless spear,
  But unto mine Avenging Spirits ye
  Shall pay--ay, one and all--destruction's debt!" He spake; they heard and quailed: as mid the hills
  Fawns tremble at a lion's deep-mouthed roar,
  And terror-stricken flee the monster, so
  The ranks of Trojan chariot-lords, the lines
  Of battle-helpers drawn from alien lands,
  Quailed at the last shout of Achilles, deemed
  That he was woundless yet. But 'neath the weight
  Of doom his aweless heart, his mighty limbs,
  At last were overborne. Down midst the dead
  He fell, as fails a beetling mountain-cliff. Earth rang beneath him: clanged with a thundercrash
  His arms, as Peleus' son the princely fell. And still his foes with most exceeding dread
  Stared at him, even as, when some murderous beast
  Lies slain by shepherds, tremble still the sheep
  Eyeing him, as beside the fold he lies,
  And shrinking, as they pass him, far aloof
  And, even as he were living, fear him dead;
  So feared they him, Achilles now no more. Yet Paris strove to kindle those faint hearts;
  For his own heart exulted, and he hoped,
  Now Peleus' son, the Danaans' strength, had fallen,
  Wholly to quench the Argive battle-fire:
  "Friends, if ye help me truly and loyally,
  Let us this day die, slain by Argive men,
  Or live, and hale to Troy with Hector's steeds
  In triumph Peleus' son thus fallen dead,
  The steeds that, grieving, yearning for their lord
  To fight have borne me since my brother died. Might we with these but hale Achilles slain,
  Glory were this for Hector's horses, yea,
  For Hector--if in Hades men have sense
  Of righteous retribution. This man aye
  Devised but mischief for the sons of Troy;
  And now Troy's daughters with exultant hearts
  From all the city streets shall gather round,
  As pantheresses wroth for stolen cubs,
  Or lionesses, might stand around a man
  Whose craft in hunting vexed them while he lived. So round Achilles--a dead corpse at last!--
  In hurrying throngs Troy's daughters then shall come
  In unforgiving, unforgetting hate,
  For parents wroth, for husbands slain, for sons,
  For noble kinsmen. Most of all shall joy
  My father, and the ancient men, whose feet
  Unwillingly are chained within the walls
  By eld, if we shall hale him through our gates,
  And give our foe to fowls of the air for meat." Then they, which feared him theretofore, in haste
  Closed round the corpse of strong-heart Aeacus' son,
  Glaucus, Aeneas, battle-fain Agenor,
  And other cunning men in deadly fight,
  Eager to hale him thence to Ilium
  The god-built burg. But Aias failed him not. Swiftly that godlike man bestrode the dead:
  Back from the corpse his long lance thrust them all. Yet ceased they not from onslaught; thronging round,
  Still with swift rushes fought they for the prize,
  One following other, like to long-lipped bees
  Which hover round their hive in swarms on swarms
  To drive a man thence; but he, recking naught
  Of all their fury, carveth out the combs
  Of nectarous honey: harassed sore are they
  By smoke-reek and the robber; spite of all
  Ever they dart against him; naught cares he;
  So naught of all their onsets Aias recked;
  But first he stabbed Agelaus in the breast,
  And slew that son of Maion: Thestor next:
  Ocythous he smote, Agestratus,
  Aganippus, Zorus, Nessus, Erymas
  The war-renowned, who came from Lycia-land
  With mighty-hearted Glaucus, from his home
  In Melanippion on the mountain-ridge,
  Athena's fane, which Massikyton fronts
  Anigh Chelidonia's headland, dreaded sore
  Of scared seafarers, when its lowering crags
  Must needs be doubled. For his death the blood
  Of famed Hippolochus' son was horror-chilled;
  For this was his dear friend. With one swift thrust
  He pierced the sevenfold hides of Aias' shield,
  Yet touched his flesh not; stayed the spear-head was
  By those thick hides and by the corset-plate
  Which lapped his battle-tireless limbs. But still
  From that stern conflict Glaucus drew not back,
  Burning to vanquish Aias, Aeacus' son,
  And in his folly vaunting threatened him:
  "Aias, men name thee mightiest man of all
  The Argives, hold thee in passing-high esteem
  Even as Achilles: therefore thou, I wot,
  By that dead warrior dead this day shalt lie!" So hurled he forth a vain word, knowing not
  How far in might above him was the man
  Whom his spear threatened. Battle-bider Aias
  Darkly and scornfully glaring on him, said
  "Thou craven wretch, and knowest thou not this,
  How much was Hector mightier than thou
  In war-craft? yet before my might, my spear,
  He shrank. Ay, with his valour was there blent
  Discretion. Thou thy thoughts are deathward set,
  Who dar'st defy me to the battle, me,
  A mightier far than thou! Thou canst not say
  That friendship of our fathers thee shall screen;
  Nor me thy gifts shall wile to let thee pass
  Scatheless from war, as once did Tydeus' son. Though thou didst 'scape his fury, will not I
  Suffer thee to return alive from war. Ha, in thy many helpers dost thou trust
  Who with thee, like so many worthless flies,
  Flit round the noble Achilles' corpse? To these
  Death and black doom shall my swift onset deal." Then on the Trojans this way and that he turned,
  As mid long forest-glens a lion turns
  On hounds, and Trojans many and Lycians slew
  That came for honour hungry, till he stood
  Mid a wide ring of flinchers; like a shoal
  Of darting fish when sails into their midst
  Dolphin or shark, a huge sea-fosterling;
  So shrank they from the might of Telamon's son,
  As aye he charged amidst the rout. But still
  Swarmed fighters up, till round Achilles' corse
  To right, to left, lay in the dust the slain
  Countless, as boars around a lion at bay;
  And evermore the strife waxed deadlier. Then too Hippolochus' war-wise son was slain
  By Aias of the heart of fire. He fell
  Backward upon Achilles, even as falls
  A sapling on a sturdy mountain-oak;
  So quelled by the spear on Peleus' son he fell. But for his rescue Anchises' stalwart son
  Strove hard, with all his comrades battle-fain,
  And haled the corse forth, and to sorrowing friends
  Gave it, to bear to Ilium's hallowed burg. Himself to spoil Achilles still fought on,
  Till warrior Aias pierced him with the spear
  Through the right forearm. Swiftly leapt he back
  From murderous war, and hasted thence to Troy. There for his healing cunning leeches wrought,
  Who stanched the blood-rush, and laid on the gash
  Balms, such as salve war-stricken warriors' pangs. But Aias still fought on: here, there he slew
  With thrusts like lightning-flashes. His great heart
  Ached sorely for his mighty cousin slain. And now the warrior-king Laertes' son
  Fought at his side: before him blenched the foe,
  As he smote down Peisander's fleetfoot son,
  The warrior Maenalus, who left his home
  In far-renowned Abydos: down on him
  He hurled Atymnius, the goodly son
  Whom Pegasis the bright-haired Nymph had borne
  To strong Emathion by Granicus' stream. Dead by his side he laid Orestius' son,
  Proteus, who dwelt 'neath lofty Ida's folds. Ah, never did his mother welcome home
  That son from war, Panaceia beauty-famed! He fell by Odysseus' hands, who spilt the lives
  Of many more whom his death-hungering spear
  Reached in that fight around the mighty dead. Yet Alcon, son of Megacles battle-swift,
  Hard by Odysseus' right knee drave the spear
  Home, and about the glittering greave the blood
  Dark-crimson welled. He recked not of the wound,
  But was unto his smiter sudden death;
  For clear through his shield he stabbed him with his spear
  Amidst his battle-fury: to the earth
  Backward he dashed him by his giant might
  And strength of hand: clashed round him in the dust
  His armour, and his corslet was distained
  With crimson life-blood. Forth from flesh and shield
  The hero plucked the spear of death: the soul
  Followed the lance-head from the body forth,
  And life forsook its mortal mansion. Then
  Rushed on his comrades, in his wound's despite,
  Odysseus, nor from that stern battle-toil
  Refrained him. And by this a mingled host
  Of Danaans eager-hearted fought around
  The mighty dead, and many and many a foe
  Slew they with those smooth-shafted ashen spears. Even as the winds strew down upon the ground
  The flying leaves, when through the forest-glades
  Sweep the wild gusts, as waneth autumn-tide,
  And the old year is dying; so the spears
  Of dauntless Danaans strewed the earth with slain,
  For loyal to dead Achilles were they all,
  And loyal to hero Aias to the death. For like black Doom he blasted the ranks of Troy. Then against Aias Paris strained his bow;
  But he was ware thereof, and sped a stone
  Swift to the archer's head: that bolt of death
  Crashed through his crested helm, and darkness closed
  Round him. In dust down fell he: naught availed
  His shafts their eager lord, this way and that
  Scattered in dust: empty his quiver lay,
  Flew from his hand the bow. In haste his friends
  Upcaught him from the earth, and Hector's steeds
  Hurried him thence to Troy, scarce drawing breath,
  And moaning in his pain. Nor left his men
  The weapons of their lord, but gathered up
  All from the plain, and bare them to the prince;
  While Aias after him sent a wrathful shout:
  "Dog, thou hast 'scaped the heavy hand of death
  To-day! But swiftly thy last hour shall come
  By some strong Argive's hands, or by mine own,
  But now have I a nobler task in hand,
  From murder's grip to rescue Achilles' corse." Then turned he on the foe, hurling swift doom
  On such as fought around Peleides yet. 'These saw how many yielded up the ghost
  Neath his strong hands, and, with hearts failing them
  For fear, against him could they stand no more. As rascal vultures were they, which the swoop
  Of an eagle, king of birds, scares far away
  From carcasses of sheep that wolves have torn;
  So this way, that way scattered they before
  The hurtling stones, the sword, the might of Aias. In utter panic from the war they fled,
  In huddled rout, like starlings from the swoop
  Of a death-dealing hawk, when, fleeing bane,
  One drives against another, as they dart
  All terror-huddled in tumultuous flight. So from the war to Priam's burg they fled
  Wretchedly clad with terror as a cloak,
  Quailing from mighty Aias' battle-shout,
  As with hands dripping blood-gouts he pursued. Yea, all, one after other, had he slain,
  Had they not streamed through city-gates flung wide
  Hard-panting, pierced to the very heart with fear. Pent therewithin he left them, as a shepherd
  Leaves folded sheep, and strode back o'er the plain;
  Yet never touched he with his feet the ground,
  But aye he trod on dead men, arms, and blood;
  For countless corpses lay o'er that wide stretch
  Even from broad-wayed Troy to Hellespont,
  Bodies of strong men slain, the spoil of Doom. As when the dense stalks of sun-ripened corn
  Fall 'neath the reapers' hands, and the long swaths,
  Heavy with full ears, overspread the field,
  And joys the heart of him who oversees
  The toil, lord of the harvest; even so,
  By baleful havoc overmastered, lay
  All round face-downward men remembering not
  The death-denouncing war-shout. But the sons
  Of fair Achaea left their slaughtered foes
  In dust and blood unstripped of arms awhile
  Till they should lay upon the pyre the son
  Of Peleus, who in battle-shock had been
  Their banner of victory, charging in his might. So the kings drew him from that stricken field
  Straining beneath the weight of giant limbs,
  And with all loving care they bore him on,
  And laid him in his tent before the ships. And round him gathered that great host, and wailed
  Heart-anguished him who had been the Achaeans' strength,
  And now, forgotten all the splendour of spears,
  Lay mid the tents by moaning Hellespont,
  In stature more than human, even as lay
  Tityos, who sought to force Queen Leto, when
  She fared to Pytho: swiftly in his wrath
  Apollo shot, and laid him low, who seemed
  Invincible: in a foul lake of gore
  There lay he, covering many a rood of ground,
  On the broad earth, his mother; and she moaned
  Over her son, of blessed Gods abhorred;
  But Lady Leto laughed. So grand of mould
  There in the foemen's land lay Aeacus' son,
  For joy to Trojans, but for endless grief
  To Achaean men lamenting. Moaned the air
  With sighing from the abysses of the sea;
  And passing heavy grew the hearts of all,
  Thinking: "Now shall we perish by the hands
  Of Trojans!" Then by those dark ships they thought
  Of white-haired fathers left in halls afar,
  Of wives new-wedded, who by couches cold
  Mourned, waiting, waiting, with their tender babes
  For husbands unreturning; and they groaned
  In bitterness of soul. A passion of grief
  Came o'er their hearts; they fell upon their faces
  On the deep sand flung down, and wept as men
  All comfortless round Peleus' mighty son,
  And clutched and plucked out by the roots their hair,
  And east upon their heads defiling sand. Their cry was like the cry that goeth up
  From folk that after battle by their walls
  Are slaughtered, when their maddened foes set fire
  To a great city, and slay in heaps on heaps
  Her people, and make spoil of all her wealth;
  So wild and high they wailed beside the sea,
  Because the Danaans' champion, Aeacus' son,
  Lay, grand in death, by a God's arrow slain,
  As Ares lay, when She of the Mighty Father
  With that huge stone down dashed him on Troy's plain. Ceaselessly wailed the Myrmidons Achilles,
  A ring of mourners round the kingly dead,
  That kind heart, friend alike to each and all,
  To no man arrogant nor hard of mood,
  But ever tempering strength with courtesy. Then Aias first, deep-groaning, uttered forth
  His yearning o'er his father's brother's son
  God-stricken--ay, no man had smitten him
  Of all upon the wide-wayed earth that dwell! Him glorious Aias heavy-hearted mourned,
  Now wandering to the tent of Peleus' son,
  Now cast down all his length, a giant form,
  On the sea-sands; and thus lamented he:
  "Achilles, shield and sword of Argive men,
  Thou hast died in Troy, from Phthia's plains afar,
  Smitten unwares by that accursed shaft,
  Such thing as weakling dastards aim in fight! For none who trusts in wielding the great shield,
  None who for war can skill to set the helm
  Upon his brows, and sway the spear in grip,
  And cleave the brass about the breasts of foes,
  Warreth with arrows, shrinking from the fray. Not man to man he met thee, whoso smote;
  Else woundless never had he 'scaped thy lance! But haply Zeus purposed to ruin all,
  And maketh all our toil and travail vain--
  Ay, now will grant the Trojans victory
  Who from Achaea now hath reft her shield! Ah me! how shall old Peleus in his halls
  Take up the burden of a mighty grief
  Now in his joyless age! His heart shall break
  At the mere rumour of it. Better so,
  Thus in a moment to forget all pain. But if these evil tidings slay him not,
  Ah, laden with sore sorrow eld shall come
  Upon him, eating out his heart with grief
  By a lone hearth Peleus so passing dear
  Once to the Blessed! But the Gods vouchsafe
  No perfect happiness to hapless men." So he in grief lamented Peleus' son. Then ancient Phoenix made heart-stricken moan,
  Clasping the noble form of Aeacus' seed,
  And in wild anguish wailed the wise of heart:
  "Thou art reft from me, dear child, and cureless pain
  Hast left to me! Oh that upon my face
  The veiling earth had fallen, ere I saw
  Thy bitter doom! No pang more terrible
  Hath ever stabbed mine heart no, not that hour
  Of exile, when I fled from fatherland
  And noble parents, fleeing Hellas through,
  Till Peleus welcomed me with gifts, and lord
  Of his Dolopians made me. In his arms
  Thee through his halls one day he bare, and set
  Upon my knees, and bade me foster thee,
  His babe, with all love, as mine own dear child:
  I hearkened to him: blithely didst thou cling
  About mine heart, and, babbling wordless speech,
  Didst call me `father' oft, and didst bedew
  My breast and tunic with thy baby lips. Ofttimes with soul that laughed for glee I held
  Thee in mine arms; for mine heart whispered me
  `This fosterling through life shall care for thee,
  Staff of thine age shall be.' And that mine hope
  Was for a little while fulfilled; but now
  Thou hast vanished into darkness, and to me
  Is left long heart-ache wild with all regret. Ah, might my sorrow slay me, ere the tale
  To noble Peleus come! When on his ears
  Falleth the heavy tidings, he shall weep
  And wail without surcease. Most piteous grief
  We twain for thy sake shall inherit aye,
  Thy sire and I, who, ere our day of doom,
  Mourning shall go down to the grave for thee--
  Ay, better this than life unholpen of thee!" So moaned his ever-swelling tide of grief. And Atreus' son beside him mourned and wept
  With heart on fire with inly smouldering pain:
  "Thou hast perished, chiefest of the Danaan men,
  Hast perished, and hast left the Achaean host
  Fenceless! Now thou art fallen, are they left
  An easier prey to foes. Thou hast given joy
  To Trojans by thy fall, who dreaded thee
  As sheep a lion. These with eager hearts
  Even to the ships will bring the battle now. Zeus, Father, thou too with deceitful words
  Beguilest mortals! Thou didst promise me
  That Priam's burg should be destroyed; but now
  That promise given dost thou not fulfil,
  But thou didst cheat mine heart: I shall not win
  The war's goal, now Achilles is no more." So did he cry heart-anguished. Mourned all round
  Wails multitudinous for Peleus' son:
  The dark ships echoed back the voice of grief,
  And sighed and sobbed the immeasurable air. And as when long sea-rollers, onward driven
  By a great wind, heave up far out at sea,
  And strandward sweep with terrible rush, and aye
  Headland and beach with shattered spray are scourged,
  And roar unceasing; so a dread sound rose
  Of moaning of the Danaans round the corse,
  Ceaselessly wailing Peleus' aweless son. And on their mourning soon black night had come,
  But spake unto Atreides Neleus' son,
  Nestor, whose own heart bare its load of grief
  Remembering his own son Antilochus:
  "O mighty Agamemnon, sceptre-lord
  Of Argives, from wide-shrilling lamentation
  Refrain we for this day. None shall withhold
  Hereafter these from all their heart's desire
  Of weeping and lamenting many days. But now go to, from aweless Aeacus' son
  Wash we the foul blood-gouts, and lay we him
  Upon a couch: unseemly it is to shame
  The dead by leaving them untended long." So counselled Neleus' son, the passing-wise. Then hasted he his men, and bade them set
  Caldrons of cold spring-water o'er the flames,
  And wash the corse, and clothe in vesture fair,
  Sea-purple, which his mother gave her son
  At his first sailing against Troy. With speed
  They did their lord's command: with loving care,
  All service meetly rendered, on a couch
  Laid they the mighty fallen, Peleus' son. The Trito-born, the passing-wise, beheld
  And pitied him, and showered upon his head
  Ambrosia, which hath virtue aye to keep
  Taintless, men say, the flesh of warriors slain. Like softly-breathing sleeper dewy-fresh
  She made him: over that dead face she drew
  A stern frown, even as when he lay, with wrath
  Darkening his grim face, clasping his slain friend
  Patroclus; and she made his frame to be
  More massive, like a war-god to behold. And wonder seized the Argives, as they thronged
  And saw the image of a living man,
  Where all the stately length of Peleus' son
  Lay on the couch, and seemed as though he slept. Around him all the woeful captive-maids,
  Whom he had taken for a prey, what time
  He had ravaged hallowed Lemnos, and had scaled
  The towered crags of Thebes, Eetion's town,
  Wailed, as they stood and rent their fair young flesh,
  And smote their breasts, and from their hearts bemoaned
  That lord of gentleness and courtesy,
  Who honoured even the daughters of his foes. And stricken most of all with heart-sick pain
  Briseis, hero Achilles' couchmate, bowed
  Over the dead, and tore her fair young flesh
  With ruthless fingers, shrieking: her soft breast
  Was ridged with gory weals, so cruelly
  She smote it thou hadst said that crimson blood
  Had dripped on milk. Yet, in her griefs despite,
  Her winsome loveliness shone out, and grace
  Hung like a veil about her, as she wailed:
  "Woe for this grief passing all griefs beside! Never on me came anguish like to this
  Not when my brethren died, my fatherland
  Was wasted--like this anguish for thy death! Thou wast my day, my sunlight, my sweet life,
  Mine hope of good, my strong defence from harm,
  Dearer than all my beauty--yea, more dear
  Than my lost parents! Thou wast all in all
  To me, thou only, captive though I be. Thou tookest from me every bondmaid's task
  And like a wife didst hold me. Ah, but now
  Me shall some new Achaean master bear
  To fertile Sparta, or to thirsty Argos. The bitter cup of thraldom shall I drain,
  Severed, ah me, from thee! Oh that the earth
  Had veiled my dead face ere I saw thy doom!" So for slain Peleus' son did she lament
  With woeful handmaids and heart-anguished Greeks,
  Mourning a king, a husband. Never dried
  Her tears were: ever to the earth they streamed
  Like sunless water trickling from a rock
  While rime and snow yet mantle o'er the earth
  Above it; yet the frost melts down before
  The east-wind and the flame-shafts of the sun. Now came the sound of that upringing wail
  To Nereus' Daughters, dwellers in the depths
  Unfathomed. With sore anguish all their hearts
  Were smitten: piteously they moaned: their cry
  Shivered along the waves of Hellespont. Then with dark mantles overpalled they sped
  Swiftly to where the Argive men were thronged. As rushed their troop up silver paths of sea,
  The flood disported round them as they came. With one wild cry they floated up; it rang,
  A sound as when fleet-flying cranes forebode
  A great storm. Moaned the monsters of the deep
  Plaintively round that train of mourners. Fast
  On sped they to their goal, with awesome cry
  Wailing the while their sister's mighty son. Swiftly from Helicon the Muses came
  Heart-burdened with undying grief, for love
  And honour to the Nereid starry-eyed. Then Zeus with courage filled the Argive men,
  That-eyes of flesh might undismayed behold
  That glorious gathering of Goddesses. Then those Divine Ones round Achilles' corse
  Pealed forth with one voice from immortal lips
  A lamentation. Rang again the shores
  Of Hellespont. As rain upon the earth
  Their tears fell round the dead man, Aeacus' son;
  For out of depths of sorrow rose their moan. And all the armour, yea, the tents, the ships
  Of that great sorrowing multitude were wet
  With tears from ever-welling springs of grief. His mother cast her on him, clasping him,
  And kissed her son's lips, crying through her tears:
  "Now let the rosy-vestured Dawn in heaven
  Exult! Now let broad-flowing Axius
  Exult, and for Asteropaeus dead
  Put by his wrath! Let Priam's seed be glad
  But I unto Olympus will ascend,
  And at the feet of everlasting Zeus
  Will cast me, bitterly planning that he gave
  Me, an unwilling bride, unto a man--
  A man whom joyless eld soon overtook,
  To whom the Fates are near, with death for gift. Yet not so much for his lot do I grieve
  As for Achilles; for Zeus promised me
  To make him glorious in the Aeacid halls,
  In recompense for the bridal I so loathed
  That into wild wind now I changed me, now
  To water, now in fashion as a bird
  I was, now as the blast of flame; nor might
  A mortal win me for his bride, who seemed
  All shapes in turn that earth and heaven contain,
  Until the Olympian pledged him to bestow
  A godlike son on me, a lord of war. Yea, in a manner this did he fulfil
  Faithfully; for my son was mightiest
  Of men. But Zeus made brief his span of life
  Unto my sorrow. Therefore up to heaven
  Will I: to Zeus's mansion will I go
  And wail my son, and will put Zeus in mind
  Of all my travail for him and his sons
  In their sore stress, and sting his soul with shame." So in her wild lament the Sea-queen cried. But now to Thetis spake Calliope,
  She in whose heart was steadfast wisdom throned:
  "From lamentation, Thetis, now forbear,
  And do not, in the frenzy of thy grief
  For thy lost son, provoke to wrath the Lord
  Of Gods and men. Lo, even sons of Zeus,
  The Thunder-king, have perished, overborne
  By evil fate. Immortal though I be,
  Mine own son Orpheus died, whose magic song
  Drew all the forest-trees to follow him,
  And every craggy rock and river-stream,
  And blasts of winds shrill-piping stormy-breathed,
  And birds that dart through air on rushing wings. Yet I endured mine heavy sorrow: Gods
  Ought not with anguished grief to vex their souls. Therefore make end of sorrow-stricken wail
  For thy brave child; for to the sons of earth
  Minstrels shall chant his glory and his might,
  By mine and by my sisters' inspiration,
  Unto the end of time. Let not thy soul
  Be crushed by dark grief, nor do thou lament
  Like those frail mortal women. Know'st thou not
  That round all men which dwell upon the earth
  Hovereth irresistible deadly Fate,
  Who recks not even of the Gods? Such power
  She only hath for heritage. Yea, she
  Soon shall destroy gold-wealthy Priam's town,
  And Trojans many and Argives doom to death,
  Whomso she will. No God can stay her hand." So in her wisdom spake Calliope. Then plunged the sun down into Ocean's stream,
  And sable-vestured Night came floating up
  O'er the wide firmament, and brought her boon
  Of sleep to sorrowing mortals. On the sands
  There slept they, all the Achaean host, with heads
  Bowed 'neath the burden of calamity. But upon Thetis sleep laid not his hand:
  Still with the deathless Nereids by the sea
  She sate; on either side the Muses spake
  One after other comfortable words
  To make that sorrowing heart forget its pain. But when with a triumphant laugh the Dawn
  Soared up the sky, and her most radiant light
  Shed over all the Trojans and their king,
  Then, sorrowing sorely for Achilles still,
  The Danaans woke to weep. Day after day,
  For many days they wept. Around them moaned
  Far-stretching beaches of the sea, and mourned
  Great Nereus for his daughter Thetis' sake;
  And mourned with him the other Sea-gods all
  For dead Achilles. Then the Argives gave
  The corpse of great Peleides to the flame. A pyre of countless tree-trunks built they up
  Which, all with one mind toiling, from the heights
  Of Ida they brought down; for Atreus' sons
  Sped on the work, and charged them to bring thence
  Wood without measure, that consumed with speed
  Might be Achilles' body. All around
  Piled they about the pyre much battle-gear
  Of strong men slain; and slew and cast thereon
  Full many goodly sons of Trojan men,
  And snorting steeds, and mighty bulls withal,
  And sheep and fatling swine thereon they cast. And wailing captive maids from coffers brought
  Mantles untold; all cast they on the pyre:
  Gold heaped they there and amber. All their hair
  The Myrmidons shore, and shrouded with the same
  The body of their king. Briseis laid
  Her own shorn tresses on the corpse, her gift,
  Her last, unto her lord. Great jars of oil
  Full many poured they out thereon, with jars
  Of honey and of wine, rich blood of the grape
  That breathed an odour as of nectar, yea,
  Cast incense-breathing perfumes manifold
  Marvellous sweet, the precious things put forth
  By earth, and treasures of the sea divine. Then, when all things were set in readiness
  About the pyre, all, footmen, charioteers,
  Compassed that woeful bale, clashing their arms,
  While, from the viewless heights Olympian, Zeus
  Rained down ambrosia on dead Aeacus' son. For honour to the Goddess, Nereus' child,
  He sent to Aeolus Hermes, bidding him
  Summon the sacred might of his swift winds,
  For that the corpse of Aeacus' son must now
  Be burned. With speed he went, and Aeolus
  Refused not: the tempestuous North in haste
  He summoned, and the wild blast of the West;
  And to Troy sped they on their whirlwind wings. Fast in mad onrush, fast across the deep
  They darted; roared beneath them as they flew
  The sea, the land; above crashed thunder-voiced
  Clouds headlong hurtling through the firmament. Then by decree of Zeus down on the pyre
  Of slain Achilles, like a charging host
  Swooped they; upleapt the Fire-god's madding breath:
  Uprose a long wail from the Myrmidons. Then, though with whirlwind rushes toiled the winds,
  All day, all night, they needs must fan the flames
  Ere that death-pyre burned out. Up to the heavens
  Vast-volumed rolled the smoke. The huge tree-trunks
  Groaned, writhing, bursting, in the heat, and dropped
  The dark-grey ash all round. So when the winds
  Had tirelessly fulfilled their mighty task,
  Back to their cave they rode cloud-charioted. Then, when the fire had last of all consumed
  That hero-king, when all the steeds, the men
  Slain round the pyre had first been ravined up,
  With all the costly offerings laid around
  The mighty dead by Achaia's weeping sons,
  The glowing embers did the Myrmidons quench
  With wine. Then clear to be discerned were seen
  His bones; for nowise like the rest were they,
  But like an ancient Giant's; none beside
  With these were blent; for bulls and steeds, and sons
  Of Troy, with all that mingled hecatomb,
  Lay in a wide ring round his corse, and he
  Amidst them, flame-devoured, lay there alone. So his companions groaning gathered up
  His bones, and in a silver casket laid
  Massy and deep, and banded and bestarred
  With flashing gold; and Nereus' daughters shed
  Ambrosia over them, and precious nards
  For honour to Achilles: fat of kine
  And amber honey poured they over all. A golden vase his mother gave, the gift
  In old time of the Wine-god, glorious work
  Of the craft-master Fire-god, in the which
  They laid the casket that enclosed the bones
  Of mighty-souled Achilles. All around
  The Argives heaped a barrow, a giant sign,
  Upon a foreland's uttermost end, beside
  The Hellespont's deep waters, wailing loud
  Farewells unto the Myrmidons' hero-king. Nor stayed the immortal steeds of Aeacus' son
  Tearless beside the ships; they also mourned
  Their slain king: sorely loth were they to abide
  Longer mid mortal men or Argive steeds
  Bearing a burden of consuming grief;
  But fain were they to soar through air, afar
  From wretched men, over the Ocean's streams,
  Over the Sea-queen's caverns, unto where
  Divine Podarge bare that storm-foot twain
  Begotten of the West-wind clarion-voiced
  Yea, and they had accomplished their desire,
  But the Gods' purpose held them back, until
  From Scyros' isle Achilles' fleetfoot son
  Should come. Him waited they to welcome, when
  He came unto the war-host; for the Fates,
  Daughters of holy Chaos, at their birth
  Had spun the life-threads of those deathless foals,
  Even to serve Poseidon first, and next
  Peleus the dauntless king, Achilles then
  The invincible, and, after these, the fourth,
  The mighty-hearted Neoptolemus,
  Whom after death to the Elysian Plain
  They were to bear, unto the Blessed Land,
  By Zeus' decree. For which cause, though their hearts
  Were pierced with bitter anguish, they abode
  Still by the ships, with spirits sorrowing
  For their old lord, and yearning for the new. Then from the surge of heavy-plunging seas
  Rose the Earth-shaker. No man saw his feet
  Pace up the strand, but suddenly he stood
  Beside the Nereid Goddesses, and spake
  To Thetis, yet for Achilles bowed with grief:
  "Refrain from endless mourning for thy son. Not with the dead shall he abide, but dwell
  With Gods, as doth the might of Herakles,
  And Dionysus ever fair. Not him
  Dread doom shall prison in darkness evermore,
  Nor Hades keep him. To the light of Zeus
  Soon shall he rise; and I will give to him
  A holy island for my gift: it lies
  Within the Euxine Sea: there evermore
  A God thy son shall be. The tribes that dwell
  Around shall as mine own self honour him
  With incense and with steam of sacrifice. Hush thy laments, vex not thine heart with grief." Then like a wind-breath had he passed away
  Over the sea, when that consoling word
  Was spoken; and a little in her breast
  Revived the spirit of Thetis: and the God
  Brought this to pass thereafter. All the host
  Moved moaning thence, and came unto the ships
  That brought them o'er from Hellas. Then returned
  To Helicon the Muses: 'neath the sea,
  Wailing the dear dead, Nereus' Daughters sank,



BOOK IV

How in the Funeral Games of Achilles heroes contended. Nor did the hapless Trojans leave unwept
  The warrior-king Hippolochus' hero-son,
  But laid, in front of the Dardanian gate,
  Upon the pyre that captain war-renowned. But him Apollo's self caught swiftly up
  Out of the blazing fire, and to the winds
  Gave him, to bear away to Lycia-land;
  And fast and far they bare him, 'neath the glens
  Of high Telandrus, to a lovely glade;
  And for a monument above his grave
  Upheaved a granite rock. The Nymphs therefrom
  Made gush the hallowed water of a stream
  For ever flowing, which the tribes of men
  Still call fair-fleeting Glaucus. This the gods
  Wrought for an honour to the Lycian king. But for Achilles still the Argives mourned
  Beside the swift ships: heart-sick were they all
  With dolorous pain and grief. Each yearned for him
  As for a son; no eye in that wide host
  Was tearless. But the Trojans with great joy
  Exulted, seeing their sorrow from afar,
  And the great fire that spake their foe consumed. And thus a vaunting voice amidst them cried:
  "Now hath Cronion from his heaven vouchsafed
  A joy past hope unto our longing eyes,
  To see Achilles fallen before Troy. Now he is smitten down, the glorious hosts
  Of Troy, I trow, shall win a breathing-space
  From blood of death and from the murderous fray. Ever his heart devised the Trojans' bane;
  In his hands maddened aye the spear of doom
  With gore besprent, and none of us that faced
  Him in the fight beheld another dawn. But now, I wot, Achaea's valorous sons
  Shall flee unto their galleys shapely-prowed,
  Since slain Achilles lies. Ah that the might
  Of Hector still were here, that he might slay
  The Argives one and all amidst their tents!" So in unbridled joy a Trojan cried;
  But one more wise and prudent answered him:
  "Thou deemest that yon murderous Danaan host
  Will straightway get them to the ships, to flee
  Over the misty sea. Nay, still their lust
  Is hot for fight: us will they nowise fear,
  Still are there left strong battle-eager men,
  As Aias, as Tydeides, Atreus' sons:
  Though dead Achilles be, I still fear these. Oh that Apollo Silverbow would end them! Then in that day were given to our prayers
  A breathing-space from war and ghastly death." In heaven was dole among the Immortal Ones,
  Even all that helped the stalwart Danaans' cause. In clouds like mountains piled they veiled their heads
  For grief of soul. But glad those others were
  Who fain would speed Troy to a happy goal. Then unto Cronos' Son great Hera spake:
  "Zeus, Lightning-father, wherefore helpest thou
  Troy, all forgetful of the fair-haired bride
  Whom once to Peleus thou didst give to wife
  Midst Pelion's glens? Thyself didst bring to pass
  Those spousals of a Goddess: on that day
  All we Immortals feasted there, and gave
  Gifts passing-fair. All this dost thou forget,
  And hast devised for Hellas heaviest woe." So spake she; but Zeus answered not a word;
  For pondering there he sat with burdened breast,
  Thinking how soon the Argives should destroy
  The city of Priam, thinking how himself
  Would visit on the victors ruin dread
  In war and on the great sea thunder-voiced. Such thoughts were his, ere long to be fulfilled. Now sank the sun to Ocean's fathomless flood:
  O'er the dim land the infinite darkness stole,
  Wherein men gain a little rest from toil. Then by the ships, despite their sorrow, supped
  The Argives, for ye cannot thrust aside
  Hunger's importunate craving, when it comes
  Upon the breast, but straightway heavy and faint
  Lithe limbs become; nor is there remedy
  Until one satisfy this clamorous guest
  Therefore these ate the meat of eventide
  In grief for Achilles' hard necessity
  Constrained them all. And, when they had broken bread,
  Sweet sleep came on them, loosening from their frames
  Care's heavy chain, and quickening strength anew

  But when the starry Bears had eastward turned
  Their heads, expectant of the uprushing light
  Of Helios, and when woke the Queen of Dawn,
  Then rose from sleep the stalwart Argive men
  Purposing for the Trojans death and doom. Stirred were they like the roughly-ridging sea
  Icarian, or as sudden-rippling corn
  In harvest field, what time the rushing wings
  Of the cloud-gathering West sweep over it;
  So upon Hellespont's strand the folk were stirred. And to those eager hearts cried Tydeus' son:
  "If we be battle-biders, friends, indeed,
  More fiercely fight we now the hated foe,
  Lest they take heart because Achilles lives
  No longer. Come, with armour, car, and steed
  Let us beset them. Glory waits our toil?" But battle-eager Aias answering spake
  "Brave be thy words, and nowise idle talk,
  Kindling the dauntless Argive men, whose hearts
  Before were battle-eager, to the fight
  Against the Trojan men, O Tydeus' son. But we must needs abide amidst the ships
  Till Goddess Thetis come forth of the sea;
  For that her heart is purposed to set here
  Fair athlete-prizes for the funeral-games. This yesterday she told me, ere she plunged
  Into sea-depths, yea, spake to me apart
  From other Danaans; and, I trow, by this
  Her haste hath brought her nigh. Yon Trojan men,
  Though Peleus' son hath died, shall have small heart
  For battle, while myself am yet alive,
  And thou, and noble Atreus' son, the king." So spake the mighty son of Telamon,
  But knew not that a dark and bitter doom
  For him should follow hard upon those games
  By Fate's contrivance. Answered Tydeus' son
  "O friend, if Thetis comes indeed this day
  With goodly gifts for her son's funeral-games,
  Then bide we by the ships, and keep we here
  All others. Meet it is to do the will
  Of the Immortals: yea, to Achilles too,
  Though the Immortals willed it not, ourselves
  Must render honour grateful to the dead." So spake the battle-eager Tydeus' son. And lo, the Bride of Peleus gliding came
  Forth of the sea, like the still breath of dawn,
  And suddenly was with the Argive throng
  Where eager-faced they waited, some, that looked
  Soon to contend in that great athlete-strife,
  And some, to joy in seeing the mighty strive. Amidst that gathering Thetis sable-stoled
  Set down her prizes, and she summoned forth
  Achaea's champions: at her best they came. But first amidst them all rose Neleus' son,
  Not as desiring in the strife of fists
  To toil, nor strain of wrestling; for his arms
  And all his sinews were with grievous eld
  Outworn, but still his heart and brain were strong. Of all the Achaeans none could match himself
  Against him in the folkmote's war of words;
  Yea, even Laertes' glorious son to him
  Ever gave place when men for speech were met;
  Nor he alone, but even the kingliest
  Of Argives, Agamemnon, lord of spears. Now in their midst he sang the gracious Queen
  Of Nereids, sang how she in willsomeness
  Of beauty was of all the Sea-maids chief. Well-pleased she hearkened. Yet again he sang,
  Singing of Peleus' Bridal of Delight,
  Which all the blest Immortals brought to pass
  By Pelion's crests; sang of the ambrosial feast
  When the swift Hours brought in immortal hands
  Meats not of earth, and heaped in golden maunds;
  Sang how the silver tables were set forth
  In haste by Themis blithely laughing; sang
  How breathed Hephaestus purest flame of fire;
  Sang how the Nymphs in golden chalices
  Mingled ambrosia; sang the ravishing dance
  Twined by the Graces' feet; sang of the chant
  The Muses raised, and how its spell enthralled
  All mountains, rivers, all the forest brood;
  How raptured was the infinite firmament,
  Cheiron's fair caverns, yea, the very Gods. Such noble strain did Neleus' son pour out
  Into the Argives' eager ears; and they
  Hearkened with ravished souls. Then in their midst
  He sang once more the imperishable deeds
  Of princely Achilles. All the mighty throng
  Acclaimed him with delight. From that beginning
  With fitly chosen words did he extol
  The glorious hero; how he voyaged and smote
  Twelve cities; how he marched o'er leagues on leagues
  Of land, and spoiled eleven; how he slew
  Telephus and Eetion's might renowned
  In Thebe; how his spear laid Cyenus low,
  Poseidon's son, and godlike Polydorus,
  Troilus the goodly, princely Asteropaeus;
  And how he dyed with blood the river-streams
  Of Xanthus, and with countless corpses choked
  His murmuring flow, when from the limbs he tore
  Lycaon's life beside the sounding river;
  And how he smote down Hector; how he slew
  Penthesileia, and the godlike son
  Of splendour-throned Dawn;--all this he sang
  To Argives which already knew the tale;
  Sang of his giant mould, how no man's strength
  In fight could stand against him, nor in games
  Where strong men strive for mastery, where the swift
  Contend with flying feet or hurrying wheels
  Of chariots, nor in combat panoplied;
  And how in goodlihead he far outshone
  All Danaans, and how his bodily might
  Was measureless in the stormy clash of war. Last, he prayed Heaven that he might see a son
  Like that great sire from sea-washed Scyros come. That noble song acclaiming Argives praised;
  Yea, silver-looted Thetis smiled, and gave
  The singer fleetfoot horses, given of old
  Beside Caicus' mouth by Telephus
  To Achilles, when he healed the torturing wound
  With that same spear wherewith himself had pierced
  Telephus' thigh, and thrust the point clear through. These Nestor Neleus' son to his comrades gave,
  And, glorying in their godlike lord, they led
  The steeds unto his ships. Then Thetis set
  Amidst the athlete-ring ten kine, to be
  Her prizes for the footrace, and by each
  Ran a fair suckling calf. These the bold might
  Of Peleus' tireless son had driven down
  From slopes of Ida, prizes of his spear. To strive for these rose up two victory-fain,
  Teucer the first, the son of Telamon,
  And Aias, of the Locrian archers chief. These twain with swift hands girded them about
  With loin-cloths, reverencing the Goddess-bride
  Of Peleus, and the Sea-maids, who with her
  Came to behold the Argives' athlete-sport. And Atreus' son, lord of all Argive men,
  Showed them the turning-goal of that swift course. Then these the Queen of Rivalry spurred on,
  As from the starting-line like falcons swift
  They sped away. Long doubtful was the race:
  Now, as the Argives gazed, would Aias' friends
  Shout, now rang out the answering cheer from friends
  Of Teucer. But when in their eager speed
  Close on the end they were, then Teucer's feet
  Were trammelled by unearthly powers: some god
  Or demon dashed his foot against the stock
  Of a deep-rooted tamarisk. Sorely wrenched
  Was his left ankle: round the joint upswelled
  The veins high-ridged. A great shout rang from all
  That watched the contest. Aias darted past
  Exultant: ran his Locrian folk to hail
  Their lord, with sudden joy in all their souls. Then to his ships they drave the kine, and cast
  Fodder before them. Eager-helpful friends
  Led Teucer halting thence. The leeches drew
  Blood from his foot: then over it they laid
  Soft-shredded linen ointment-smeared, and swathed
  With smooth bands round, and charmed away the pain. Then swiftly rose two mighty-hearted ones
  Eager to match their strength in wrestling strain,
  The son of Tydeus and the giant Aias. Into the midst they strode, and marvelling gazed
  The Argives on men shapen like to gods. Then grappled they, like lions famine-stung
  Fighting amidst the mountains o'er a stag,
  Whose strength is even-balanced; no whit less
  Is one than other in their deadly rage;
  So these long time in might were even-matched,
  Till Aias locked his strong hands round the son
  Of Tydeus, straining hard to break his back;
  But he, with wrestling-craft and strength combined,
  Shifted his hip 'neath Telamon's son, and heaved
  The giant up; with a side-twist wrenched free
  From Aias' ankle-lock his thigh, and so
  With one huge shoulder-heave to earth he threw
  That mighty champion, and himself came down
  Astride him: then a mighty shout went up. But battle-stormer Aias, chafed in mind,
  Sprang up, hot-eager to essay again
  That grim encounter. From his terrible hands
  He dashed the dust, and challenged furiously
  With a great voice Tydeides: not a whit
  That other quailed, but rushed to close with him. Rolled up the dust in clouds from 'neath their feet:
  Hurtling they met like battling mountain-bulls
  That clash to prove their dauntless strength, and spurn
  The dust, while with their roaring all the hills
  Re-echo: in their desperate fury these
  Dash their strong heads together, straining long
  Against each other with their massive strength,
  Hard-panting in the fierce rage of their strife,
  While from their mouths drip foam-flakes to the ground;
  So strained they twain with grapple of brawny hands. 'Neath that hard grip their backs and sinewy necks
  Cracked, even as when in mountain-glades the trees
  Dash storm-tormented boughs together. Oft
  Tydeides clutched at Aias' brawny thighs,
  But could not stir his steadfast-rooted feet. Oft Aias hurled his whole weight on him, bowed
  His shoulders backward, strove to press him down;
  And to new grips their hands were shifting aye. All round the gazing people shouted, some
  Cheering on glorious Tydeus' son, and some
  The might of Aias. Then the giant swung
  The shoulders of his foe to right, to left;
  Then gripped him 'neath the waist; with one fierce heave
  And giant effort hurled him like a stone
  To earth. The floor of Troyland rang again
  As fell Tydeides: shouted all the folk. Yet leapt he up all eager to contend
  With giant Aias for the third last fall:
  But Nestor rose and spake unto the twain:
  "From grapple of wrestling, noble sons, forbear;
  For all we know that ye be mightiest
  Of Argives since the great Achilles died." Then these from toil refrained, and from their brows
  Wiped with their hands the plenteous-streaming sweat:
  They kissed each other, and forgat their strife. Then Thetis, queen of Goddesses, gave to them
  Four handmaids; and those strong and aweless ones
  Marvelled beholding them, for these surpassed
  All captive-maids in beauty and household-skill,
  Save only lovely-tressed Briseis. These
  Achilles captive brought from Lesbos' Isle,
  And in their service joyed. The first was made
  Stewardess of the feast and lady of meats;
  The second to the feasters poured the wine;
  The third shed water on their hands thereafter;
  The fourth bare all away, the banquet done. These Tydeus' son and giant Aias shared,
  And, parted two and two, unto their ships
  Sent they those fair and serviceable ones. Next, for the play of fists Idomeneus rose,
  For cunning was he in all athlete-lore;
  But none came forth to meet him, yielding all
  To him, the elder-born, with reverent awe. So in their midst gave Thetis unto him
  A chariot and fleet steeds, which theretofore
  Mighty Patroclus from the ranks of Troy
  Drave, when he slew Sarpedon, seed of Zeus,
  These to his henchmen gave Idomeneus
  To drive unto the ships: himself remained
  Still sitting in the glorious athlete-ring. Then Phoenix to the stalwart Argives cried:
  "Now to Idomeneus the Gods have given
  A fair prize uncontested, free of toil
  Of mighty arms and shoulders, honouring
  The elder-born with bloodless victory. But lo, ye younger men, another prize
  Awaiteth the swift play of cunning hands. Step forth then: gladden great Peleides' soul." He spake, they heard; but each on other looked,
  And, loth to essay the contest, all sat still,
  Till Neleus' son rebuked those laggard souls:
  "Friends, it were shame that men should shun the play
  Of clenched hands, who in that noble sport
  Have skill, wherein young men delight, which links
  Glory to toil. Ah that my thews were strong
  As when we held King Pelias' funeral-feast,
  I and Acastus, kinsmen joining hands,
  When I with godlike Polydeuces stood
  In gauntlet-strife, in even-balanced fray,
  And when Ancaeus in the wrestlers' ring
  Mightier than all beside, yet feared and shrank
  From me, and dared not strive with me that day,
  For that ere then amidst the Epeian men--
  No battle-blenchers they!--I had vanquished him,
  For all his might, and dashed him to the dust
  By dead Amaryncus' tomb, and thousands round
  Sat marvelling at my prowess and my strength. Therefore against me not a second time
  Raised he his hands, strong wrestler though he were;
  And so I won an uncontested prize. But now old age is on me, and many griefs. Therefore I bid you, whom it well beseems,
  To win the prize; for glory crowns the youth
  Who bears away the meed of athlete-strife." Stirred by his gallant chiding, a brave man
  Rose, son of haughty godlike Panopeus,
  The man who framed the Horse, the bane of Troy,
  Not long thereafter. None dared meet him now
  In play of fists, albeit in deadly craft
  Of war, when Ares rusheth through the field,
  He was not cunning. But for strife of hands
  The fair prize uncontested had been won
  By stout Epeius--yea, he was at point
  To bear it thence unto the Achaean ships;
  But one strode forth to meet him, Theseus' son,
  The spearman Acamas, the mighty of heart,
  Bearing already on his swift hands girt
  The hard hide-gauntlets, which Evenor's son
  Agelaus on his prince's hands had drawn
  With courage-kindling words. The comrades then
  Of Panopeus' princely son for Epeius raised
  A heartening cheer. He like a lion stood
  Forth in the midst, his strong hands gauntleted
  With bull's hide hard as horn. Loud rang the cheers
  From side to side of that great throng, to fire
  The courage of the mighty ones to clash
  Hands in the gory play. Sooth, little spur
  Needed they for their eagerness for fight. But, ere they closed, they flashed out proving blows
  To wot if still, as theretofore, their arms
  Were limber and lithe, unclogged by toil of war;
  Then faced each other, and upraised their hands
  With ever-watching eyes, and short quick steps
  A-tiptoe, and with ever-shifting feet,
  Each still eluding other's crushing might. Then with a rush they closed like thunder-clouds
  Hurled on each other by the tempest-blast,
  Flashing forth lightnings, while the welkin thrills
  As clash the clouds and hollow roar the winds;
  So 'neath the hard hide-gauntlets clashed their jaws. Down streamed the blood, and from their brows the sweat
  Blood-streaked made on the flushed cheeks crimson bars. Fierce without pause they fought, and never flagged
  Epeius, but threw all his stormy strength
  Into his onrush. Yet did Theseus' son
  Never lose heart, but baffled the straight blows
  Of those strong hands, and by his fighting-craft
  Flinging them right and left, leapt in, brought home
  A blow to his eyebrow, cutting to the bone. Even then with counter-stroke Epeius reached
  Acamas' temple, and hurled him to the ground. Swift he sprang up, and on his stalwart foe
  Rushed, smote his head: as he rushed in again,
  The other, slightly swerving, sent his left
  Clean to his brow; his right, with all his might
  Behind it, to his nose. Yet Acamas still
  Warded and struck with all the manifold shifts
  Of fighting-craft. But now the Achaeans all
  Bade stop the fight, though eager still were both
  To strive for coveted victory. Then came
  Their henchmen, and the gory gauntlets loosed
  In haste from those strong hands. Now drew they breath
  From that great labour, as they bathed their brows
  With sponges myriad-pored. Comrades and friends
  With pleading words then drew them face to face,
  And prayed, "In friendship straight forget your wrath." So to their comrades' suasion hearkened they;
  For wise men ever bear a placable mind. They kissed each other, and their hearts forgat
  That bitter strife. Then Thetis sable-stoled
  Gave to their glad hands two great silver bowls
  The which Euneus, Jason's warrior son
  In sea-washed Lemnos to Achilles gave
  To ransom strong Lycaon from his hands. These had Hephaestus fashioned for his gift
  To glorious Dionysus, when he brought
  His bride divine to Olympus, Minos' child
  Far-famous, whom in sea-washed Dia's isle
  Theseus unwitting left. The Wine-god brimmed
  With nectar these, and gave them to his son;
  And Thoas at his death to Hypsipyle
  With great possessions left them. She bequeathed
  The bowls to her godlike son, who gave them up
  Unto Achilles for Lycaon's life. The one the son of lordly Theseus took,
  And goodly Epeius sent to his ship with joy
  The other. Then their bruises and their scars
  Did Podaleirius tend with loving care. First pressed he out black humours, then his hands
  Deftly knit up the gashes: salves he laid
  Thereover, given him by his sire of old,
  Such as had virtue in one day to heal
  The deadliest hurts, yea, seeming-cureless wounds. Straight was the smart assuaged, and healed the scars
  Upon their brows and 'neath their clustering hair

  Then for the archery-test Oileus' son
  Stood forth with Teucer, they which in the race
  Erewhile contended. Far away from these
  Agamemnon, lord of spears, set up a helm
  Crested with plumes, and spake: "The master-shot
  Is that which shears the hair-crest clean away." Then straightway Aias shot his arrow first,
  And smote the helm-ridge: sharply rang the brass. Then Teucer second with most earnest heed
  Shot: the swift shaft hath shorn the plume away. Loud shouted all the people as they gazed,
  And praised him without stint, for still his foot
  Halted in pain, yet nowise marred his aim
  When with his hands he sped the flying shaft. Then Peleus' bride gave unto him the arms
  Of godlike Troilus, the goodliest
  Of all fair sons whom Hecuba had borne
  In hallowed Troy; yet of his goodlihead
  No joy she had; the prowess and the spear
  Of fell Achilles reft his life from him. As when a gardener with new-whetted scythe
  Mows down, ere it may seed, a blade of corn
  Or poppy, in a garden dewy-fresh
  And blossom-flushed, which by a water-course
  Crowdeth its blooms--mows it ere it may reach
  Its goal of bringing offspring to the birth,
  And with his scythe-sweep makes its life-work vain
  And barren of all issue, nevermore
  Now to be fostered by the dews of spring;
  So did Peleides cut down Priam's son
  The god-like beautiful, the beardless yet
  And virgin of a bride, almost a child! Yet the Destroyer Fate had lured him on
  To war, upon the threshold of glad youth,
  When youth is bold, and the heart feels no void. Forthwith a bar of iron massy and long
  From the swift-speeding hand did many essay
  To hurl; but not an Argive could prevail
  To cast that ponderous mass. Aias alone
  Sped it from his strong hand, as in the time
  Of harvest might a reaper fling from him
  A dry oak-bough, when all the fields are parched. And all men marvelled to behold how far
  Flew from his hand the bronze which scarce two men
  Hard-straining had uplifted from the ground. Even this Antaeus' might was wont to hurl
  Erstwhile, ere the strong hands of Hercules
  O'ermastered him. This, with much spoil beside,
  Hercules took, and kept it to make sport
  For his invincible hand; but afterward
  Gave it to valiant Peleus, who with him
  Had smitten fair-towered Ilium's burg renowned;
  And he to Achilles gave it, whose swift ships
  Bare it to Troy, to put him aye in mind
  Of his own father, as with eager will
  He fought with stalwart Trojans, and to be
  A worthy test wherewith to prove his strength. Even this did Aias from his brawny hand
  Fling far. So then the Nereid gave to him
  The glorious arms from godlike Memnon stripped. Marvelling the Argives gazed on them: they were
  A giant's war-gear. 