



Produced by Alan Light





MEN, WOMEN AND GHOSTS

by Amy Lowell


by Amy Lowell [American (Massachusetts) poet and critic--1874-1925.] [Note on text:  Lines longer than 78 characters are broken
and the continuation is indented two spaces. Some obvious errors
have been corrected.] "'... See small portions of the Eternal World that ever groweth':... So sang a Fairy, mocking, as he sat on a streak'd tulip,
  Thinking none saw him:  when he ceas'd I started from the trees,
  And caught him in my hat, as boys knock down a butterfly." William Blake. "Europe. A Prophecy." 'Thou hast a lap full of seed,
            And this is a fine country.' William Blake. Preface


This is a book of stories. For that reason I have excluded all purely
lyrical poems. But the word "stories" has been stretched to its fullest
application. It includes both narrative poems, properly so called;
tales divided into scenes; and a few pieces of less obvious
story-telling import in which one might say that the dramatis personae
are air, clouds, trees, houses, streets, and such like things. It has long been a favourite idea of mine that the rhythms of 'vers
libre' have not been sufficiently plumbed, that there is in them a power
of variation which has never yet been brought to the light of
experiment. I think it was the piano pieces of Debussy, with their
strange likeness to short vers libre poems, which first showed me the
close kinship of music and poetry, and there flashed into my mind the
idea of using the movement of poetry in somewhat the same way that the
musician uses the movement of music. It was quite evident that this could never be done in the strict pattern
of a metrical form, but the flowing, fluctuating rhythm of vers libre
seemed to open the door to such an experiment. First, however, I
considered the same method as applied to the more pronounced movements
of natural objects. If the reader will turn to the poem, "A Roxbury
Garden", he will find in the first two sections an attempt to give the
circular movement of a hoop bowling along the ground, and the up and
down, elliptical curve of a flying shuttlecock. From these experiments, it is but a step to the flowing rhythm of music. In "The Cremona Violin", I have tried to give this flowing, changing
rhythm to the parts in which the violin is being played. The effect is
farther heightened, because the rest of the poem is written in the seven
line Chaucerian stanza; and, by deserting this ordered pattern for the
undulating line of vers libre, I hoped to produce something of the
suave, continuous tone of a violin. Again, in the violin parts
themselves, the movement constantly changes, as will be quite plain to
any one reading these passages aloud. In "The Cremona Violin", however, the rhythms are fairly obvious and
regular. I set myself a far harder task in trying to transcribe the
various movements of Stravinsky's "Three Pieces 'Grotesques', for String
Quartet". Several musicians, who have seen the poem, think the movement
accurately given. These experiments lead me to believe that there is here much food for
thought and matter for study, and I hope many poets will follow me in
opening up the still hardly explored possibilities of vers libre. A good many of the poems in this book are written in "polyphonic prose". A form about which I have written and spoken so much that it seems
hardly necessary to explain it here. Let me hastily add, however, that
the word "prose" in its name refers only to the typographical
arrangement, for in no sense is this a prose form. Only read it aloud,
Gentle Reader, I beg, and you will see what you will see. For a purely
dramatic form, I know none better in the whole range of poetry. It
enables the poet to give his characters the vivid, real effect they have
in a play, while at the same time writing in the 'decor'. One last innovation I have still to mention. It will be found in
"Spring Day", and more fully enlarged upon in the series, "Towns in
Colour". In these poems, I have endeavoured to give the colour, and
light, and shade, of certain places and hours, stressing the purely
pictorial effect, and with little or no reference to any other aspect of
the places described. It is an enchanting thing to wander through a
city looking for its unrelated beauty, the beauty by which it captivates
the sensuous sense of seeing. I have always loved aquariums, but for years I went to them and looked,
and looked, at those swirling, shooting, looping patterns of fish, which
always defied transcription to paper until I hit upon the "unrelated"
method. The result is in "An Aquarium". I think the first thing which
turned me in this direction was John Gould Fletcher's "London
Excursion", in "Some Imagist Poets". I here record my thanks. For the substance of the poems--why, the poems are here. No one
writing to-day can fail to be affected by the great war raging in Europe
at this time. We are too near it to do more than touch upon it. But,
obliquely, it is suggested in many of these poems, most notably those in
the section, "Bronze Tablets". The Napoleonic Era is an epic subject,
and waits a great epic poet. I have only been able to open a few
windows upon it here and there. But the scene from the windows is
authentic, and the watcher has used eyes, and ears, and heart, in
watching. Amy Lowell
July 10, 1916. Contents



      Figurines in Old Saxe

  Patterns
  Pickthorn Manor
  The Cremona Violin
  The Cross-Roads
  A Roxbury Garden
  1777


      Bronze Tablets

  The Fruit Shop
  Malmaison
  The Hammers
  Two Travellers in the Place Vendome


      War Pictures

  The Allies
  The Bombardment
  Lead Soldiers
  The Painter on Silk
  A Ballad of Footmen


      The Overgrown Pasture

  Reaping
  Off the Turnpike
  The Grocery
  Number 3 on the Docket


      Clocks Tick a Century

  Nightmare:  A Tale for an Autumn Evening
  The Paper Windmill
  The Red Lacquer Music-Stand
  Spring Day
  The Dinner-Party
  Stravinsky's Three Pieces "Grotesques", for String Quartet
  Towns in Colour
   Red Slippers
   Thompson's Lunch Room--Grand Central Station
   An Opera House
   Afternoon Rain in State Street
   An Aquarium





The two sea songs quoted in "The Hammers" are taken from
'Songs:  Naval and Nautical, of the late Charles Dibdin', London,
John Murray, 1841. The "Hanging Johnny" refrain, in "The Cremona Violin",
is borrowed from the old, well-known chanty of that name. MEN, WOMEN AND GHOSTS




FIGURINES IN OLD SAXE




Patterns



   I walk down the garden paths,
   And all the daffodils
   Are blowing, and the bright blue squills. I walk down the patterned garden-paths
   In my stiff, brocaded gown. With my powdered hair and jewelled fan,
   I too am a rare
   Pattern. As I wander down
   The garden paths. My dress is richly figured,
   And the train
   Makes a pink and silver stain
   On the gravel, and the thrift
   Of the borders. Just a plate of current fashion,
   Tripping by in high-heeled, ribboned shoes. Not a softness anywhere about me,
   Only whalebone and brocade. And I sink on a seat in the shade
   Of a lime tree. For my passion
   Wars against the stiff brocade. The daffodils and squills
   Flutter in the breeze
   As they please. And I weep;
   For the lime-tree is in blossom
   And one small flower has dropped upon my bosom. And the plashing of waterdrops
   In the marble fountain
   Comes down the garden-paths. The dripping never stops. Underneath my stiffened gown
   Is the softness of a woman bathing in a marble basin,
   A basin in the midst of hedges grown
   So thick, she cannot see her lover hiding,
   But she guesses he is near,
   And the sliding of the water
   Seems the stroking of a dear
   Hand upon her. What is Summer in a fine brocaded gown! I should like to see it lying in a heap upon the ground. All the pink and silver crumpled up on the ground. I would be the pink and silver as I ran along the paths,
   And he would stumble after,
   Bewildered by my laughter. I should see the sun flashing from his sword-hilt and the buckles
     on his shoes. I would choose
   To lead him in a maze along the patterned paths,
   A bright and laughing maze for my heavy-booted lover,
   Till he caught me in the shade,
   And the buttons of his waistcoat bruised my body as he clasped me,
   Aching, melting, unafraid. With the shadows of the leaves and the sundrops,
   And the plopping of the waterdrops,
   All about us in the open afternoon--
   I am very like to swoon
   With the weight of this brocade,
   For the sun sifts through the shade. Underneath the fallen blossom
   In my bosom,
   Is a letter I have hid. It was brought to me this morning by a rider from the Duke. "Madam, we regret to inform you that Lord Hartwell
   Died in action Thursday se'nnight." As I read it in the white, morning sunlight,
   The letters squirmed like snakes. "Any answer, Madam," said my footman. "No," I told him. "See that the messenger takes some refreshment. No, no answer." And I walked into the garden,
   Up and down the patterned paths,
   In my stiff, correct brocade. The blue and yellow flowers stood up proudly in the sun,
   Each one. I stood upright too,
   Held rigid to the pattern
   By the stiffness of my gown. Up and down I walked,
   Up and down. In a month he would have been my husband. In a month, here, underneath this lime,
   We would have broke the pattern;
   He for me, and I for him,
   He as Colonel, I as Lady,
   On this shady seat. He had a whim
   That sunlight carried blessing. And I answered, "It shall be as you have said." Now he is dead. In Summer and in Winter I shall walk
   Up and down
   The patterned garden-paths
   In my stiff, brocaded gown. The squills and daffodils
   Will give place to pillared roses, and to asters, and to snow. I shall go
   Up and down,
   In my gown. Gorgeously arrayed,
   Boned and stayed. And the softness of my body will be guarded from embrace
   By each button, hook, and lace. For the man who should loose me is dead,
   Fighting with the Duke in Flanders,
   In a pattern called a war. Christ! What are patterns for? Pickthorn Manor



       I

   How fresh the Dartle's little waves that day! A steely silver, underlined with blue,
   And flashing where the round clouds, blown away,
    Let drop the yellow sunshine to gleam through
   And tip the edges of the waves with shifts
    And spots of whitest fire, hard like gems
       Cut from the midnight moon they were, and sharp
    As wind through leafless stems. The Lady Eunice walked between the drifts
   Of blooming cherry-trees, and watched the rifts
       Of clouds drawn through the river's azure warp. II

   Her little feet tapped softly down the path. Her soul was listless; even the morning breeze
   Fluttering the trees and strewing a light swath
    Of fallen petals on the grass, could please
   Her not at all. She brushed a hair aside
    With a swift move, and a half-angry frown. She stopped to pull a daffodil or two,
    And held them to her gown
   To test the colours; put them at her side,
   Then at her breast, then loosened them and tried
       Some new arrangement, but it would not do. III

   A lady in a Manor-house, alone,
    Whose husband is in Flanders with the Duke
   Of Marlborough and Prince Eugene, she's grown
    Too apathetic even to rebuke
   Her idleness. What is she on this Earth? No woman surely, since she neither can
       Be wed nor single, must not let her mind
    Build thoughts upon a man
   Except for hers. Indeed that were no dearth
   Were her Lord here, for well she knew his worth,
       And when she thought of him her eyes were kind. IV

   Too lately wed to have forgot the wooing. Too unaccustomed as a bride to feel
   Other than strange delight at her wife's doing. Even at the thought a gentle blush would steal
   Over her face, and then her lips would frame
    Some little word of loving, and her eyes
       Would brim and spill their tears, when all they saw
    Was the bright sun, slantwise
   Through burgeoning trees, and all the morning's flame
   Burning and quivering round her. With quick shame
       She shut her heart and bent before the law. V

   He was a soldier, she was proud of that. This was his house and she would keep it well. His honour was in fighting, hers in what
    He'd left her here in charge of. Then a spell
   Of conscience sent her through the orchard spying
    Upon the gardeners. Were their tools about? Were any branches broken? Had the weeds
    Been duly taken out
   Under the 'spaliered pears, and were these lying
   Nailed snug against the sunny bricks and drying
       Their leaves and satisfying all their needs? VI

   She picked a stone up with a little pout,
    Stones looked so ill in well-kept flower-borders. Where should she put it? All the paths about
    Were strewn with fair, red gravel by her orders. No stone could mar their sifted smoothness. So
    She hurried to the river. At the edge
       She stood a moment charmed by the swift blue
    Beyond the river sedge. She watched it curdling, crinkling, and the snow
   Purfled upon its wave-tops. Then, "Hullo,
       My Beauty, gently, or you'll wriggle through." VII

   The Lady Eunice caught a willow spray
    To save herself from tumbling in the shallows
   Which rippled to her feet. Then straight away
    She peered down stream among the budding sallows. A youth in leather breeches and a shirt
    Of finest broidered lawn lay out upon
       An overhanging bole and deftly swayed
    A well-hooked fish which shone
   In the pale lemon sunshine like a spurt
   Of silver, bowed and damascened, and girt
       With crimson spots and moons which waned and played. VIII

   The fish hung circled for a moment, ringed
    And bright; then flung itself out, a thin blade
   Of spotted lightning, and its tail was winged
    With chipped and sparkled sunshine. And the shade
   Broke up and splintered into shafts of light
    Wheeling about the fish, who churned the air
       And made the fish-line hum, and bent the rod
    Almost to snapping. Care
   The young man took against the twigs, with slight,
   Deft movements he kept fish and line in tight
       Obedience to his will with every prod. IX

   He lay there, and the fish hung just beyond. He seemed uncertain what more he should do. He drew back, pulled the rod to correspond,
    Tossed it and caught it; every time he threw,
   He caught it nearer to the point. At last
    The fish was near enough to touch. He paused. Eunice knew well the craft--"What's got the thing!" She cried. "What can have caused--
   Where is his net? The moment will be past. The fish will wriggle free." She stopped aghast. He turned and bowed. One arm was in a sling. X

   The broad, black ribbon she had thought his basket
    Must hang from, held instead a useless arm. "I do not wonder, Madam, that you ask it." He smiled, for she had spoke aloud. "The charm
   Of trout fishing is in my eyes enhanced
    When you must play your fish on land as well." "How will you take him?" Eunice asked. "In truth
    I really cannot tell. 'Twas stupid of me, but it simply chanced
   I never thought of that until he glanced
       Into the branches. 'Tis a bit uncouth." XI

   He watched the fish against the blowing sky,
    Writhing and glittering, pulling at the line. "The hook is fast, I might just let him die,"
    He mused. "But that would jar against your fine
   Sense of true sportsmanship, I know it would,"
    Cried Eunice. "Let me do it." Swift and light
       She ran towards him. "It is so long now
    Since I have felt a bite,
   I lost all heart for everything." She stood,
   Supple and strong, beside him, and her blood
       Tingled her lissom body to a glow. XII

   She quickly seized the fish and with a stone
    Ended its flurry, then removed the hook,
   Untied the fly with well-poised fingers. Done,
    She asked him where he kept his fishing-book. He pointed to a coat flung on the ground. She searched the pockets, found a shagreen case,
       Replaced the fly, noticed a golden stamp
    Filling the middle space. Two letters half rubbed out were there, and round
   About them gay rococo flowers wound
       And tossed a spray of roses to the clamp. XIII

   The Lady Eunice puzzled over these. "G. D." the young man gravely said. "My name
   Is Gervase Deane. Your servant, if you please." "Oh, Sir, indeed I know you, for your fame
   For exploits in the field has reached my ears. I did not know you wounded and returned." "But just come back, Madam. A silly prick
    To gain me such unearned
   Holiday making. And you, it appears,
   Must be Sir Everard's lady. And my fears
       At being caught a-trespassing were quick." XIV

   He looked so rueful that she laughed out loud. "You are forgiven, Mr. Deane. Even more,
   I offer you the fishing, and am proud
    That you should find it pleasant from this shore. Nobody fishes now, my husband used
    To angle daily, and I too with him. He loved the spotted trout, and pike, and dace. He even had a whim
   That flies my fingers tied swiftly confused
   The greater fish. And he must be excused,
       Love weaves odd fancies in a lonely place." XV

   She sighed because it seemed so long ago,
    Those days with Everard; unthinking took
   The path back to the orchard. Strolling so
    She walked, and he beside her. In a nook
   Where a stone seat withdrew beneath low boughs,
    Full-blossomed, hummed with bees, they sat them down. She questioned him about the war, the share
    Her husband had, and grown
   Eager by his clear answers, straight allows
   Her hidden hopes and fears to speak, and rouse
       Her numbed love, which had slumbered unaware. XVI

   Under the orchard trees daffodils danced
    And jostled, turning sideways to the wind. A dropping cherry petal softly glanced
    Over her hair, and slid away behind. At the far end through twisted cherry-trees
    The old house glowed, geranium-hued, with bricks
       Bloomed in the sun like roses, low and long,
    Gabled, and with quaint tricks
   Of chimneys carved and fretted. Out of these
   Grey smoke was shaken, which the faint Spring breeze
       Tossed into nothing. Then a thrush's song


       XVII

   Needled its way through sound of bees and river. The notes fell, round and starred, between young leaves,
   Trilled to a spiral lilt, stopped on a quiver. The Lady Eunice listens and believes. Gervase has many tales of her dear Lord,
    His bravery, his knowledge, his charmed life. She quite forgets who's speaking in the gladness
    Of being this man's wife. Gervase is wounded, grave indeed, the word
   Is kindly said, but to a softer chord
       She strings her voice to ask with wistful sadness,


       XVIII

   "And is Sir Everard still unscathed? I fain
    Would know the truth." "Quite well, dear Lady, quite." She smiled in her content. "So many slain,
    You must forgive me for a little fright." And he forgave her, not alone for that,
    But because she was fingering his heart,
       Pressing and squeezing it, and thinking so
    Only to ease her smart
   Of painful, apprehensive longing. At
   Their feet the river swirled and chucked. They sat
       An hour there. The thrush flew to and fro. XIX

   The Lady Eunice supped alone that day,
    As always since Sir Everard had gone,
   In the oak-panelled parlour, whose array
    Of faded portraits in carved mouldings shone. Warriors and ladies, armoured, ruffed, peruked. Van Dykes with long, slim fingers; Holbeins, stout
       And heavy-featured; and one Rubens dame,
    A peony just burst out,
   With flaunting, crimson flesh. Eunice rebuked
   Her thoughts of gentler blood, when these had duked
       It with the best, and scorned to change their name. XX

   A sturdy family, and old besides,
    Much older than her own, the Earls of Crowe. Since Saxon days, these men had sought their brides
    Among the highest born, but always so,
   Taking them to themselves, their wealth, their lands,
    But never their titles. Stern perhaps, but strong,
       The Framptons fed their blood from richest streams,
    Scorning the common throng. Gazing upon these men, she understands
   The toughness of the web wrought from such strands
       And pride of Everard colours all her dreams. XXI

   Eunice forgets to eat, watching their faces
    Flickering in the wind-blown candle's shine. Blue-coated lackeys tiptoe to their places,
    And set out plates of fruit and jugs of wine. The table glitters black like Winter ice. The Dartle's rushing, and the gentle clash
       Of blossomed branches, drifts into her ears. And through the casement sash
   She sees each cherry stem a pointed slice
   Of splintered moonlight, topped with all the spice
       And shimmer of the blossoms it uprears. XXII

   "In such a night--" she laid the book aside,
    She could outnight the poet by thinking back. In such a night she came here as a bride. The date was graven in the almanack
   Of her clasped memory. In this very room
    Had Everard uncloaked her. On this seat
       Had drawn her to him, bade her note the trees,
    How white they were and sweet
   And later, coming to her, her dear groom,
   Her Lord, had lain beside her in the gloom
       Of moon and shade, and whispered her to ease. XXIII

   Her little taper made the room seem vast,
    Caverned and empty. And her beating heart
   Rapped through the silence all about her cast
    Like some loud, dreadful death-watch taking part
   In this sad vigil. Slowly she undrest,
    Put out the light and crept into her bed. The linen sheets were fragrant, but so cold. And brimming tears she shed,
   Sobbing and quivering in her barren nest,
   Her weeping lips into the pillow prest,
       Her eyes sealed fast within its smothering fold. XXIV

   The morning brought her a more stoic mind,
    And sunshine struck across the polished floor. She wondered whether this day she should find
    Gervase a-fishing, and so listen more,
   Much more again, to all he had to tell. And he was there, but waiting to begin
       Until she came. They fished awhile, then went
    To the old seat within
   The cherry's shade. He pleased her very well
   By his discourse. But ever he must dwell
       Upon Sir Everard. Each incident


       XXV

   Must be related and each term explained. How troops were set in battle, how a siege
   Was ordered and conducted. She complained
    Because he bungled at the fall of Liege. The curious names of parts of forts she knew,
    And aired with conscious pride her ravelins,
       And counterscarps, and lunes. The day drew on,
    And his dead fish's fins
   In the hot sunshine turned a mauve-green hue. At last Gervase, guessing the hour, withdrew. But she sat long in still oblivion. XXVI

   Then he would bring her books, and read to her
    The poems of Dr. Donne, and the blue river
   Would murmur through the reading, and a stir
    Of birds and bees make the white petals shiver,
   And one or two would flutter prone and lie
    Spotting the smooth-clipped grass. The days went by
       Threaded with talk and verses. Green leaves pushed
    Through blossoms stubbornly. Gervase, unconscious of dishonesty,
   Fell into strong and watchful loving, free
       He thought, since always would his lips be hushed. XXVII

   But lips do not stay silent at command,
    And Gervase strove in vain to order his. Luckily Eunice did not understand
    That he but read himself aloud, for this
   Their friendship would have snapped. She treated him
    And spoilt him like a brother. It was now
       "Gervase" and "Eunice" with them, and he dined
    Whenever she'd allow,
   In the oak parlour, underneath the dim
   Old pictured Framptons, opposite her slim
       Figure, so bright against the chair behind. XXVIII

   Eunice was happier than she had been
    For many days, and yet the hours were long. All Gervase told to her but made her lean
    More heavily upon the past. Among
   Her hopes she lived, even when she was giving
    Her morning orders, even when she twined
       Nosegays to deck her parlours. With the thought
    Of Everard, her mind
   Solaced its solitude, and in her striving
   To do as he would wish was all her living. She welcomed Gervase for the news he brought. XXIX

   Black-hearts and white-hearts, bubbled with the sun,
    Hid in their leaves and knocked against each other. Eunice was standing, panting with her run
    Up to the tool-house just to get another
   Basket. All those which she had brought were filled,
    And still Gervase pelted her from above. The buckles of his shoes flashed higher and higher
    Until his shoulders strove
   Quite through the top. "Eunice, your spirit's filled
   This tree. White-hearts!" He shook, and cherries spilled
       And spat out from the leaves like falling fire. XXX

   The wide, sun-winged June morning spread itself
    Over the quiet garden. And they packed
   Full twenty baskets with the fruit. "My shelf
    Of cordials will be stored with what it lacked. In future, none of us will drink strong ale,
    But cherry-brandy." "Vastly good, I vow,"
       And Gervase gave the tree another shake. The cherries seemed to flow
   Out of the sky in cloudfuls, like blown hail. Swift Lady Eunice ran, her farthingale,
       Unnoticed, tangling in a fallen rake. XXXI

   She gave a little cry and fell quite prone
    In the long grass, and lay there very still. Gervase leapt from the tree at her soft moan,
    And kneeling over her, with clumsy skill
   Unloosed her bodice, fanned her with his hat,
    And his unguarded lips pronounced his heart. "Eunice, my Dearest Girl, where are you hurt?" His trembling fingers dart
   Over her limbs seeking some wound. She strove
   To answer, opened wide her eyes, above
       Her knelt Sir Everard, with face alert. XXXII

   Her eyelids fell again at that sweet sight,
    "My Love!" she murmured, "Dearest! Oh, my Dear!" He took her in his arms and bore her right
    And tenderly to the old seat, and "Here
   I have you mine at last," she said, and swooned
    Under his kisses. When she came once more
       To sight of him, she smiled in comfort knowing
    Herself laid as before
   Close covered on his breast. And all her glowing
   Youth answered him, and ever nearer growing
       She twined him in her arms and soft festooned


       XXXIII

   Herself about him like a flowering vine,
    Drawing his lips to cling upon her own. A ray of sunlight pierced the leaves to shine
    Where her half-opened bodice let be shown
   Her white throat fluttering to his soft caress,
    Half-gasping with her gladness. And her pledge
       She whispers, melting with delight. A twig
    Snaps in the hornbeam hedge. A cackling laugh tears through the quietness. Eunice starts up in terrible distress. "My God! What's that?" Her staring eyes are big. XXXIV

   Revulsed emotion set her body shaking
    As though she had an ague. Gervase swore,
   Jumped to his feet in such a dreadful taking
    His face was ghastly with the look it wore. Crouching and slipping through the trees, a man
    In worn, blue livery, a humpbacked thing,
       Made off. But turned every few steps to gaze
    At Eunice, and to fling
   Vile looks and gestures back. "The ruffian! By Christ's Death! I will split him to a span
       Of hog's thongs." She grasped at his sleeve, "Gervase! XXXV

   What are you doing here? Put down that sword,
    That's only poor old Tony, crazed and lame. We never notice him. With my dear Lord
    I ought not to have minded that he came. But, Gervase, it surprises me that you
    Should so lack grace to stay here." With one hand
       She held her gaping bodice to conceal
    Her breast. "I must demand
   Your instant absence. Everard, but new
   Returned, will hardly care for guests. Adieu." "Eunice, you're mad." His brain began to reel. XXXVI

   He tried again to take her, tried to twist
    Her arms about him. Truly, she had said
   Nothing should ever part them. In a mist
    She pushed him from her, clasped her aching head
   In both her hands, and rocked and sobbed aloud. "Oh! Where is Everard? What does this mean? So lately come to leave me thus alone!" But Gervase had not seen
   Sir Everard. Then, gently, to her bowed
   And sickening spirit, he told of her proud
       Surrender to him. He could hear her moan. XXXVII

   Then shame swept over her and held her numb,
    Hiding her anguished face against the seat. At last she rose, a woman stricken--dumb--
    And trailed away with slowly-dragging feet. Gervase looked after her, but feared to pass
    The barrier set between them. All his rare
       Joy broke to fragments--worse than that, unreal. And standing lonely there,
   His swollen heart burst out, and on the grass
   He flung himself and wept. He knew, alas! The loss so great his life could never heal. XXXVIII

   For days thereafter Eunice lived retired,
    Waited upon by one old serving-maid. She would not leave her chamber, and desired
    Only to hide herself. She was afraid
   Of what her eyes might trick her into seeing,
    Of what her longing urge her then to do. What was this dreadful illness solitude
    Had tortured her into? Her hours went by in a long constant fleeing
   The thought of that one morning. And her being
       Bruised itself on a happening so rude. XXXIX

   It grew ripe Summer, when one morning came
    Her tirewoman with a letter, printed
   Upon the seal were the Deane crest and name. With utmost gentleness, the letter hinted
   His understanding and his deep regret. But would she not permit him once again
       To pay her his profound respects? No word
    Of what had passed should pain
   Her resolution. Only let them get
   Back the old comradeship. Her eyes were wet
       With starting tears, now truly she deplored


       XL

   His misery. Yes, she was wrong to keep
    Away from him. He hardly was to blame. 'Twas she--she shuddered and began to weep. 'Twas her fault! Hers! Her everlasting shame
   Was that she suffered him, whom not at all
    She loved. Poor Boy! Yes, they must still be friends. She owed him that to keep the balance straight. It was such poor amends
   Which she could make for rousing hopes to gall
   Him with their unfulfilment. Tragical
       It was, and she must leave him desolate. XLI

   Hard silence he had forced upon his lips
    For long and long, and would have done so still
   Had not she--here she pressed her finger tips
    Against her heavy eyes. Then with forced will
   She wrote that he might come, sealed with the arms
    Of Crowe and Frampton twined. Her heart felt lighter
       When this was done. It seemed her constant care
    Might some day cease to fright her. Illness could be no crime, and dreadful harms
   Did come from too much sunshine. Her alarms
       Would lessen when she saw him standing there,


       XLII

   Simple and kind, a brother just returned
    From journeying, and he would treat her so. She knew his honest heart, and if there burned
    A spark in it he would not let it show. But when he really came, and stood beside
    Her underneath the fruitless cherry boughs,
       He seemed a tired man, gaunt, leaden-eyed. He made her no more vows,
   Nor did he mention one thing he had tried
   To put into his letter. War supplied
       Him topics. And his mind seemed occupied. XLIII

   Daily they met. And gravely walked and talked. He read her no more verses, and he stayed
   Only until their conversation, balked
    Of every natural channel, fled dismayed. Again the next day she would meet him, trying
    To give her tone some healthy sprightliness,
       But his uneager dignity soon chilled
    Her well-prepared address. Thus Summer waned, and in the mornings, crying
   Of wild geese startled Eunice, and their flying
       Whirred overhead for days and never stilled. XLIV

   One afternoon of grey clouds and white wind,
    Eunice awaited Gervase by the river. The Dartle splashed among the reeds and whined
    Over the willow-roots, and a long sliver
   Of caked and slobbered foam crept up the bank. All through the garden, drifts of skirling leaves
       Blew up, and settled down, and blew again. The cherry-trees were weaves
   Of empty, knotted branches, and a dank
   Mist hid the house, mouldy it smelt and rank
       With sodden wood, and still unfalling rain. XLV

   Eunice paced up and down. No joy she took
    At meeting Gervase, but the custom grown
   Still held her. He was late. She sudden shook,
    And caught at her stopped heart. Her eyes had shown
   Sir Everard emerging from the mist. His uniform was travel-stained and torn,
       His jackboots muddy, and his eager stride
    Jangled his spurs. A thorn
   Entangled, trailed behind him. To the tryst
   He hastened. Eunice shuddered, ran--a twist
       Round a sharp turning and she fled to hide. XLVI

   But he had seen her as she swiftly ran,
    A flash of white against the river's grey. "Eunice," he called. "My Darling. Eunice. Can
    You hear me? It is Everard. All day
   I have been riding like the very devil
    To reach you sooner. Are you startled, Dear?" He broke into a run and followed her,
    And caught her, faint with fear,
   Cowering and trembling as though she some evil
   Spirit were seeing. "What means this uncivil
       Greeting, Dear Heart?" He saw her senses blur. XLVII

   Swaying and catching at the seat, she tried
    To speak, but only gurgled in her throat. At last, straining to hold herself, she cried
    To him for pity, and her strange words smote
   A coldness through him, for she begged Gervase
    To leave her, 'twas too much a second time. Gervase must go, always Gervase, her mind
    Repeated like a rhyme
   This name he did not know. In sad amaze
   He watched her, and that hunted, fearful gaze,
       So unremembering and so unkind. XLVIII

   Softly he spoke to her, patiently dealt
    With what he feared her madness. By and by
   He pierced her understanding. Then he knelt
    Upon the seat, and took her hands:  "Now try
   To think a minute I am come, my Dear,
    Unharmed and back on furlough. Are you glad
       To have your lover home again? To me,
    Pickthorn has never had
   A greater pleasantness. Could you not bear
   To come and sit awhile beside me here? A stone between us surely should not be." XLIX

   She smiled a little wan and ravelled smile,
    Then came to him and on his shoulder laid
   Her head, and they two rested there awhile,
    Each taking comfort. Not a word was said. But when he put his hand upon her breast
    And felt her beating heart, and with his lips
       Sought solace for her and himself. She started
    As one sharp lashed with whips,
   And pushed him from her, moaning, his dumb quest
   Denied and shuddered from. And he, distrest,
       Loosened his wife, and long they sat there, parted. L

   Eunice was very quiet all that day,
    A little dazed, and yet she seemed content. At candle-time, he asked if she would play
    Upon her harpsichord, at once she went
   And tinkled airs from Lully's 'Carnival'
    And 'Bacchus', newly brought away from France. Then jaunted through a lively rigadoon
    To please him with a dance
   By Purcell, for he said that surely all
   Good Englishmen had pride in national
       Accomplishment. But tiring of it soon


       LI

   He whispered her that if she had forgiven
    His startling her that afternoon, the clock
   Marked early bed-time. Surely it was Heaven
    He entered when she opened to his knock. The hours rustled in the trailing wind
    Over the chimney. Close they lay and knew
       Only that they were wedded. At his touch
    Anxiety she threw
   Away like a shed garment, and inclined
   Herself to cherish him, her happy mind
       Quivering, unthinking, loving overmuch. LII

   Eunice lay long awake in the cool night
    After her husband slept. She gazed with joy
   Into the shadows, painting them with bright
    Pictures of all her future life's employ. Twin gems they were, set to a single jewel,
    Each shining with the other. Soft she turned
       And felt his breath upon her hair, and prayed
    Her happiness was earned. Past Earls of Crowe should give their blood for fuel
   To light this Frampton's hearth-fire. By no cruel
       Affrightings would she ever be dismayed. LIII

   When Everard, next day, asked her in joke
    What name it was that she had called him by,
   She told him of Gervase, and as she spoke
    She hardly realized it was a lie. Her vision she related, but she hid
    The fondness into which she had been led. Sir Everard just laughed and pinched her ear,
    And quite out of her head
   The matter drifted. Then Sir Everard chid
   Himself for laziness, and off he rid
       To see his men and count his farming-gear. LIV

   At supper he seemed overspread with gloom,
    But gave no reason why, he only asked
   More questions of Gervase, and round the room
    He walked with restless strides. At last he tasked
   Her with a greater feeling for this man
    Than she had given. Eunice quick denied
       The slightest interest other than a friend
    Might claim. But he replied
   He thought she underrated. Then a ban
   He put on talk and music. He'd a plan
       To work at, draining swamps at Pickthorn End. LV

   Next morning Eunice found her Lord still changed,
    Hard and unkind, with bursts of anger. Pride
   Kept him from speaking out. His probings ranged
    All round his torment. Lady Eunice tried
   To sooth him. So a week went by, and then
    His anguish flooded over; with clenched hands
       Striving to stem his words, he told her plain
    Tony had seen them, "brands
   Burning in Hell," the man had said. Again
   Eunice described her vision, and how when
       Awoke at last she had known dreadful pain. LVI

   He could not credit it, and misery fed
    Upon his spirit, day by day it grew. To Gervase he forbade the house, and led
    The Lady Eunice such a life she flew
   At his approaching footsteps. Winter came
    Snowing and blustering through the Manor trees. All the roof-edges spiked with icicles
    In fluted companies. The Lady Eunice with her tambour-frame
   Kept herself sighing company. The flame
       Of the birch fire glittered on the walls. LVII

   A letter was brought to her as she sat,
    Unsealed, unsigned. It told her that his wound,
   The writer's, had so well recovered that
    To join his regiment he felt him bound. But would she not wish him one short "Godspeed",
    He asked no more. Her greeting would suffice. He had resolved he never should return. Would she this sacrifice
   Make for a dying man? How could she read
   The rest! But forcing her eyes to the deed,
       She read. Then dropped it in the fire to burn. LVIII

   Gervase had set the river for their meeting
    As farthest from the farms where Everard
   Spent all his days. How should he know such cheating
    Was quite expected, at least no dullard
   Was Everard Frampton. Hours by hours he hid
    Among the willows watching. Dusk had come,
       And from the Manor he had long been gone. Eunice her burdensome
   Task set about. Hooded and cloaked, she slid
   Over the slippery paths, and soon amid
       The sallows saw a boat tied to a stone. LIX

   Gervase arose, and kissed her hand, then pointed
    Into the boat. She shook her head, but he
   Begged her to realize why, and with disjointed
    Words told her of what peril there might be
   From listeners along the river bank. A push would take them out of earshot. Ten
       Minutes was all he asked, then she should land,
    He go away again,
   Forever this time. Yet how could he thank
   Her for so much compassion. Here she sank
       Upon a thwart, and bid him quick unstrand


       LX

   His boat. He cast the rope, and shoved the keel
    Free of the gravel; jumped, and dropped beside
   Her; took the oars, and they began to steal
    Under the overhanging trees. A wide
   Gash of red lantern-light cleft like a blade
    Into the gloom, and struck on Eunice sitting
       Rigid and stark upon the after thwart. It blazed upon their flitting
   In merciless light. A moment so it stayed,
   Then was extinguished, and Sir Everard made
       One leap, and landed just a fraction short. LXI

   His weight upon the gunwale tipped the boat
    To straining balance. Everard lurched and seized
   His wife and held her smothered to his coat. "Everard, loose me, we shall drown--" and squeezed
   Against him, she beat with her hands. He gasped
    "Never, by God!" The slidden boat gave way
       And the black foamy water split--and met. Bubbled up through the spray
   A wailing rose and in the branches rasped,
   And creaked, and stilled. Over the treetops, clasped
       In the blue evening, a clear moon was set. LXII

   They lie entangled in the twisting roots,
    Embraced forever. Their cold marriage bed
   Close-canopied and curtained by the shoots
    Of willows and pale birches. At the head,
   White lilies, like still swans, placidly float
    And sway above the pebbles. Here are waves
       Sun-smitten for a threaded counterpane
    Gold-woven on their graves. In perfect quietness they sleep, remote
   In the green, rippled twilight. Death has smote
       Them to perpetual oneness who were twain. The Cremona Violin



       Part First

   Frau Concert-Meister Altgelt shut the door. A storm was rising, heavy gusts of wind
   Swirled through the trees, and scattered leaves before
   Her on the clean, flagged path. The sky behind
   The distant town was black, and sharp defined
   Against it shone the lines of roofs and towers,
   Superimposed and flat like cardboard flowers. A pasted city on a purple ground,
   Picked out with luminous paint, it seemed. The cloud
   Split on an edge of lightning, and a sound
   Of rivers full and rushing boomed through bowed,
   Tossed, hissing branches. Thunder rumbled loud
   Beyond the town fast swallowing into gloom. Frau Altgelt closed the windows of each room. She bustled round to shake by constant moving
   The strange, weird atmosphere. She stirred the fire,
   She twitched the supper-cloth as though improving
   Its careful setting, then her own attire
   Came in for notice, tiptoeing higher and higher
   She peered into the wall-glass, now adjusting
   A straying lock, or else a ribbon thrusting

   This way or that to suit her. At last sitting,
   Or rather plumping down upon a chair,
   She took her work, the stocking she was knitting,
   And watched the rain upon the window glare
   In white, bright drops. Through the black glass a flare
   Of lightning squirmed about her needles. "Oh!" She cried. "What can be keeping Theodore so!" A roll of thunder set the casements clapping. Frau Altgelt flung her work aside and ran,
   Pulled open the house door, with kerchief flapping
   She stood and gazed along the street. A man
   Flung back the garden-gate and nearly ran
   Her down as she stood in the door. "Why, Dear,
   What in the name of patience brings you here? Quick, Lotta, shut the door, my violin
   I fear is wetted. Now, Dear, bring a light. This clasp is very much too worn and thin. I'll take the other fiddle out to-night
   If it still rains. Tut! Tut! my child, you're quite
   Clumsy. Here, help me, hold the case while I--
   Give me the candle. No, the inside's dry. Thank God for that! Well, Lotta, how are you? A bad storm, but the house still stands, I see. Is my pipe filled, my Dear? I'll have a few
   Puffs and a snooze before I eat my tea. What do you say? That you were feared for me? Nonsense, my child. Yes, kiss me, now don't talk. I need a rest, the theatre's a long walk." Her needles still, her hands upon her lap
   Patiently laid, Charlotta Altgelt sat
   And watched the rain-run window. In his nap
   Her husband stirred and muttered. Seeing that,
   Charlotta rose and softly, pit-a-pat,
   Climbed up the stairs, and in her little room
   Found sighing comfort with a moon in bloom. But even rainy windows, silver-lit
   By a new-burst, storm-whetted moon, may give
   But poor content to loneliness, and it
   Was hard for young Charlotta so to strive
   And down her eagerness and learn to live
   In placid quiet. While her husband slept,
   Charlotta in her upper chamber wept. Herr Concert-Meister Altgelt was a man
   Gentle and unambitious, that alone
   Had kept him back. He played as few men can,
   Drawing out of his instrument a tone
   So shimmering-sweet and palpitant, it shone
   Like a bright thread of sound hung in the air,
   Afloat and swinging upward, slim and fair. Above all things, above Charlotta his wife,
   Herr Altgelt loved his violin, a fine
   Cremona pattern, Stradivari's life
   Was flowering out of early discipline
   When this was fashioned. Of soft-cutting pine
   The belly was. The back of broadly curled
   Maple, the head made thick and sharply whirled. The slanting, youthful sound-holes through
      The belly of fine, vigorous pine
      Mellowed each note and blew
      It out again with a woody flavour
      Tanged and fragrant as fir-trees are
      When breezes in their needles jar. The varnish was an orange-brown
      Lustered like glass that's long laid down
      Under a crumbling villa stone. Purfled stoutly, with mitres which point
      Straight up the corners. Each curve and joint
      Clear, and bold, and thin. Such was Herr Theodore's violin. Seven o'clock, the Concert-Meister gone
   With his best violin, the rain being stopped,
   Frau Lotta in the kitchen sat alone
   Watching the embers which the fire dropped. The china shone upon the dresser, topped
   By polished copper vessels which her skill
   Kept brightly burnished. It was very still. An air from 'Orfeo' hummed in her head. Herr Altgelt had been practising before
   The night's performance. Charlotta had plead
   With him to stay with her. Even at the door
   She'd begged him not to go. "I do implore
   You for this evening, Theodore," she had said. "Leave them to-night, and stay with me instead." "A silly poppet!" Theodore pinched her ear. "You'd like to have our good Elector turn
   Me out I think." "But, Theodore, something queer
   Ails me. Oh, do but notice how they burn,
   My cheeks! The thunder worried me. You're stern,
   And cold, and only love your work, I know. But Theodore, for this evening, do not go." But he had gone, hurriedly at the end,
   For she had kept him talking. Now she sat
   Alone again, always alone, the trend
   Of all her thinking brought her back to that
   She wished to banish. What would life be? What? For she was young, and loved, while he was moved
   Only by music. Each day that was proved. Each day he rose and practised. While he played,
   She stopped her work and listened, and her heart
   Swelled painfully beneath her bodice. Swayed
   And longing, she would hide from him her smart. "Well, Lottchen, will that do?" Then what a start
   She gave, and she would run to him and cry,
   And he would gently chide her, "Fie, Dear, fie. I'm glad I played it well. But such a taking! You'll hear the thing enough before I've done." And she would draw away from him, still shaking. Had he but guessed she was another one,
   Another violin. Her strings were aching,
   Stretched to the touch of his bow hand, again
   He played and she almost broke at the strain. Where was the use of thinking of it now,
   Sitting alone and listening to the clock! She'd best make haste and knit another row. Three hours at least must pass before his knock
   Would startle her. It always was a shock. She listened--listened--for so long before,
   That when it came her hearing almost tore. She caught herself just starting in to listen. What nerves she had:  rattling like brittle sticks! She wandered to the window, for the glisten
   Of a bright moon was tempting. Snuffed the wicks
   Of her two candles. Still she could not fix
   To anything. The moon in a broad swath
   Beckoned her out and down the garden-path. Against the house, her hollyhocks stood high
   And black, their shadows doubling them. The night
   Was white and still with moonlight, and a sigh
   Of blowing leaves was there, and the dim flight
   Of insects, and the smell of aconite,
   And stocks, and Marvel of Peru. She flitted
   Along the path, where blocks of shadow pitted

   The even flags. She let herself go dreaming
   Of Theodore her husband, and the tune
   From 'Orfeo' swam through her mind, but seeming
   Changed--shriller. Of a sudden, the clear moon
   Showed her a passer-by, inopportune
   Indeed, but here he was, whistling and striding. Lotta squeezed in between the currants, hiding. "The best laid plans of mice and men," alas! The stranger came indeed, but did not pass. Instead, he leant upon the garden-gate,
   Folding his arms and whistling. Lotta's state,
   Crouched in the prickly currants, on wet grass,
   Was far from pleasant. Still the stranger stayed,
   And Lotta in her currants watched, dismayed. He seemed a proper fellow standing there
   In the bright moonshine. His cocked hat was laced
   With silver, and he wore his own brown hair
   Tied, but unpowdered. His whole bearing graced
   A fine cloth coat, and ruffled shirt, and chased
   Sword-hilt. Charlotta looked, but her position
   Was hardly easy. When would his volition

   Suggest his walking on? And then that tune! A half-a-dozen bars from 'Orfeo'
   Gone over and over, and murdered. What Fortune
   Had brought him there to stare about him so? "Ach, Gott im Himmel! Why will he not go!" Thought Lotta, but the young man whistled on,
   And seemed in no great hurry to be gone. Charlotta, crouched among the currant bushes,
   Watched the moon slowly dip from twig to twig. If Theodore should chance to come, and blushes
   Streamed over her. He would not care a fig,
   He'd only laugh. She pushed aside a sprig
   Of sharp-edged leaves and peered, then she uprose
   Amid her bushes. "Sir," said she, "pray whose

   Garden do you suppose you're watching? Why
   Do you stand there? I really must insist
   Upon your leaving. 'Tis unmannerly
   To stay so long." The young man gave a twist
   And turned about, and in the amethyst
   Moonlight he saw her like a nymph half-risen
   From the green bushes which had been her prison. He swept his hat off in a hurried bow. "Your pardon, Madam, I had no idea
   I was not quite alone, and that is how
   I came to stay. My trespass was not sheer
   Impertinence. I thought no one was here,
   And really gardens cry to be admired. To-night especially it seemed required. And may I beg to introduce myself? Heinrich Marohl of Munich. And your name?" Charlotta told him. And the artful elf
   Promptly exclaimed about her husband's fame. So Lotta, half-unwilling, slowly came
   To conversation with him. When she went
   Into the house, she found the evening spent. Theodore arrived quite wearied out and teased,
   With all excitement in him burned away. It had gone well, he said, the audience pleased,
   And he had played his very best to-day,
   But afterwards he had been forced to stay
   And practise with the stupid ones. His head
   Ached furiously, and he must get to bed. Part Second

      Herr Concert-Meister Altgelt played,
      And the four strings of his violin
      Were spinning like bees on a day in Spring. The notes rose into the wide sun-mote
      Which slanted through the window,
      They lay like coloured beads a-row,
      They knocked together and parted,
      And started to dance,
      Skipping, tripping, each one slipping
      Under and over the others so
      That the polychrome fire streamed like a lance
      Or a comet's tail,
      Behind them. Then a wail arose--crescendo--
      And dropped from off the end of the bow,
      And the dancing stopped. A scent of lilies filled the room,
      Long and slow. Each large white bloom
      Breathed a sound which was holy perfume from a blessed censer,
      And the hum of an organ tone,
      And they waved like fans in a hall of stone
      Over a bier standing there in the centre, alone. Each lily bent slowly as it was blown. Like smoke they rose from the violin--
      Then faded as a swifter bowing
      Jumbled the notes like wavelets flowing
      In a splashing, pashing, rippling motion
      Between broad meadows to an ocean
      Wide as a day and blue as a flower,
      Where every hour
      Gulls dipped, and scattered, and squawked, and squealed,
      And over the marshes the Angelus pealed,
      And the prows of the fishing-boats were spattered
      With spray. And away a couple of frigates were starting
      To race to Java with all sails set,
      Topgallants, and royals, and stunsails, and jibs,
      And wide moonsails; and the shining rails
      Were polished so bright they sparked in the sun. All the sails went up with a run:
          "They call me Hanging Johnny,
             Away-i-oh;
          They call me Hanging Johnny,
             So hang, boys, hang." And the sun had set and the high moon whitened,
      And the ship heeled over to the breeze. He drew her into the shade of the sails,
      And whispered tales
      Of voyages in the China seas,
      And his arm around her
      Held and bound her. She almost swooned,
      With the breeze and the moon
      And the slipping sea,
      And he beside her,
      Touching her, leaning--
      The ship careening,
      With the white moon steadily shining over
      Her and her lover,
      Theodore, still her lover! Then a quiver fell on the crowded notes,
      And slowly floated
      A single note which spread and spread
      Till it filled the room with a shimmer like gold,
      And noises shivered throughout its length,
      And tried its strength. They pulled it, and tore it,
      And the stuff waned thinner, but still it bore it. Then a wide rent
      Split the arching tent,
      And balls of fire spurted through,
      Spitting yellow, and mauve, and blue. One by one they were quenched as they fell,
      Only the blue burned steadily. Paler and paler it grew, and--faded--away. Herr Altgelt stopped. "Well, Lottachen, my Dear, what do you say? I think I'm in good trim. Now let's have dinner. What's this, my Love, you're very sweet to-day. I wonder how it happens I'm the winner
   Of so much sweetness. But I think you're thinner;
   You're like a bag of feathers on my knee. Why, Lotta child, you're almost strangling me. I'm glad you're going out this afternoon. The days are getting short, and I'm so tied
   At the Court Theatre my poor little bride
   Has not much junketing I fear, but soon
   I'll ask our manager to grant a boon. To-night, perhaps, I'll get a pass for you,
   And when I go, why Lotta can come too. Now dinner, Love. I want some onion soup
   To whip me up till that rehearsal's over. You know it's odd how some women can stoop! Fraeulein Gebnitz has taken on a lover,
   A Jew named Goldstein. No one can discover
   If it's his money. But she lives alone
   Practically. Gebnitz is a stone,

   Pores over books all day, and has no ear
   For his wife's singing. Artists must have men;
   They need appreciation. But it's queer
   What messes people make of their lives, when
   They should know more. If Gebnitz finds out, then
   His wife will pack. Yes, shut the door at once. I did not feel it cold, I am a dunce." Frau Altgelt tied her bonnet on and went
   Into the streets. A bright, crisp Autumn wind
   Flirted her skirts and hair. A turbulent,
   Audacious wind it was, now close behind,
   Pushing her bonnet forward till it twined
   The strings across her face, then from in front
   Slantingly swinging at her with a shunt,

   Until she lay against it, struggling, pushing,
   Dismayed to find her clothing tightly bound
   Around her, every fold and wrinkle crushing
   Itself upon her, so that she was wound
   In draperies as clinging as those found
   Sucking about a sea nymph on the frieze
   Of some old Grecian temple. In the breeze

   The shops and houses had a quality
   Of hard and dazzling colour; something sharp
   And buoyant, like white, puffing sails at sea. The city streets were twanging like a harp. Charlotta caught the movement, skippingly
   She blew along the pavement, hardly knowing
   Toward what destination she was going. She fetched up opposite a jeweller's shop,
   Where filigreed tiaras shone like crowns,
   And necklaces of emeralds seemed to drop
   And then float up again with lightness. Browns
   Of striped agates struck her like cold frowns
   Amid the gaiety of topaz seals,
   Carved though they were with heads, and arms, and wheels. A row of pencils knobbed with quartz or sard
   Delighted her. And rings of every size
   Turned smartly round like hoops before her eyes,
   Amethyst-flamed or ruby-girdled, jarred
   To spokes and flashing triangles, and starred
   Like rockets bursting on a festal day. Charlotta could not tear herself away. With eyes glued tightly on a golden box,
   Whose rare enamel piqued her with its hue,
   Changeable, iridescent, shuttlecocks
   Of shades and lustres always darting through
   Its level, superimposing sheet of blue,
   Charlotta did not hear footsteps approaching. She started at the words:  "Am I encroaching?" "Oh, Heinrich, how you frightened me! I thought
   We were to meet at three, is it quite that?" "No, it is not," he answered, "but I've caught
   The trick of missing you. One thing is flat,
   I cannot go on this way. Life is what
   Might best be conjured up by the word:  'Hell'. Dearest, when will you come?" Lotta, to quell

   His effervescence, pointed to the gems
   Within the window, asked him to admire
   A bracelet or a buckle. But one stems
   Uneasily the burning of a fire. Heinrich was chafing, pricked by his desire. Little by little she wooed him to her mood
   Until at last he promised to be good. But here he started on another tack;
   To buy a jewel, which one would Lotta choose. She vainly urged against him all her lack
   Of other trinkets. Should she dare to use
   A ring or brooch her husband might accuse
   Her of extravagance, and ask to see
   A strict accounting, or still worse might be. But Heinrich would not be persuaded. Why
   Should he not give her what he liked? And in
   He went, determined certainly to buy
   A thing so beautiful that it would win
   Her wavering fancy. Altgelt's violin
   He would outscore by such a handsome jewel
   That Lotta could no longer be so cruel! Pity Charlotta, torn in diverse ways. If she went in with him, the shopman might
   Recognize her, give her her name; in days
   To come he could denounce her. In her fright
   She almost fled. But Heinrich would be quite
   Capable of pursuing. By and by
   She pushed the door and entered hurriedly. It took some pains to keep him from bestowing
   A pair of ruby earrings, carved like roses,
   The setting twined to represent the growing
   Tendrils and leaves, upon her. "Who supposes
   I could obtain such things! It simply closes
   All comfort for me." So he changed his mind
   And bought as slight a gift as he could find. A locket, frosted over with seed pearls,
   Oblong and slim, for wearing at the neck,
   Or hidden in the bosom; their joined curls
   Should lie in it. And further to bedeck
   His love, Heinrich had picked a whiff, a fleck,
   The merest puff of a thin, linked chain
   To hang it from. Lotta could not refrain

   From weeping as they sauntered down the street. She did not want the locket, yet she did. To have him love her she found very sweet,
   But it is hard to keep love always hid. Then there was something in her heart which chid
   Her, told her she loved Theodore in him,
   That all these meetings were a foolish whim. She thought of Theodore and the life they led,
   So near together, but so little mingled. The great clouds bulged and bellied overhead,
   And the fresh wind about her body tingled;
   The crane of a large warehouse creaked and jingled;
   Charlotta held her breath for very fear,
   About her in the street she seemed to hear:
       "They call me Hanging Johnny,
          Away-i-oh;
       They call me Hanging Johnny,
          So hang, boys, hang." And it was Theodore, under the racing skies,
   Who held her and who whispered in her ear. She knew her heart was telling her no lies,
   Beating and hammering. He was so dear,
   The touch of him would send her in a queer
   Swoon that was half an ecstasy. And yearning
   For Theodore, she wandered, slowly turning

   Street after street as Heinrich wished it so. He had some aim, she had forgotten what. Their progress was confused and very slow,
   But at the last they reached a lonely spot,
   A garden far above the highest shot
   Of soaring steeple. At their feet, the town
   Spread open like a chequer-board laid down. Lotta was dimly conscious of the rest,
   Vaguely remembered how he clasped the chain
   About her neck. She treated it in jest,
   And saw his face cloud over with sharp pain. Then suddenly she felt as though a strain
   Were put upon her, collared like a slave,
   Leashed in the meshes of this thing he gave. She seized the flimsy rings with both her hands
   To snap it, but they held with odd persistence. Her eyes were blinded by two wind-blown strands
   Of hair which had been loosened. Her resistance
   Melted within her, from remotest distance,
   Misty, unreal, his face grew warm and near,
   And giving way she knew him very dear. For long he held her, and they both gazed down
   At the wide city, and its blue, bridged river. From wooing he jested with her, snipped the blown
   Strands of her hair, and tied them with a sliver
   Cut from his own head. But she gave a shiver
   When, opening the locket, they were placed
   Under the glass, commingled and enlaced. "When will you have it so with us?" He sighed. She shook her head. He pressed her further. "No,
   No, Heinrich, Theodore loves me," and she tried
   To free herself and rise. He held her so,
   Clipped by his arms, she could not move nor go. "But you love me," he whispered, with his face
   Burning against her through her kerchief's lace. Frau Altgelt knew she toyed with fire, knew
   That what her husband lit this other man
   Fanned to hot flame. She told herself that few
   Women were so discreet as she, who ran
   No danger since she knew what things to ban. She opened her house door at five o'clock,
   A short half-hour before her husband's knock. Part Third

   The 'Residenz-Theater' sparked and hummed
   With lights and people. Gebnitz was to sing,
   That rare soprano. All the fiddles strummed
   With tuning up; the wood-winds made a ring
   Of reedy bubbling noises, and the sting
   Of sharp, red brass pierced every ear-drum; patting
   From muffled tympani made a dark slatting

   Across the silver shimmering of flutes;
   A bassoon grunted, and an oboe wailed;
   The 'celli pizzicato-ed like great lutes,
   And mutterings of double basses trailed
   Away to silence, while loud harp-strings hailed
   Their thin, bright colours down in such a scatter
   They lost themselves amid the general clatter. Frau Altgelt in the gallery, alone,
   Felt lifted up into another world. Before her eyes a thousand candles shone
   In the great chandeliers. A maze of curled
   And powdered periwigs past her eyes swirled. She smelt the smoke of candles guttering,
   And caught the glint of jewelled fans fluttering

   All round her in the boxes. Red and gold,
   The house, like rubies set in filigree,
   Filliped the candlelight about, and bold
   Young sparks with eye-glasses, unblushingly
   Ogled fair beauties in the balcony. An officer went by, his steel spurs jangling. Behind Charlotta an old man was wrangling

   About a play-bill he had bought and lost. Three drunken soldiers had to be ejected. Frau Altgelt's eyes stared at the vacant post
   Of Concert-Meister, she at once detected
   The stir which brought him. But she felt neglected
   When with no glance about him or her way,
   He lifted up his violin to play. The curtain went up? Perhaps. If so,
      Charlotta never saw it go. The famous Fraeulein Gebnitz' singing
      Only came to her like the ringing
      Of bells at a festa
      Which swing in the air
      And nobody realizes they are there. They jingle and jangle,
      And clang, and bang,
      And never a soul could tell whether they rang,
      For the plopping of guns and rockets
      And the chinking of silver to spend, in one's pockets,
      And the shuffling and clapping of feet,
      And the loud flapping
      Of flags, with the drums,
      As the military comes. It's a famous tune to walk to,
      And I wonder where they're off to. Step-step-stepping to the beating of the drums. But the rhythm changes as though a mist
      Were curling and twisting
      Over the landscape. For a moment a rhythmless, tuneless fog
      Encompasses her. Then her senses jog
      To the breath of a stately minuet. Herr Altgelt's violin is set
      In tune to the slow, sweeping bows, and retreats and advances,
      To curtsies brushing the waxen floor as the Court dances. Long and peaceful like warm Summer nights
      When stars shine in the quiet river. And against the lights
      Blundering insects knock,
      And the 'Rathaus' clock
      Booms twice, through the shrill sounds
      Of flutes and horns in the lamplit grounds. Pressed against him in the mazy wavering
      Of a country dance, with her short breath quavering
      She leans upon the beating, throbbing
      Music. Laughing, sobbing,
      Feet gliding after sliding feet;
      His--hers--
      The ballroom blurs--
      She feels the air
      Lifting her hair,
      And the lapping of water on the stone stair. He is there! He is there! Twang harps, and squeal, you thin violins,
      That the dancers may dance, and never discover
      The old stone stair leading down to the river
      With the chestnut-tree branches hanging over
      Her and her lover. Theodore, still her lover! The evening passed like this, in a half faint,
   Delirium with waking intervals
   Which were the entr'acts. Under the restraint
   Of a large company, the constant calls
   For oranges or syrops from the stalls
   Outside, the talk, the passing to and fro,
   Lotta sat ill at ease, incognito. She heard the Gebnitz praised, the tenor lauded,
   The music vaunted as most excellent. The scenery and the costumes were applauded,
   The latter it was whispered had been sent
   From Italy. The Herr Direktor spent
   A fortune on them, so the gossips said. Charlotta felt a lightness in her head. When the next act began, her eyes were swimming,
   Her prodded ears were aching and confused. The first notes from the orchestra sent skimming
   Her outward consciousness. Her brain was fused
   Into the music, Theodore's music! Used
   To hear him play, she caught his single tone. For all she noticed they two were alone. Part Fourth

   Frau Altgelt waited in the chilly street,
   Hustled by lackeys who ran up and down
   Shouting their coachmen's names; forced to retreat
   A pace or two by lurching chairmen; thrown
   Rudely aside by linkboys; boldly shown
   The ogling rapture in two bleary eyes
   Thrust close to hers in most unpleasant wise. Escaping these, she hit a liveried arm,
   Was sworn at by this glittering gentleman
   And ordered off. However, no great harm
   Came to her. But she looked a trifle wan
   When Theodore, her belated guardian,
   Emerged. She snuggled up against him, trembling,
   Half out of fear, half out of the assembling

   Of all the thoughts and needs his playing had given. Had she enjoyed herself, he wished to know. "Oh! Theodore, can't you feel that it was Heaven!" "Heaven! My Lottachen, and was it so? Gebnitz was in good voice, but all the flow
   Of her last aria was spoiled by Klops,
   A wretched flutist, she was mad as hops." He was so simple, so matter-of-fact,
   Charlotta Altgelt knew not what to say
   To bring him to her dream. His lack of tact
   Kept him explaining all the homeward way
   How this thing had gone well, that badly. "Stay,
   Theodore!" she cried at last. "You know to me
   Nothing was real, it was an ecstasy." And he was heartily glad she had enjoyed
   Herself so much, and said so. "But it's good
   To be got home again." He was employed
   In looking at his violin, the wood
   Was old, and evening air did it no good. But when he drew up to the table for tea
   Something about his wife's vivacity

   Struck him as hectic, worried him in short. He talked of this and that but watched her close. Tea over, he endeavoured to extort
   The cause of her excitement. She arose
   And stood beside him, trying to compose
   Herself, all whipt to quivering, curdled life,
   And he, poor fool, misunderstood his wife. Suddenly, broken through her anxious grasp,
   Her music-kindled love crashed on him there. Amazed, he felt her fling against him, clasp
   Her arms about him, weighing down his chair,
   Sobbing out all her hours of despair. "Theodore, a woman needs to hear things proved. Unless you tell me, I feel I'm not loved." Theodore went under in this tearing wave,
   He yielded to it, and its headlong flow
   Filled him with all the energy she gave. He was a youth again, and this bright glow,
   This living, vivid joy he had to show
   Her what she was to him. Laughing and crying,
   She asked assurances there's no denying. Over and over again her questions, till
   He quite convinced her, every now and then
   She kissed him, shivering as though doubting still. But later when they were composed and when
   She dared relax her probings, "Lottachen,"
   He asked, "how is it your love has withstood
   My inadvertence? I was made of wood." She told him, and no doubt she meant it truly,
   That he was sun, and grass, and wind, and sky
   To her. And even if conscience were unruly
   She salved it by neat sophistries, but why
   Suppose her insincere, it was no lie
   She said, for Heinrich was as much forgot
   As though he'd never been within earshot. But Theodore's hands in straying and caressing
   Fumbled against the locket where it lay
   Upon her neck. "What is this thing I'm pressing?" He asked. "Let's bring it to the light of day." He lifted up the locket. "It should stay
   Outside, my Dear. Your mother has good taste. To keep it hidden surely is a waste." Pity again Charlotta, straight aroused
   Out of her happiness. The locket brought
   A chilly jet of truth upon her, soused
   Under its icy spurting she was caught,
   And choked, and frozen. Suddenly she sought
   The clasp, but with such art was this contrived
   Her fumbling fingers never once arrived

   Upon it. Feeling, twisting, round and round,
   She pulled the chain quite through the locket's ring
   And still it held. Her neck, encompassed, bound,
   Chafed at the sliding meshes. Such a thing
   To hurl her out of joy! A gilded string
   Binding her folly to her, and those curls
   Which lay entwined beneath the clustered pearls! Again she tried to break the cord. It stood. "Unclasp it, Theodore," she begged. But he
   Refused, and being in a happy mood,
   Twitted her with her inefficiency,
   Then looking at her very seriously:
   "I think, Charlotta, it is well to have
   Always about one what a mother gave. As she has taken the great pains to send
   This jewel to you from Dresden, it will be
   Ingratitude if you do not intend
   To carry it about you constantly. With her fine taste you cannot disagree,
   The locket is most beautifully designed." He opened it and there the curls were, twined. Charlotta's heart dropped beats like knitting-stitches. She burned a moment, flaming; then she froze. Her face was jerked by little, nervous twitches,
   She heard her husband asking:  "What are those?" Put out her hand quickly to interpose,
   But stopped, the gesture half-complete, astounded
   At the calm way the question was propounded. "A pretty fancy, Dear, I do declare. Indeed I will not let you put it off. A lovely thought:  yours and your mother's hair!" Charlotta hid a gasp under a cough. "Never with my connivance shall you doff
   This charming gift." He kissed her on the cheek,
   And Lotta suffered him, quite crushed and meek. When later in their room she lay awake,
   Watching the moonlight slip along the floor,
   She felt the chain and wept for Theodore's sake. She had loved Heinrich also, and the core
   Of truth, unlovely, startled her. Wherefore
   She vowed from now to break this double life
   And see herself only as Theodore's wife. Part Fifth

   It was no easy matter to convince
   Heinrich that it was finished. Hard to say
   That though they could not meet (he saw her wince)
   She still must keep the locket to allay
   Suspicion in her husband. She would pay
   Him from her savings bit by bit--the oath
   He swore at that was startling to them both. Her resolution taken, Frau Altgelt
   Adhered to it, and suffered no regret. She found her husband all that she had felt
   His music to contain. Her days were set
   In his as though she were an amulet
   Cased in bright gold. She joyed in her confining;
   Her eyes put out her looking-glass with shining. Charlotta was so gay that old, dull tasks
   Were furbished up to seem like rituals. She baked and brewed as one who only asks
   The right to serve. Her daily manuals
   Of prayer were duties, and her festivals
   When Theodore praised some dish, or frankly said
   She had a knack in making up a bed. So Autumn went, and all the mountains round
   The city glittered white with fallen snow,
   For it was Winter. Over the hard ground
   Herr Altgelt's footsteps came, each one a blow. On the swept flags behind the currant row
   Charlotta stood to greet him. But his lip
   Only flicked hers. His Concert-Meistership

   Was first again. This evening he had got
   Important news. The opera ordered from
   Young Mozart was arrived. That old despot,
   The Bishop of Salzburg, had let him come
   Himself to lead it, and the parts, still hot
   From copying, had been tried over. Never
   Had any music started such a fever. The orchestra had cheered till they were hoarse,
   The singers clapped and clapped. The town was made,
   With such a great attraction through the course
   Of Carnival time. In what utter shade
   All other cities would be left! The trade
   In music would all drift here naturally. In his excitement he forgot his tea. Lotta was forced to take his cup and put
   It in his hand. But still he rattled on,
   Sipping at intervals. The new catgut
   Strings he was using gave out such a tone
   The "Maestro" had remarked it, and had gone
   Out of his way to praise him. Lotta smiled,
   He was as happy as a little child. From that day on, Herr Altgelt, more and more,
   Absorbed himself in work. Lotta at first
   Was patient and well-wishing. But it wore
   Upon her when two weeks had brought no burst
   Of loving from him. Then she feared the worst;
   That his short interest in her was a light
   Flared up an instant only in the night. 'Idomeneo' was the opera's name,
   A name that poor Charlotta learnt to hate. Herr Altgelt worked so hard he seldom came
   Home for his tea, and it was very late,
   Past midnight sometimes, when he knocked. His state
   Was like a flabby orange whose crushed skin
   Is thin with pulling, and all dented in. He practised every morning and her heart
   Followed his bow. But often she would sit,
   While he was playing, quite withdrawn apart,
   Absently fingering and touching it,
   The locket, which now seemed to her a bit
   Of some gone youth. His music drew her tears,
   And through the notes he played, her dreading ears

   Heard Heinrich's voice, saying he had not changed;
   Beer merchants had no ecstasies to take
   Their minds off love. So far her thoughts had ranged
   Away from her stern vow, she chanced to take
   Her way, one morning, quite by a mistake,
   Along the street where Heinrich had his shop. What harm to pass it since she should not stop! It matters nothing how one day she met
   Him on a bridge, and blushed, and hurried by. Nor how the following week he stood to let
   Her pass, the pavement narrowing suddenly. How once he took her basket, and once he
   Pulled back a rearing horse who might have struck
   Her with his hoofs. It seemed the oddest luck

   How many times their business took them each
   Right to the other. Then at last he spoke,
   But she would only nod, he got no speech
   From her. Next time he treated it in joke,
   And that so lightly that her vow she broke
   And answered. So they drifted into seeing
   Each other as before. There was no fleeing. Christmas was over and the Carnival
   Was very near, and tripping from each tongue
   Was talk of the new opera. Each book-stall
   Flaunted it out in bills, what airs were sung,
   What singers hired. Pictures of the young
   "Maestro" were for sale. The town was mad. Only Charlotta felt depressed and sad. Each day now brought a struggle 'twixt her will
   And Heinrich's. 'Twixt her love for Theodore
   And him. Sometimes she wished to kill
   Herself to solve her problem. For a score
   Of reasons Heinrich tempted her. He bore
   Her moods with patience, and so surely urged
   Himself upon her, she was slowly merged

   Into his way of thinking, and to fly
   With him seemed easy. But next morning would
   The Stradivarius undo her mood. Then she would realize that she must cleave
   Always to Theodore. And she would try
   To convince Heinrich she should never leave,
   And afterwards she would go home and grieve. All thought in Munich centered on the part
   Of January when there would be given
   'Idomeneo' by Wolfgang Mozart. The twenty-ninth was fixed. And all seats, even
   Those almost at the ceiling, which were driven
   Behind the highest gallery, were sold. The inches of the theatre went for gold. Herr Altgelt was a shadow worn so thin
   With work, he hardly printed black behind
   The candle. He and his old violin
   Made up one person. He was not unkind,
   But dazed outside his playing, and the rind,
   The pine and maple of his fiddle, guarded
   A part of him which he had quite discarded. It woke in the silence of frost-bright nights,
      In little lights,
      Like will-o'-the-wisps flickering, fluttering,
      Here--there--
      Spurting, sputtering,
      Fading and lighting,
      Together, asunder--
      Till Lotta sat up in bed with wonder,
      And the faint grey patch of the window shone
      Upon her sitting there, alone. For Theodore slept. The twenty-eighth was last rehearsal day,
   'Twas called for noon, so early morning meant
   Herr Altgelt's only time in which to play
   His part alone. Drawn like a monk who's spent
   Himself in prayer and fasting, Theodore went
   Into the kitchen, with a weary word
   Of cheer to Lotta, careless if she heard. Lotta heard more than his spoken word. She heard the vibrating of strings and wood. She was washing the dishes, her hands all suds,
      When the sound began,
      Long as the span
      Of a white road snaking about a hill. The orchards are filled
      With cherry blossoms at butterfly poise. Hawthorn buds are cracking,
      And in the distance a shepherd is clacking
      His shears, snip-snipping the wool from his sheep. The notes are asleep,
      Lying adrift on the air
      In level lines
      Like sunlight hanging in pines and pines,
      Strung and threaded,
      All imbedded
      In the blue-green of the hazy pines. Lines--long, straight lines! And stems,
      Long, straight stems
      Pushing up
      To the cup of blue, blue sky. Stems growing misty
      With the many of them,
      Red-green mist
      Of the trees,
      And these
      Wood-flavoured notes. The back is maple and the belly is pine. The rich notes twine
      As though weaving in and out of leaves,
      Broad leaves
      Flapping slowly like elephants' ears,
      Waving and falling. Another sound peers
      Through little pine fingers,
      And lingers, peeping. Ping! Ping! pizzicato, something is cheeping. There is a twittering up in the branches,
      A chirp and a lilt,
      And crimson atilt on a swaying twig. Wings! Wings! And a little ruffled-out throat which sings. The forest bends, tumultuous
      With song. The woodpecker knocks,
      And the song-sparrow trills,
      Every fir, and cedar, and yew
      Has a nest or a bird,
      It is quite absurd
      To hear them cutting across each other:
      Peewits, and thrushes, and larks, all at once,
      And a loud cuckoo is trying to smother
      A wood-pigeon perched on a birch,
      "Roo--coo--oo--oo--"
      "Cuckoo! Cuckoo! That's one for you!" A blackbird whistles, how sharp, how shrill! And the great trees toss
      And leaves blow down,
      You can almost hear them splash on the ground. The whistle again:
      It is double and loud! The leaves are splashing,
      And water is dashing
      Over those creepers, for they are shrouds;
      And men are running up them to furl the sails,
      For there is a capful of wind to-day,
      And we are already well under way. The deck is aslant in the bubbling breeze. "Theodore, please. Oh, Dear, how you tease!" And the boatswain's whistle sounds again,
      And the men pull on the sheets:
          "My name is Hanging Johnny,
             Away-i-oh;
          They call me Hanging Johnny,
             So hang, boys, hang." The trees of the forest are masts, tall masts;
      They are swinging over
      Her and her lover. Almost swooning
      Under the ballooning canvas,
      She lies
      Looking up in his eyes
      As he bends farther over. Theodore, still her lover! The suds were dried upon Charlotta's hands,
   She leant against the table for support,
   Wholly forgotten. Theodore's eyes were brands
   Burning upon his music. He stopped short. Charlotta almost heard the sound of bands
   Snapping. She put one hand up to her heart,
   Her fingers touched the locket with a start. Herr Altgelt put his violin away
   Listlessly. "Lotta, I must have some rest. The strain will be a hideous one to-day. Don't speak to me at all. It will be best
   If I am quiet till I go." And lest
   She disobey, he left her. On the stairs
   She heard his mounting steps. What use were prayers! He could not hear, he was not there, for she
   Was married to a mummy, a machine. Her hand closed on the locket bitterly. Before her, on a chair, lay the shagreen
   Case of his violin. She saw the clean
   Sun flash the open clasp. The locket's edge
   Cut at her fingers like a pushing wedge. A heavy cart went by, a distant bell
   Chimed ten, the fire flickered in the grate. She was alone. Her throat began to swell
   With sobs. What kept her here, why should she wait? The violin she had begun to hate
   Lay in its case before her. Here she flung
   The cover open. With the fiddle swung

   Over her head, the hanging clock's loud ticking
   Caught on her ear. 'Twas slow, and as she paused
   The little door in it came open, flicking
   A wooden cuckoo out:  "Cuckoo!" It caused
   The forest dream to come again. "Cuckoo!" Smashed on the grate, the violin broke in two. "Cuckoo! Cuckoo!" the clock kept striking on;
   But no one listened. Frau Altgelt had gone. The Cross-Roads



A bullet through his heart at dawn. On the table a letter signed with a
woman's name. A wind that goes howling round the house, and weeping as
in shame. Cold November dawn peeping through the windows, cold dawn
creeping over the floor, creeping up his cold legs, creeping over his
cold body, creeping across his cold face. A glaze of thin yellow
sunlight on the staring eyes. Wind howling through bent branches. A
wind which never dies down. Howling, wailing. The gazing eyes glitter
in the sunlight. The lids are frozen open and the eyes glitter. The thudding of a pick on hard earth. A spade grinding and crunching. Overhead, branches writhing, winding, interlacing, unwinding,
scattering; tortured twinings, tossings, creakings. Wind flinging
branches apart, drawing them together, whispering and whining among
them. A waning, lopsided moon cutting through black clouds. 