

E-text prepared by Robert Shimmin, Gene Smethers, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE DAUGHTER OF THE COMMANDANT

A Russian Romance

by

ALEXKSANDR POUSHKIN

Translated by Mrs. Milne Home

Authoress of "Mamma's Black Nurse Stories," "West Indian Folklore"







PREFACE. ALEXKSANDR POUSHKIN, the Poet, was born at Petersburg in 1799 of good
family, and died before he was forty, in the prime of his genius. The
novel here offered to the public is considered by Russians his best
prose work. Others are _Boris Godunof_, a dramatic sketch, but never
intended to be put on the stage, and _The Prisoner of the Caucasus_. Among his poems are "The Gipsies," "Ruslan and Ludmilla," "The Fountain
of Tears," and "Evgeni Oneghin." The last, if I mistake not, was
translated into English some years ago. Some of Poushkin's writings
having drawn suspicion on him he was banished to a distant part of the
Empire, where he filled sundry administrative posts. The Tzar Nicholai,
on his accession in 1825, recalled him to Petersburg and made him
Historiographer. The works of the poet were much admired in society, but
he was not happy in his domestic life. His outspoken language made him
many enemies, and disgraceful reports were purposely spread abroad
concerning him, which resulted in a duel in which he was mortally
wounded by his brother-in-law, George Danthes. His death was mourned
publicly by all Russia. M.P.M.H. April, 1891. CONTENTS. CHAPTER

I. Sergeant of the Guards
II. The Guide
III. The Little Fort
IV. The Duel
V.    Love
VI. Pugatchef
VII. The Assault
VIII. The Unexpected Visit
IX. The Parting
X. The Siege
XI. The Rebel Camp
XII. The Orphan
XIII. The Arrest
XIV. The Trial




CHAPTER I. SERGEANT OF THE GUARDS. My father, Andrej Petrovitch Grineff, after serving in his youth under
Count Muenich,[1] had retired in 17--with the rank of senior major. Since
that time he had always lived on his estate in the district of Simbirsk,
where he married Avdotia, the eldest daughter of a poor gentleman in the
neighbourhood. Of the nine children born of this union I alone survived;
all my brothers and sisters died young. I had been enrolled as sergeant
in the Semenofsky regiment by favour of the major of the Guard, Prince
Banojik, our near relation. I was supposed to be away on leave till my
education was finished. At that time we were brought up in another
manner than is usual now. From five years old I was given over to the care of the huntsman,
Saveliitch,[2] who from his steadiness and sobriety was considered
worthy of becoming my attendant. Thanks to his care, at twelve years old
I could read and write, and was considered a good judge of the points of
a greyhound. At this time, to complete my education, my father hired a
Frenchman, M. Beaupre, who was imported from Moscow at the same time as
the annual provision of wine and Provence oil. His arrival displeased
Saveliitch very much. "It seems to me, thank heaven," murmured he, "the child was washed,
combed, and fed. What was the good of spending money and hiring a
'_moussie_,' as if there were not enough servants in the house?" Beaupre, in his native country, had been a hairdresser, then a soldier
in Prussia, and then had come to Russia to be "_outchitel_," without
very well knowing the meaning of this word. [3] He was a good creature,
but wonderfully absent and hare-brained. His greatest weakness was a
love of the fair sex. Neither, as he said himself, was he averse to the
bottle, that is, as we say in Russia, that his passion was drink. But,
as in our house the wine only appeared at table, and then only in
_liqueur_ glasses, and as on these occasions it somehow never came to
the turn of the "_outchitel_" to be served at all, my Beaupre soon
accustomed himself to the Russian brandy, and ended by even preferring
it to all the wines of his native country as much better for the
stomach. We became great friends, and though, according to the contract,
he had engaged himself to teach me _French, German, and all the
sciences_, he liked better learning of me to chatter Russian
indifferently. Each of us busied himself with our own affairs; our
friendship was firm, and I did not wish for a better mentor. But Fate
soon parted us, and it was through an event which I am going to relate. The washerwoman, Polashka, a fat girl, pitted with small-pox, and the
one-eyed cow-girl, Akoulka, came one fine day to my mother with such
stories against the "_moussie_," that she, who did not at all like these
kind of jokes, in her turn complained to my father, who, a man of hasty
temperament, instantly sent for that _rascal of a Frenchman_. He was
answered humbly that the "_moussie_" was giving me a lesson. My father
ran to my room. Beaupre was sleeping on his bed the sleep of the just. As for me, I was absorbed in a deeply interesting occupation. A map had
been procured for me from Moscow, which hung against the wall without
ever being used, and which had been tempting me for a long time from the
size and strength of its paper. I had at last resolved to make a kite of
it, and, taking advantage of Beaupre's slumbers, I had set to work. My father came in just at the very moment when I was tying a tail to the
Cape of Good Hope. At the sight of my geographical studies he boxed my ears sharply, sprang
forward to Beaupre's bed, and, awaking him without any consideration, he
began to assail him with reproaches. In his trouble and confusion
Beaupre vainly strove to rise; the poor "_outchitel_" was dead drunk. My father pulled him up by the collar of his coat, kicked him out of the
room, and dismissed him the same day, to the inexpressible joy of
Saveliitch. Thus was my education finished. I lived like a stay-at-home son (_nedoross'l_),[4] amusing myself by
scaring the pigeons on the roofs, and playing leapfrog with the lads of
the courtyard,[5] till I was past the age of sixteen. But at this age my
life underwent a great change. One autumn day, my mother was making honey jam in her parlour, while,
licking my lips, I was watching the operations, and occasionally tasting
the boiling liquid. My father, seated by the window, had just opened the
_Court Almanack_, which he received every year. He was very fond of
this book; he never read it except with great attention, and it had the
power of upsetting his temper very much. My mother, who knew all his
whims and habits by heart, generally tried to keep the unlucky book
hidden, so that sometimes whole months passed without the _Court
Almanack_ falling beneath his eye. On the other hand, when he did chance
to find it, he never left it for hours together. He was now reading it,
frequently shrugging his shoulders, and muttering, half aloud--

"General! He was sergeant in my company. Knight of the Orders of Russia! Was it so long ago that we--"

At last my father threw the _Almanack_ away from him on the sofa, and
remained deep in a brown study, which never betokened anything good. "Avdotia Vassilieva,"[6] said he, sharply addressing my mother, "how
old is Petrousha? "[7]

"His seventeenth year has just begun," replied my mother. "Petrousha was
born the same year our Aunt Anastasia Garasimofna[8] lost an eye, and
that--"

"All right," resumed my father; "it is time he should serve. 'Tis time
he should cease running in and out of the maids' rooms and climbing into
the dovecote." The thought of a coming separation made such an impression on my mother
that she dropped her spoon into her saucepan, and her eyes filled with
tears. As for me, it is difficult to express the joy which took
possession of me. The idea of service was mingled in my mind with the
liberty and pleasures offered by the town of Petersburg. I already saw
myself officer of the Guard, which was, in my opinion, the height of
human happiness. My father neither liked to change his plans, nor to defer the execution
of them. The day of my departure was at once fixed. The evening before
my father told me that he was going to give me a letter for my future
superior officer, and bid me bring him pen and paper. "Don't forget, Andrej Petrovitch," said my mother, "to remember me to
Prince Banojik; tell him I hope he will do all he can for my Petrousha." "What nonsense!" cried my father, frowning. "Why do you wish me to write
to Prince Banojik?" "But you have just told us you are good enough to write to Petrousha's
superior officer." "Well, what of that?" "But Prince Banojik is Petrousha's superior officer. You know very well
he is on the roll of the Semenofsky regiment." "On the roll! What is it to me whether he be on the roll or no? Petrousha shall not go to Petersburg! What would he learn there? To
spend money and commit follies. No, he shall serve with the army, he
shall smell powder, he shall become a soldier and not an idler of the
Guard, he shall wear out the straps of his knapsack. Where is his
commission? Give it to me." My mother went to find my commission, which she kept in a box with my
christening clothes, and gave it to my father with, a trembling hand. My
father read it with attention, laid it before him on the table, and
began his letter. Curiosity pricked me. "Where shall I be sent," thought I, "if not to Petersburg?" I never took my eyes off my father's pen as it travelled slowly over the
paper. At last he finished his letter, put it with my commission into
the same cover, took off his spectacles, called me, and said--

"This letter is addressed to Andrej Karlovitch R., my old friend and
comrade. You are to go to Orenburg[9] to serve under him." All my brilliant expectations and high hopes vanished. Instead of the
gay and lively life of Petersburg, I was doomed to a dull life in a far
and wild country. Military service, which a moment before I thought
would be delightful, now seemed horrible to me. But there was nothing
for it but resignation. On the morning of the following day a travelling
_kibitka_ stood before the hall door. There were packed in it a trunk
and a box containing a tea service, and some napkins tied up full of
rolls and little cakes, the last I should get of home pampering. My parents gave me their blessing, and my father said to me--

"Good-bye, Petr'; serve faithfully he to whom you have sworn fidelity;
obey your superiors; do not seek for favours; do not struggle after
active service, but do not refuse it either, and remember the proverb,
'Take care of your coat while it is new, and of your honour while it is
young.'" My mother tearfully begged me not to neglect my health, and bade
Saveliitch take great care of the darling. I was dressed in a short
"_touloup_"[10] of hareskin, and over it a thick pelisse of foxskin. I
seated myself in the _kibitka_ with Saveliitch, and started for my
destination, crying bitterly. I arrived at Simbirsk during the night, where I was to stay twenty-four
hours, that Saveliitch might do sundry commissions entrusted to him. I
remained at an inn, while Saveliitch went out to get what he wanted. Tired of looking out at the windows upon a dirty lane, I began wandering
about the rooms of the inn. I went into the billiard room. I found there
a tall gentleman, about forty years of age, with long, black
moustachios, in a dressing-gown, a cue in his hand, and a pipe in his
mouth. He was playing with the marker, who was to have a glass of brandy
if he won, and, if he lost, was to crawl under the table on all fours. I
stayed to watch them; the longer their games lasted, the more frequent
became the all-fours performance, till at last the marker remained
entirely under the table. The gentleman addressed to him some strong
remarks, as a funeral sermon, and proposed that I should play a game
with him. I replied that I did not know how to play billiards. Probably
it seemed to him very odd. He looked at me with a sort of pity. Nevertheless, he continued talking to me. I learnt that his name was
Ivan Ivanovitch[11] Zourine, that he commanded a troop in the ----th
Hussars, that he was recruiting just now at Simbirsk, and that he had
established himself at the same inn as myself. Zourine asked me to lunch
with him, soldier fashion, and, as we say, on what Heaven provides. I
accepted with pleasure; we sat down to table; Zourine drank a great
deal, and pressed me to drink, telling me I must get accustomed to the
service. He told good stories, which made me roar with laughter, and we
got up from table the best of friends. Then he proposed to teach me
billiards. "It is," said he, "a necessity for soldiers like us. Suppose, for
instance, you come to a little town; what are you to do? One cannot
always find a Jew to afford one sport. In short, you must go to the inn
and play billiards, and to play you must know how to play." These reasons completely convinced me, and with great ardour I began
taking my lesson. Zourine encouraged me loudly; he was surprised at my
rapid progress, and after a few lessons he proposed that we should play
for money, were it only for a "_groch_" (two kopeks),[12] not for the
profit, but that we might not play for nothing, which, according to him,
was a very bad habit. I agreed to this, and Zourine called for punch; then he advised me to
taste it, always repeating that I must get accustomed to the service. "And what," said he, "would the service be without punch?" I followed his advice. We continued playing, and the more I sipped my
glass, the bolder I became. My balls flew beyond the cushions. I got
angry; I was impertinent to the marker who scored for us. I raised the
stake; in short, I behaved like a little boy just set free from school. Thus the time passed very quickly. At last Zourine glanced at the clock,
put down his cue, and told me I had lost a hundred roubles. [13] This
disconcerted me very much; my money was in the hands of Saveliitch. I
was beginning to mumble excuses, when Zourine said--

"But don't trouble yourself; I can wait, and now let us go to
Arinushka's." What could you expect? I finished my day as foolishly as I had begun it. We supped with this Arinushka. Zourine always filled up my glass,
repeating that I must get accustomed to the service. Upon leaving the table I could scarcely stand. At midnight Zourine took
me back to the inn. Saveliitch came to meet us at the door. "What has befallen you?" he said to me in a melancholy voice, when he
saw the undoubted signs of my zeal for the service. "Where did you thus
swill yourself? Oh! good heavens! such a misfortune never happened
before." "Hold your tongue, old owl," I replied, stammering; "I am sure you are
drunk. Go to bed, ... but first help me to bed." The next day I awoke with a bad headache. I only remembered confusedly
the occurrences of the past evening. My meditations were broken by
Saveliitch, who came into my room with a cup of tea. "You begin early making free, Petr' Andrejitch," he said to me, shaking
his head. "Well, where do you get it from? It seems to me that neither
your father nor your grandfather were drunkards. We needn't talk of
your mother; she has never touched a drop of anything since she was
born, except '_kvass_. '[14] So whose fault is it? Whose but the
confounded '_moussie_;' he taught you fine things, that son of a dog,
and well worth the trouble of taking a Pagan for your servant, as if our
master had not had enough servants of his own!" I was ashamed. I turned round and said to him--

"Go away, Saveliitch; I don't want any tea." But it was impossible to quiet Saveliitch when once he had begun to
sermonize. "Do you see now, Petr' Andrejitch," said he, "what it is to commit
follies? You have a headache; you won't take anything. A man who gets
drunk is good for nothing. Do take a little pickled cucumber with honey
or half a glass of brandy to sober you. What do you think?" At this moment a little boy came in, who brought me a note from Zourine. I unfolded it and read as follows:--

"DEAR PETR' ANDREJITCH,

"Oblige me by sending by bearer the hundred roubles you lost to me
yesterday. I want money dreadfully. "Your devoted

"IVAN ZOURINE." There was nothing for it. I assumed a look of indifference, and,
addressing myself to Saveliitch, I bid him hand over a hundred roubles
to the little boy. "What--why?" he asked me in great surprise. "I owe them to him," I answered as coldly as possible. "You owe them to him!" retorted Saveliitch, whose surprise became
greater. "When had you the time to run up such a debt? It is
impossible. Do what you please, excellency, but I will not give this
money." I then considered that, if in this decisive moment I did not oblige this
obstinate old man to obey me, it would be difficult for me in future to
free myself from his tutelage. Glancing at him haughtily, I said to
him--

"I am your master; you are my servant. The money is mine; I lost it
because I chose to lose it. I advise you not to be headstrong, and to
obey your orders." My words made such an impression on Saveliitch that he clasped his hands
and remained dumb and motionless. "What are you standing there for like a stock?" I exclaimed, angrily. Saveliitch began to weep. "Oh! my father, Petr' Andrejitch," sobbed he, in a trembling voice; "do
not make me die of sorrow. Oh! my light, hearken to me who am old;
write to this robber that you were only joking, that we never had so
much money. A hundred roubles! Good heavens! Tell him your parents have
strictly forbidden you to play for anything but nuts." "Will you hold your tongue?" said I, hastily, interrupting him. "Hand
over the money, or I will kick you out of the place." Saveliitch looked at me with a deep expression of sorrow, and went to
fetch my money. I was sorry for the poor old man, but I wished to assert
myself, and prove that I was not a child. Zourine got his hundred
roubles. Saveliitch was in haste to get me away from this unlucky inn; he came in
telling me the horses were harnessed. I left Simbirsk with an uneasy
conscience, and with some silent remorse, without taking leave of my
instructor, whom I little thought I should ever see again. CHAPTER II. THE GUIDE. My reflections during the journey were not very pleasant. According to
the value of money at that time, my loss was of some importance. I could
not but confess to myself that my conduct at the Simbirsk Inn had been
most foolish, and I felt guilty toward Saveliitch. All this worried me. The old man sat, in sulky silence, in the forepart of the sledge, with
his face averted, every now and then giving a cross little cough. I had
firmly resolved to make peace with him, but I did not know how to begin. At last I said to him--

"Look here, Saveliitch, let us have done with all this; let us make
peace." "Oh! my little father, Petr' Andrejitch," he replied, with a deep sigh,
"I am angry with myself; it is I who am to blame for everything. What
possessed me to leave you alone in the inn? But what could I do; the
devil would have it so, else why did it occur to me to go and see my
gossip the deacon's wife, and thus it happened, as the proverb says, 'I
left the house and was taken to prison.' What ill-luck! What ill-luck! How shall I appear again before my master and mistress? What will they
say when they hear that their child is a drunkard and a gamester?" To comfort poor Saveliitch, I gave him my word of honour that in future
I would not spend a single kopek without his consent. Gradually he
calmed down, though he still grumbled from time to time, shaking his
head--

"A hundred roubles, it is easy to talk!" I was approaching my destination. Around me stretched a wild and dreary
desert, intersected by little hills and deep ravines. All was covered
with snow. The sun was setting. My _kibitka_ was following the narrow
road, or rather the track, left by the sledges of the peasants. All at
once my driver looked round, and addressing himself to me--

"Sir," said he, taking off his cap, "will you not order me to turn
back?" "Why?" "The weather is uncertain. There is already a little wind. Do you not
see how it is blowing about the surface snow." "Well, what does that matter?" "And do you see what there is yonder?" The driver pointed east with his whip. "I see nothing more than the white steppe and the clear sky." "There, there; look, that little cloud!" I did, in fact, perceive on the horizon a little white cloud which I
had at first taken for a distant hill. My driver explained to me that
this little cloud portended a "_bourane_. "[15] I had heard of the
snowstorms peculiar to these regions, and I knew of whole caravans
having been sometimes buried in the tremendous drifts of snow. Saveliitch was of the same opinion as the driver, and advised me to turn
back, but the wind did not seem to me very violent, and hoping to reach
in time the next posting station, I bid him try and get on quickly. He
put his horses to a gallop, continually looking, however, towards the
east. But the wind increased in force, the little cloud rose rapidly,
became larger and thicker, at last covering the whole sky. The snow
began to fall lightly at first, but soon in large flakes. The wind
whistled and howled; in a moment the grey sky was lost in the whirlwind
of snow which the wind raised from the earth, hiding everything around
us. "How unlucky we are, excellency," cried the driver; "it is the
_bourane_." I put my head out of the _kibitka_; all was darkness and confusion. The
wind blew with such ferocity that it was difficult not to think it an
animated being. The snow drifted round and covered us. The horses went at a walk, and
soon stopped altogether. "Why don't you go on?" I said, impatiently, to the driver. "But where to?" he replied, getting out of the sledge. "Heaven only
knows where we are now. There is no longer any road, and it is all
dark." I began to scold him, but Saveliitch took his part. "Why did you not listen to him?" he said to me, angrily. "You would have
gone back to the post-house; you would have had some tea; you could
have slept till morning; the storm would have blown over, and we should
have started. And why such haste? Had it been to get married, now!" Saveliitch was right. What was there to do? The snow continued to
fall--a heap was rising around the _kibitka_. The horses stood
motionless, hanging their heads and shivering from time to time. The driver walked round them, settling their harness, as if he had
nothing else to do. Saveliitch grumbled. I was looking all round in
hopes of perceiving some indication of a house or a road; but I could
not see anything but the confused whirling of the snowstorm. All at once I thought I distinguished something black. "Hullo, driver!" I exclaimed, "what is that black thing over there?" The driver looked attentively in the direction I was pointing out. "Heaven only knows, excellency," replied he, resuming his seat. "It is not a sledge, it is not a tree, and it seems to me that it moves. It must be a wolf or a man." I ordered him to move towards the unknown object, which came also to
meet us. In two minutes I saw it was a man, and we met. "Hey, there, good man," the driver hailed him, "tell us, do you happen
to know the road?" "This is the road," replied the traveller. "I am on firm ground; but
what the devil good does that do you?" "Listen, my little peasant," said I to him, "do you know this part of
the country? Can you guide us to some place where we may pass the
night?" "Do I know this country? Thank heaven," rejoined the stranger, "I have
travelled here, on horse and afoot, far and wide. But just look at this
weather! One cannot keep the road. Better stay here and wait; perhaps
the hurricane will cease and the sky will clear, and we shall find the
road by starlight." His coolness gave me courage, and I resigned myself to pass the night on
the steppe, commending myself to the care of Providence, when suddenly
the stranger, seating himself on the driver's seat, said--

"Grace be to God, there _is_ a house not far off. Turn to the right, and
go on." "Why should I go to the right?" retorted my driver, ill-humouredly. "How do you know where the road is that you are so ready to say, 'Other
people's horses, other people's harness--whip away!'" It seemed to me the driver was right. "Why," said I to the stranger, "do you think a house is not far off?" "The wind blew from that direction," replied he, "and I smelt smoke, a
sure sign that a house is near." His cleverness and the acuteness of his sense of smell alike astonished
me. I bid the driver go where the other wished. The horses ploughed
their way through the deep snow. The _kibitka_ advanced slowly,
sometimes upraised on a drift, sometimes precipitated into a ditch, and
swinging from side to side. It was very like a boat on a stormy sea. Saveliitch groaned deeply as every moment he fell upon me. I lowered the
_tsinofka_,[16] I rolled myself up in my cloak and I went to sleep,
rocked by the whistle of the storm and the lurching of the sledge. I had
then a dream that I have never forgotten, and in which I still see
something prophetic, as I recall the strange events of my life. The
reader will forgive me if I relate it to him, as he knows, no doubt, by
experience how natural it is for man to retain a vestige of superstition
in spite of all the scorn for it he may think proper to assume. I had reached the stage when the real and unreal begin to blend into the
first vague visions of drowsiness. It seemed to me that the snowstorm
continued, and that we were wandering in the snowy desert. All at once I
thought I saw a great gate, and we entered the courtyard of our house. My first thought was a fear that my father would be angry at my
involuntary return to the paternal roof, and would attribute it to a
premeditated disobedience. Uneasy, I got out of my _kibitka_, and I saw
my mother come to meet me, looking very sad. "Don't make a noise," she said to me. "Your father is on his death-bed,
and wishes to bid you farewell." Struck with horror, I followed her into the bedroom. I look round; the
room is nearly dark. Near the bed some people were standing, looking sad
and cast down. I approached on tiptoe. My mother raised the curtain, and
said--

"Andrej Petrovitch, Petrousha has come back; he came back having heard
of your illness. Give him your blessing." I knelt down. But to my astonishment instead of my father I saw in the
bed a black-bearded peasant, who regarded me with a merry look. Full of
surprise, I turned towards my mother. "What does this mean?" I exclaimed. "It is not my father. Why do you
want me to ask this peasant's blessing?" "It is the same thing, Petrousha," replied my mother. "That person is
your _godfather_. [17] Kiss his hand, and let him bless you." I would not consent to this. Whereupon the peasant sprang from the bed,
quickly drew his axe from his belt, and began to brandish it in all
directions. I wished to fly, but I could not. The room seemed to be
suddenly full of corpses. I stumbled against them; my feet slipped in
pools of blood. The terrible peasant called me gently, saying to me--

"Fear nothing, come near; come and let me bless you." Fear had stupified me....

At this moment I awoke. The horses had stopped; Saveliitch had hold of
my hand. "Get out, excellency," said he to me; "here we are." "Where?" I asked, rubbing my eyes. "At our night's lodging. Heaven has helped us; we came by chance right
upon the hedge by the house. Get out, excellency, as quick as you can,
and let us see you get warm." I got out of the _kibitka_. The snowstorm still raged, but less
violently. It was so dark that one might, as we say, have as well been
blind. The host received us near the entrance, holding a lantern beneath
the skirt of his caftan, and led us into a room, small but prettily
clean, lit by a _loutchina_. [18] On the wall hung a long carbine and a
high Cossack cap. Our host, a Cossack of the Yaik,[19] was a peasant of about sixty, still
fresh and hale. Saveliitch brought the tea canister, and asked for a
fire that he might make me a cup or two of tea, of which, certainly, I
never had more need. The host hastened to wait upon him. "What has become of our guide? Where is he?" I asked Saveliitch. "Here, your excellency," replied a voice from above. I raised my eyes to the recess above the stove, and I saw a black beard
and two sparkling eyes. "Well, are you cold?" "How could I not be cold," answered he, "in a little caftan all holes? I
had a _touloup_, but, it's no good hiding it, I left it yesterday in
pawn at the brandy shop; the cold did not seem to me then so keen." At this moment the host re-entered with the boiling _samovar_. [20] I
offered our guide a cup of tea. He at once jumped down. I was struck by his appearance. He was a man about forty, middle height,
thin, but broad-shouldered. His black beard was beginning to turn grey;
his large quick eyes roved incessantly around. In his face there was an
expression rather pleasant, but slightly mischievous. His hair was cut
short. He wore a little torn _armak_,[21] and wide Tartar trousers. I offered him a cup of tea; he tasted it, and made a wry face. "Do me the favour, your excellency," said he to me, "to give me a glass
of brandy; we Cossacks do not generally drink tea." I willingly acceded to his desire. The host took from one of the shelves
of the press a jug and a glass, approached him, and, having looked him
well in the face--

"Well, well," said he, "so here you are again in our part of the world. Where, in heaven's name, do you come from now?" My guide winked in a meaning manner, and replied by the well-known
saying--

"The sparrow was flying about in the orchard; he was eating hempseed;
the grandmother threw a stone at him, and missed him. And you, how are
you all getting on?" "How are we all getting on?" rejoined the host, still speaking in
proverbs. "Vespers were beginning to ring, but the wife of the _pope_[22] forbid
it; the pope went away on a visit, and the devils are abroad in the
churchyard." "Shut up, uncle," retorted the vagabond. "When it rains there will be
mushrooms, and when you find mushrooms you will find a basket to put
them in. But now" (he winked a second time) "put your axe behind your
back,[23] the gamekeeper is abroad. To the health of your excellency." So saying he took the glass, made the sign of the cross, and swallowed
his brandy at one gulp, then, bowing to me, returned to his lair above
the stove. I could not then understand a single word of the thieves' slang they
employed. It was only later on that I understood that they were talking
about the army of the Yaik, which had only just been reduced to
submission after the revolt of 1772. [24]

Saveliitch listened to them talking with a very discontented manner, and
cast suspicious glances, sometimes on the host and sometimes on the
guide. The kind of inn where we had sought shelter stood in the very middle of
the steppe, far from the road and from any dwelling, and certainly was
by no means unlikely to be a robber resort. But what could we do? We
could not dream of resuming our journey. Saveliitch's uneasiness amused
me very much. I stretched myself on a bench. My old retainer at last
decided to get up on the top of the stove,[25] while the host lay down
on the floor. They all soon began to snore, and I myself soon fell dead
asleep. When I awoke, somewhat late, on the morrow I saw that the storm was
over. The sun shone brightly; the snow stretched afar like a dazzling
sheet. The horses were already harnessed. I paid the host, who named
such a mere trifle as my reckoning that Saveliitch did not bargain as he
usually did. His suspicions of the evening before were quite gone. I
called the guide to thank him for what he had done for us, and I told
Saveliitch to give him half a rouble as a reward. Saveliitch frowned. "Half a rouble!" cried he. "Why? Because you were good enough to bring
him yourself to the inn? I will obey you, excellency, but we have no
half roubles to spare. If we take to giving gratuities to everybody we
shall end by dying of hunger." I could not dispute the point with Saveliitch; my money, according to my
solemn promise, was entirely at his disposal. Nevertheless, I was
annoyed that I was not able to reward a man who, if he had not brought
me out of fatal danger, had, at least, extricated me from an awkward
dilemma. "Well," I said, coolly, to Saveliitch, "if you do not wish to give him
half a rouble give him one of my old coats; he is too thinly clad. Give
him my hareskin _touloup_." "Have mercy on me, my father, Petr' Andrejitch!" exclaimed Saveliitch. "What need has he of your _touloup_? He will pawn it for drink, the
dog, in the first tavern he comes across." "That, my dear old fellow, is no longer your affair," said the vagabond,
"whether I drink it or whether I do not. His excellency honours me with
a coat off his own back. [26] It is his excellency's will, and it is your
duty as a serf not to kick against it, but to obey." "You don't fear heaven, robber that you are," said Saveliitch, angrily. "You see the child is still young and foolish, and you are quite ready
to plunder him, thanks to his kind heart. What do you want with a
gentleman's _touloup_? You could not even put it across your cursed
broad shoulders." "I beg you will not play the wit," I said to my follower. "Get the cloak
quickly." "Oh! good heavens!" exclaimed Saveliitch, bemoaning himself. "A
_touloup_ of hareskin, and still quite new! And to whom is it
given?--to a drunkard in rags." However, the _touloup_ was brought. The vagabond began trying it on
directly. The _touloup_, which had already become somewhat too small for
me, was really too tight for him. Still, with some trouble, he succeeded
in getting it on, though he cracked all the seams. Saveliitch gave, as
it were, a subdued howl when he heard the threads snapping. As to the vagabond, he was very pleased with my present. He ushered me
to my _kibitka_, and saying, with a low bow, "Thanks, your excellency;
may Heaven reward you for your goodness; I shall never forget, as long
as I live, your kindnesses," went his way, and I went mine, without
paying any attention to Saveliitch's sulkiness. I soon forgot the snowstorm, the guide, and my hareskin _touloup_. Upon arrival at Orenburg I immediately waited on the General. I found a
tall man, already bent by age. His long hair was quite white; his old
uniform reminded one of a soldier of Tzarina Anne's[27] time, and he
spoke with a strongly-marked German accent. I gave him my father's
letter. Upon reading his name he cast a quick glance at me. "Ah," said he, "it was but a short time Andrej Petrovitch was your age,
and now he has got a fine fellow of a son. Well, well--time, time." He opened the letter, and began reading it half aloud, with a running
fire of remarks--

"'Sir, I hope your excellency'--What's all this ceremony? For shame! I
wonder he's not ashamed of himself! Of course, discipline before
everything; but is it thus one writes to an old comrade? 'Your
excellency will not have forgotten'--Humph! 'And when under the late
Field Marshal Muenich during the campaign, as well as little
Caroline'--Eh! eh! _bruder_! So he still remembers our old pranks? 'Now
for business. I send you my rogue'--Hum! 'Hold him with gloves of
porcupine-skin'--What does that mean--'gloves of porcupine-skin?' It
must be a Russian proverb. "What does it mean, 'hold with gloves of porcupine-skin?'" resumed he,
turning to me. "It means," I answered him, with the most innocent face in the world,
"to treat someone kindly, not too strictly, to leave him plenty of
liberty; that is what holding with gloves of porcupine-skin means." "Humph! I understand." "'And not give him any liberty'--No; it seems that porcupine-skin gloves
means something quite different.' Enclosed is his commission'--Where is
it then? Ah! here it is!--'in the roll of the Semenofsky Regiment'--All
right; everything necessary shall be done. 'Allow me to salute you
without ceremony, and like an old friend and comrade'--Ah! he has at
last remembered it all," etc., etc. "Well, my little father," said he, after he had finished the letter and
put my commission aside, "all shall be done; you shall be an officer in
the ----th Regiment, and you shall go to-morrow to Fort Belogorsk, where
you will serve under the orders of Commandant Mironoff, a brave and
worthy man. There you will really serve and learn discipline. There is
nothing for you to do at Orenburg; amusement is bad for a young man. To-day I invite you to dine with me." "Worse and worse," thought I to myself. "What good has it done me to
have been a sergeant in the Guard from my cradle? Where has it brought
me? To the ----th Regiment, and to a fort stranded on the frontier of
the Kirghiz-Kaisak Steppes!" I dined at Andrej Karlovitch's, in the company of his old aide de camp. Strict German economy was the rule at his table, and I think that the
dread of a frequent guest at his bachelor's table contributed not a
little to my being so promptly sent away to a distant garrison. The next day I took leave of the General, and started for my
destination. CHAPTER III. THE LITTLE POET. The little fort of Belogorsk lay about forty versts[28] from Orenburg. From this town the road followed along by the rugged banks of the R.
Yaik. The river was not yet frozen, and its lead-coloured waves looked
almost black contrasted with its banks white with snow. Before me
stretched the Kirghiz Steppes. I was lost in thought, and my reverie was
tinged with melancholy. Garrison life did not offer me much attraction. I tried to imagine what my future chief, Commandant Mironoff, would be
like. I saw in my mind's eye a strict, morose old man, with no ideas
beyond the service, and prepared to put me under arrest for the smallest
trifle. Twilight was coming on; we were driving rather quickly. "Is it far from here to the fort?" I asked the driver. "Why, you can see it from here," replied he. I began looking all round, expecting to see high bastions, a wall, and a
ditch. I saw nothing but a little village, surrounded by a wooden
palisade. On one side three or four haystacks, half covered with snow;
on another a tumble-down windmill, whose sails, made of coarse limetree
bark, hung idly down. "But where is the fort?" I asked, in surprise. "There it is yonder, to be sure," rejoined the driver, pointing out to
me the village which we had just reached. I noticed near the gateway an old iron cannon. The streets were narrow
and crooked, nearly all the _izbas_[29] were thatched. I ordered him to
take me to the Commandant, and almost directly my _kibitka_ stopped
before a wooden house, built on a knoll near the church, which was also
in wood. No one came to meet me. From the steps I entered the ante-room. An old
pensioner, seated on a table, was busy sewing a blue patch on the elbow
of a green uniform. I begged him to announce me. "Come in, my little father," he said to me; "we are all at home." I went into a room, very clean, but furnished in a very homely manner. In one corner there stood a dresser with crockery on it. Against the
wall hung, framed and glazed, an officer's commission. Around this were
arranged some bark pictures,[30] representing the "Taking of Kustrin"
and of "Otchakof,"[31] "The Choice of the Betrothed," and the "Burial of
the Cat by the Mice." Near the window sat an old woman wrapped in a
shawl, her head tied up in a handkerchief. She was busy winding thread,
which a little, old, one-eyed man in an officer's uniform was holding on
his outstretched hands. "What do you want, my little father?" she said to me, continuing her
employment. I answered that I had been ordered to join the service here, and that,
therefore, I had hastened to report myself to the Commandant. With these
words I turned towards the little, old, one-eyed man, whom I had taken
for the Commandant. But the good lady interrupted the speech with which
I had prepared myself. "Ivan Kouzmitch[32] is not at home," said she. "He is gone to see Father
Garassim. But it's all the same, I am his wife. Be so good as to love us
and take us into favour. [33] Sit down, my little father." She called a servant, and bid her tell the "_ouriadnik_"[34] to come. The little, old man was looking curiously at me with his one eye. "Might I presume to ask you," said he to me, "in what regiment you have
deigned to serve?" I satisfied his curiosity. "And might I ask you," continued he, "why you have condescended to
exchange from the Guard into our garrison?" I replied that it was by order of the authorities. "Probably for conduct unbecoming an officer of the Guard?" rejoined my
indefatigable questioner. "Will you be good enough to stop talking nonsense?" the wife of the
Commandant now said to him. "You can see very well that this young man
is tired with his journey. He has something else to do than to answer
your questions. Hold your hands better. And you, my little father," she
continued, turning to me, "do not bemoan yourself too much because you
have been shoved into our little hole of a place; you are not the first,
and you will not be the last. One may suffer, but one gets accustomed to
it. For instance, Chvabrine, Alexey Ivanytch,[35] was transferred to us
four years ago on account of a murder. Heaven knows what ill-luck befel
him. It happened one day he went out of the town with a lieutenant, and
they had taken swords, and they set to pinking one another, and Alexey
Ivanytch killed the lieutenant, and before a couple of witnesses. Well,
well, there's no heading ill-luck!" At this moment the "_ouriadnik_," a young and handsome Cossack, came in. "Maximitch," the Commandant's wife said to him, "find a quarter for this
officer, and a clean one." "I obey, Vassilissa Igorofna,"[36] replied the "_ouriadnik_." "Ought not
his excellency to go to Iwan Polejaieff?" "You are doting, Maximitch," retorted the Commandant's wife; "Polejaieff
has already little enough room; and, besides, he is my gossip; and then
he does not forget that we are his superiors. Take the gentleman--What
is your name, my little father?" "Petr' Andrejitch." "Take Petr' Andrejitch to Semeon Kouzoff's. The rascal let his horse get
into my kitchen garden. Is everything in order, Maximitch?" "Thank heaven! all is quiet," replied the Cossack. "Only Corporal
Prokoroff has been fighting in the bathhouse with the woman Oustinia
Pegoulina for a pail of hot water." "Iwan Ignatiitch,"[37] said the Commandant's wife to the little one-eyed
man, "you must decide between Prokoroff and Oustinia which is to blame,
and punish both of them; and you, Maximitch, go, in heaven's name! Petr'
Andrejitch, Maximitch will take you to your lodging." I took leave. The "_ouriadnik"_ led me to an _izba_, which stood on the
steep bank of the river, quite at the far end of the little fort. Half
the _izba_ was occupied by the family of Semeon Kouzoff, the other half
was given over to me. This half consisted of a tolerably clean room,
divided into two by a partition. Saveliitch began to unpack, and I looked out of the narrow window. I saw
stretching out before me a bare and dull steppe; on one side there stood
some huts. Some fowls were wandering down the street. An old woman,
standing on a doorstep, holding in her hand a trough, was calling to
some pigs, the pigs replying by amicable grunts. And it was in such a country as this I was condemned to pass my youth! Overcome by bitter grief, I left the window, and went to bed supperless,
in spite of Saveliitch's remonstrances, who continued to repeat, in a
miserable tone--

"Oh, good heavens! he does not deign to eat anything. What would my
mistress say if the child should fall ill?" On the morrow, I had scarcely begun to dress before the door of my room
opened, and a young officer came in. He was undersized, but, in spite of
irregular features, his bronzed face had a remarkably gay and lively
expression. "I beg your pardon," said he to me in French,[38] "for coming thus
unceremoniously to make your acquaintance. I heard of your arrival
yesterday, and the wish to see at last a human being took such
possession of me that I could not resist any longer. You will understand
that when you have been here some time!" I easily guessed that this was the officer sent away from the Guard in
consequence of the duel. We made acquaintance. Chvabrine was very witty. His conversation was
lively and interesting. He described to me, with, much raciness and
gaiety, the Commandant's family, the society of the fort, and, in short,
all the country where my fate had led me. I was laughing heartily when the same pensioner whom I had seen patching
his uniform in the Commandant's ante-room, came in with an invitation to
dinner for me from Vassilissa Igorofna. Chvabrine said he should accompany me. As we drew near the Commandant's house we saw in the square about twenty
little old pensioners, with long pigtails and three-cornered hats. They
were drawn up in line. Before them stood the Commandant, a tall, old
man, still hale, in a dressing-gown and a cotton nightcap. As soon as he perceived us he came up, said a few pleasant words to me,
and went back to the drill. We were going to stop and see the
manoeuvres, but he begged us to go at once to Vassilissa Igorofna's,
promising to follow us directly. "Here," said he, "there's really
nothing to see." Vassilissa Igorofna received us with simplicity and kindness, and
treated me as if she had known me a long time. The pensioner and
Palashka were laying the cloth. "What possesses my Ivan Kouzmitch to-day to drill his troops so long?" remarked the Commandant's wife. "Palashka, go and fetch him for dinner. And what can have become of Masha? "[39]

Hardly had she said the name than a young girl of sixteen came into the
room. She had a fresh, round face, and her hair was smoothly put back
behind her ears, which were red with shyness and modesty. She did not
please me very much at first sight; I looked at her with prejudice. Chvabrine had described Marya, the Commandant's daughter, to me as being
rather silly. She went and sat down in a corner, and began to sew. Still
the "_chtchi_"[40] had been brought in. Vassilissa Igorofna, not seeing
her husband come back, sent Palashka for the second time to call him. "Tell the master that the visitors are waiting, and the soup is getting
cold. Thank heaven, the drill will not run away. He will have plenty of
time to shout as much as he likes." The Commandant soon appeared, accompanied by the little old one-eyed
man. "What does all this mean, my little father?" said his wife to him. "Dinner has been ready a long time, and we cannot make you come." "But don't you see, Vassilissa Igorofna," replied Ivan Kouzmitch, "I
was very busy drilling my little soldiers." "Nonsense," replied she, "that's only a boast; they are past service,
and you don't know much about it. You should have stayed at home, and
said your prayers; that would have been much better for you. My dear
guests, pray sit down to table." We took our places. Vassilissa Igorofna never ceased talking for a
moment, and overwhelmed me with questions. Who were my parents, were
they alive, where did they live, and what was their income? When she
learnt that my father had three hundred serfs--

"Well!" she exclaimed, "there are rich people in this world! And as to
us, my little father, we have as to souls[41] only the servant girl,
Palashka. Well, thank heaven, we get along little by little. We have
only one care on our minds--Masha, a girl who must be married. And what
dowry has she got? A comb and two-pence to pay for a bath twice a year. If only she could light on some honest man! If not she must remain an
old maid!" I glanced at Marya Ivanofna. [42] She had become quite red, and tears
were rolling down, even into her plate. I was sorry for her, and I
hastened to change the conversation. "I have heard," I exclaimed (very much to the point), "that the Bashkirs
intend to attack your fort." "Who told you that, my little father?" replied Ivan Kouzmitch. "I heard it said at Orenburg," replied I. "That's all rubbish," said the Commandant. "We have not heard a word of
it for ever so long. The Bashkir people have been thoroughly awed, and
the Kirghiz, too, have had some good lessons. They won't dare to attack
us, and if they venture to do so I'll give them such a fright that they
won't stir for ten years at least." "And you are not afraid," I continued, addressing the Commandant's wife,
"to stay in a fort liable to such dangers?" "It's all a question of custom, my little father," answered she. "It's
twenty years ago now since we were transferred from the regiment here. You would never believe how frightened I used to be of those confounded
Pagans. If ever I chanced to see their hairy caps, or hear their howls,
believe me, my little father, I nearly died of it. And now I am so
accustomed to it that I should not budge an inch if I was told that the
rascals were prowling all around the fort." "Vassilissa Igorofna is a very brave lady," remarked Chvabrine, gravely. "Ivan Kouzmitch knows something of that." "Oh! yes, indeed," said Ivan Kouzmitch, "she's no coward." "And Marya Ivanofna," I asked her mother, "is she as bold as you?" "Masha!" replied the lady; "no, Masha is a coward. Till now she has
never been able to hear a gun fired without trembling all over. It is
two years ago now since Ivan Kouzmitch took it into his head to fire his
cannon on my birthday; she was so frightened, the poor little dove, she
nearly ran away into the other world. Since that day we have never fired
that confounded cannon any more." We got up from table; the Commandant and his wife went to take their
siesta, and I went to Chvabrine's quarters, where we passed the evening
together. CHAPTER IV. THE DUEL. Several weeks passed, during which my life in Fort Belogorsk became not
merely endurable, but even pleasant. I was received like one of the
family in the household of the Commandant. The husband and wife were
excellent people. Ivan Kouzmitch, who had been a child of the regiment,
had become an officer, and was a simple, uneducated man, but good and
true. His wife led him completely, which, by the way, very well suited
his natural laziness. It was Vassilissa Igorofna who directed all military business as she
did that of her household, and commanded in the little fort as she did
in her house. Marya Ivanofna soon ceased being shy, and we became better
acquainted. I found her a warm-hearted and sensible girl. By degrees I
became attached to this honest family, even to Iwan Ignatiitch, the
one-eyed lieutenant, whom Chvabrine accused of secret intrigue with
Vassilissa Igorofna, an accusation which had not even a shadow of
probability. But that did not matter to Chvabrine. I became an officer. My work did not weigh heavily upon me. In this
heaven-blest fort there was no drill to do, no guard to mount, nor
review to pass. Sometimes the Commandant instructed his soldiers for his
own pleasure. But he had not yet succeeded in teaching them to know
their right hand from their left. Chvabrine had some French books; I
took to reading, and I acquired a taste for literature. In the morning I
used to read, and I tried my hand at translations, sometimes even at
compositions in verse. Nearly every day I dined at the Commandant's,
where I usually passed the rest of the day. In the evening, Father
Garasim used to drop in, accompanied by his wife, Akoulina, who was the
sturdiest gossip of the neighbourhood. It is scarcely necessary to say
that every day we met, Chvabrine and I. Still hour by hour his
conversation pleased me less. His everlasting jokes about the
Commandant's family, and, above all, his witty remarks upon Marya
Ivanofna, displeased me very much. I had no other society but that of
this family within the little fort, but I did not want any other. In spite of all the prophecies, the Bashkirs did not revolt. Peace
reigned around our little fort. But this peace was suddenly troubled by
war within. I have already said I dabbled a little in literature. My attempts were
tolerable for the time, and Soumarokoff[43] himself did justice to them
many years later. One day I happened to write a little song which
pleased me. It is well-known that under colour of asking advice, authors
willingly seek a benevolent listener; I copied out my little song, and
took it to Chvabrine, the only person in the fort who could appreciate a
poetical work. After a short preface, I drew my manuscript from my pocket, and read to
him the following verses:[44]

  "By waging war with thoughts of love
  I try to forget my beauty;
  Alas! by flight from Masha,
  I hope my freedom to regain! "But the eyes which enslaved me are ever before me. My soul have they troubled and ruined my rest. "Oh! Masha, who knowest my sorrows,
    Seeing me in this miserable plight,
    Take pity on thy captive." "What do you think of that?" I said to Chvabrine, expecting praise as a
tribute due to me. But to my great displeasure Chvabrine, who usually
showed kindness, told me flatly my song was worth nothing. "Why?" I asked, trying to hide my vexation. "Because such verses," replied he, "are only worthy of my master
Trediakofski,[45] and, indeed, remind me very much of his little erotic
couplets." He took the MSS. from my hand and began unmercifully criticizing each
verse, each word, cutting me up in the most spiteful way. That was too
much for me; I snatched the MSS. out of his hands, and declared that
never, no never, would I ever again show him one of my compositions. Chvabrine did not laugh the less at this threat. "Let us see," said he, "if you will be able to keep your word; poets
have as much need of an audience as Ivan Kouzmitch has need of his
'_petit verre_' before dinner. And who is this Masha to whom you declare
your tender sentiments and your ardent flame? Surely it must be Marya
Ivanofna?" "That does not concern you," replied I, frowning; "I don't ask for your
advice nor your suppositions." "Oh! oh! a vain poet and a discreet lover," continued Chvabrine,
irritating me more and more. "Listen to a little friendly advice: if you
wish to succeed, I advise you not to stick at songs." "What do you mean, sir?" I exclaimed; "explain yourself if you please." "With pleasure," rejoined he. "I mean that if you want to be well with
Masha Mironoff, you need only make her a present of a pair of earrings
instead of your languishing verses." My blood boiled. "Why have you such an opinion of her?" I asked him, restraining with
difficulty my indignation. "Because," replied he, with a satanic smile, "because I know by
experience her views and habits." "You lie, you rascal!" I shouted at him, in fury. "You are a shameless
liar." Chvabrine's face changed. "This I cannot overlook," he said; "you shall give me satisfaction." "Certainly, whenever you like," replied I, joyfully; for at that moment
I was ready to tear him in pieces. I rushed at once to Iwan Ignatiitch, whom I found with a needle in his
hand. In obedience to the order of the Commandant's wife, he was
threading mushrooms to be dried for the winter. "Ah! Petr' Andrejitch," said he, when he saw me; "you are welcome. On
what errand does heaven send you, if I may presume to ask?" I told him in a few words that I had quarrelled with Alexey Ivanytch,
and that I begged him, Iwan Ignatiitch, to be my second. Iwan Ignatiitch
heard me till I had done with great attention, opening wide his single
eye. "You deign to tell me," said he, "that you wish to kill Alexey Ivanytch,
and that I am to be witness? Is not that what you mean, if I may presume
to ask you?" "Exactly." "But, good heavens, Petr' Andrejitch, what folly have you got in your
head? You and Alexey Ivanytch have insulted one another; well, a fine
affair! You needn't wear an insult hung round your neck. He has said
silly things to you, give him some impertinence; he in return will give
you a blow, give him in return a box on the ear; he another, you
another, and then you part. And presently we oblige you to make peace. Whereas now--is it a good thing to kill your neighbour, if I may presume
to ask you? Even if it were _you_ who should kill _him_! May heaven be
with him, for I do not love him. But if it be he who is to run you
through, you will have made a nice business of it. Who will pay for the
broken pots, allow me to ask?" The arguments of the prudent officer did not deter me. My resolution
remained firm. "As you like," said Iwan Ignatiitch, "do as you please; but what good
should I do as witness? People fight; what is there extraordinary in
that, allow me to ask? Thank heaven I have seen the Swedes and the
Turks at close quarters, and I have seen a little of everything." I endeavoured to explain to him as best I could the duty of a second,
but I found Iwan Ignatiitch quite unmanageable. "Do as you like," said he; "if I meddled in the matter, it would be to
go and tell Ivan Kouzmitch, according to the rules of the service, that
a criminal deed is being plotted in the fort, in opposition to the
interests of the crown, and remark to the Commandant how advisable it
would be that he should think of taking the necessary measures." I was frightened, and I begged Iwan Ignatiitch not to say anything to
the Commandant. With great difficulty I managed to quiet him, and at
last made him promise to hold his tongue, when I left him in peace. As usual I passed the evening at the Commandant's. I tried to appear
lively and unconcerned in order not to awaken any suspicions, and avoid
any too curious questions. But I confess I had none of the coolness of
which people boast who have found themselves in the same position. All
that evening I felt inclined to be soft-hearted and sentimental. Marya Ivanofna pleased me more than usual. The thought that perhaps I
was seeing her for the last time gave her, in my eyes, a touching grace. Chvabrine came in. I took him aside and told him about my interview with
Iwan Ignatiitch. "Why any seconds?" he said to me, dryly. "We shall do very well without
them." We decided to fight on the morrow behind the haystacks, at six o'clock
in the morning. Seeing us talking in such a friendly manner, Iwan Ignatiitch, full of
joy, nearly betrayed us. "You should have done that long ago," he said to me, with a face of
satisfaction. "Better a hollow peace than an open quarrel." "What is that you say, Iwan Ignatiitch?" said the Commandant's wife, who
was playing patience in a corner. "I did not exactly catch what you
said." Iwan Ignatiitch, who saw my face darken, recollected his promise, became
confused, and did not know what to say. Chvabrine came to the rescue. "Iwan Ignatiitch," said he, "approves of the compact we have made." "And with whom, my little father, did you quarrel?" "Why, with Petr' Andrejitch, to be sure, and we even got to high words." "What for?" "About a mere trifle, over a little song." "Fine thing to quarrel over--a little song! How did it happen?" "Thus. Petr' Andrejitch lately composed a song, and he began singing it
to me this morning. So I--I struck up mine, 'Captain's daughter, don't
go abroad at dead of night!' As we did not sing in the same key, Petr'
Andrejitch became angry. But afterwards he reflected that 'every one is
free to sing what he pleases,' and that's all." Chvabrine's insolence made me furious, but no one else, except myself,
understood his coarse allusions. Nobody, at least, took up the subject. From poetry the conversation passed to poets in general, and the
Commandant made the remark that they were all rakes and confirmed
drunkards; he advised me as a friend to give up poetry as a thing
opposed to the service, and leading to no good. Chvabrine's presence was to me unbearable. I hastened to take leave of
the Commandant and his family. After coming home I looked at my sword; I
tried its point, and I went to bed after ordering Saveliitch to wake me
on the morrow at six o'clock. On the following day, at the appointed hour, I was already behind the
haystacks, waiting for my foeman. It was not long before he appeared. "We may be surprised," he said to me; "we must make haste." We laid aside our uniforms, and in our waistcoats we drew our swords
from the scabbard. At this moment Iwan Ignatiitch, followed by five pensioners, came out
from behind a heap of hay. He gave us an order to go at once before the
Commandant. We sulkily obeyed. The soldiers surrounded us, and we
followed Iwan Ignatiitch who brought us along in triumph, walking with
a military step, with majestic gravity. We entered the Commandant's house. Iwan Ignatiitch threw the door wide
open, and exclaimed, emphatically--

"They are taken!" Vassilissa Igorofna ran to meet us. "What does all this mean? Plotting assassination in our very fort! Ivan
Kouzmitch, put them under arrest at once. Petr' Andrejitch, Alexey
Ivanytch, give up your swords, give them up--give them up. Palashka,
take away the swords to the garret. Petr' Andrejitch, I did not expect
this of you; aren't you ashamed of yourself? As to Alexey Ivanytch, it's
different; he was transferred from the Guard for sending a soul into the
other world. He does not believe in our Lord! But do you wish to do
likewise?" Ivan Kouzmitch approved of all his wife said, repeating--

"Look there, now, Vassilissa Igorofna is quite right--duels are
formally forbidden by martial law." Palashka had taken away our swords, and had carried them to the garret. I could not help laughing. Chvabrine looked grave. "In spite of all the respect I have for you," he said, coolly, to the
Commandant's wife, "I cannot help remarking that you are giving yourself
useless trouble by trying us at your tribunal. Leave this cure do Ivan
Kouzmitch--it is his business." "What! what! my little father!" retorted the Commandant's wife, "are not
husband and wife the same flesh and spirit? Ivan Kouzmitch, are you
trifling? Lock them up separately, and keep them on broad and water till
this ridiculous idea goes out of their heads. And Father Garasim shall
make them do penance that they may ask pardon of heaven and of men." Ivan Kouzmitch did not know what to do. Marya Ivanofna was very pale. Little by little the storm sank. The Commandant's wife became more easy
to deal with. She ordered us to make friends. Palashka brought us back
our swords. We left the house apparently reconciled. Ivan Ignatiitch
accompanied us. "Weren't you ashamed," I said to him, angrily, "thus to denounce us to
the Commandant after giving me your solemn word not to do so?" "As God is holy," replied he, "I said nothing to Ivan Kouzmitch; it was
Vassilissa Igorofna who wormed it all out of me. It was she who took all
the necessary measures unknown to the Commandant. As it is, heaven be
praised that it has all ended in this way." After this reply he returned to his quarters, and I remained alone with
Chvabrine. "Our affair can't end thus," I said to him. "Certainly not," rejoined Chvabrine. "You shall wash out your insolence
in blood. But they will watch us; we must pretend to be friends for a
few days. Good-bye." And we parted as if nothing had happened. Upon my return to the Commandant's, I sat down according to my custom by
Marya Ivanofna; her father was not at home, and her mother was engaged
with household cares. We spoke in a low voice Marya Ivanofna reproached
me tenderly for the anxiety my quarrel with Chvabrine had occasioned
her. "My heart failed me," said she, "when they came to tell us that you were
going to draw swords on each other. How strange men are! For a word
forgotten the next week they are ready to cut each other's throats, and
to sacrifice not only their life, but their honour, and the happiness of
those who--But I am sure it was not you who began the quarrel; it was
Alexey Ivanytch who was the aggressor." "What makes you think so, Marya?" "Why, because--because he is so sneering. I do not like Alexey Ivanytch;
I even dislike him. Yet, all the same, I should not have liked him to
dislike me; it would have made me very uneasy." "And what do you think, Marya Ivanofna, does he dislike you or no?" Marya Ivanofna looked disturbed, and grew very red. "I think," she said, at last, "I think he likes me." "Why?" "Because he proposed to me." "Proposed to you! When?" "Last year, two months before you came." "And you did not consent?" "As you see, Alexey Ivanytch is a man of wit, and of good family, to be
sure, well off, too; but only to think of being obliged to kiss him
before everybody under the marriage crown! No, no; nothing in the world
would induce me." The words of Marya Ivanofna enlightened me, and made many things clear
to me. I understood now why Chvabrine so persistently followed her up. He had probably observed our mutual attraction, and was trying to detach
us one from another. The words which had provoked our quarrel seemed to me the more infamous
when, instead of a rude and coarse joke, I saw in them a premeditated
calumny. The wish to punish the barefaced liar took more entire possession of me,
and I awaited impatiently a favourable moment. I had not to wait long. On the morrow, just as I was busy composing an elegy, and I was biting
my pen as I searched for a rhyme, Chvabrine tapped at my window. I laid
down the pen, and I took up my sword and left the house. "Why delay any longer?" said Chvabrine. "They are not watching us any
more. Let us go to the river-bank; there nobody will interrupt us." We started in silence, and after having gone down a rugged path we
halted at the water's edge and crossed swords. Chvabrine was a better swordsman than I was, but I was stronger and
bolder, and M. Beaupre, who had, among other things, been a soldier, had
given me some lessons in fencing, by which I had profited. Chvabrine did not in the least expect to find in me such a dangerous
foeman. For a long while we could neither of us do the other any harm,
but at last, noticing that Chvabrine was getting tired, I vigorously
attacked him, and almost forced him backwards into the river. Suddenly I heard my own name called in a loud voice. I quickly turned my
head, and saw Saveliitch running towards me down the path. At this
moment I felt a sharp prick in the chest, under the right shoulder, and
I fell senseless. CHAPTER V.

LOVE. When I came to myself I remained some time without understanding what
had befallen me, nor where I chanced to be. I was in bed in an
unfamiliar room, and I felt very weak indeed. Saveliitch was standing by
me, a light in his hand. Someone was unrolling with care the bandages
round my shoulder and chest. Little by little my ideas grew clearer. I
recollected my duel and guessed without any difficulty that I had been
wounded. At this moment the door creaked slightly on its hinges. "Well, how is he getting on?" whispered a voice which thrilled through
me. "Always the same still," replied Saveliitch, sighing; "always
unconscious, as he has now been these four days." I wished to turn, but I had not strength to do so. "Where am I? Who is there?" I said, with difficulty. Marya Ivanofna came
near to my bed and leaned gently over me. "How do you feel?" she said to me. "All right, thank God!" I replied in a weak voice. "It is you, Marya
Ivanofna; tell me--"

I could not finish. Saveliitch exclaimed, joy painted on his face--

"He is coming to himself!--he is coming to himself! Oh! thanks be to
heaven! My father Petr' Andrejitch, have you frightened me enough? Four
days! That seems little enough to say, but--"

Marya Ivanofna interrupted him. "Do not talk to him too much, Saveliitch; he is still very weak." She went away, shutting the door carefully. I felt myself disturbed with confused thoughts. I was evidently in the
house of the Commandant, as Marya Ivanofna could thus come and see me! I
wished to question Saveliitch; but the old man shook his head and turned
a deaf ear. I shut my eyes in displeasure, and soon fell asleep. Upon
waking I called Saveliitch, but in his stead I saw before me Marya
Ivanofna, who greeted me in her soft voice. I cannot describe the
delicious feeling which thrilled through me at this moment, I seized her
hand and pressed it in a transport of delight, while bedewing it with my
tears. Marya did not withdraw it, and all of a sudden I felt upon my
cheek the moist and burning imprint of her lips. A wild flame of love
thrilled through my whole being. "Dear, good Marya Ivanofna," I said to her, "be my wife. Consent to give
me happiness." She became reasonable again. "For heaven's sake, calm yourself," she said, withdrawing her hand. "You
are still in danger; your wound may reopen; be careful of yourself--were
it only for my sake." After these words she went away, leaving me at the height of happiness. I felt that life was given back to me. "She will be mine! She loves me!" This thought filled all my being. From this moment I hourly got better. It was the barber of the regiment
who dressed my wound, for there was no other doctor in all the fort,
and, thank God, he did not attempt any doctoring. Youth and nature
hastened my recovery. All the Commandant's family took the greatest
care of me. Marya Ivanofna scarcely ever left me. It is unnecessary to
say that I seized the first favourable opportunity to resume my
interrupted proposal, and this time Marya heard me more patiently. She
naively avowed to me her love, and added that her parents would, in all
probability, rejoice in her happiness. "But think well about it," she used to say to me. "Will there be no
objections on the part of your family?" These words made me reflect. I had no doubt of my mother's tenderness;
but knowing the character and way of thinking of my father, I foresaw
that my love would not touch him very much, and that he would call it
youthful folly. I frankly confessed this to Marya Ivanofna, but in spite
of this I resolved to write to my father as eloquently as possible to
ask his blessing. I showed my letter to Marya Ivanofna, who found it so
convincing and touching that she had no doubt of success, and gave
herself up to the feelings of her heart with all the confidence of youth
and love. I made peace with Chvabrine during the early days of my convalescence. Ivan Kouzmitch said to me, reproaching me for the duel--

"You know, Petr' Andrejitch, properly speaking, I ought to put you under
arrest; but you are already sufficiently punished without that. As to
Alexey Ivanytch, he is confined by my order, and under strict guard, in
the corn magazine, and Vassilissa Igorofna has his sword under lock and
key. He will have time to reflect and repent at his ease." I was too happy to cherish the least rancour. I began to intercede for
Chvabrine, and the good Commandant, with his wife's leave, agreed to set
him at liberty. Chvabrine came to see me. He expressed deep regret for
all that had occurred, declared it was all his fault, and begged me to
forget the past. Not being of a rancorous disposition, I heartily
forgave him both our quarrel and my wound. I saw in his slander the
irritation of wounded vanity and rejected love, so I generously forgave
my unhappy rival. I was soon completely recovered, and was able to go back to my quarters. I impatiently awaited the answer to my letter, not daring to hope, but
trying to stifle sad forebodings that would arise. I had not yet
attempted any explanation as regarded Vassilissa Igorofna and her
husband. But my courtship could be no surprise to them, as neither Marya
nor myself made any secret of our feelings before them, and we were sure
beforehand of their consent. At last, one fine day, Saveliitch came into my room with a letter in his
hand. I took it trembling. The address was written in my father's hand. This prepared me for something serious, since it was usually my mother
who wrote, and he only added a few lines at the end. For a long time I
could not make up my mind to break the seal. I read over the solemn
address:--

"To my son, Petr' Andrejitch Grineff, District of Orenburg, Fort
Belogorsk." I tried to guess from my father's handwriting in what mood he had
written the letter. At last I resolved to open it, and I did not need to
read more than the first few lines to see that the whole affair was at
the devil. Here are the contents of this letter:--

"My Son Petr',--

"We received the 15th of this month the letter in which you ask our
parental blessing and our consent to your marriage with Marya Ivanofna,
the Mironoff daughter. [46] And not only have I no intention of giving
you either my blessing or my consent, but I intend to come and punish
you well for your follies, like a little boy, in spite of your officer's
rank, because you have shown me that you are not fit to wear the sword
entrusted to you for the defence of your country, and not for fighting
duels with fools like yourself. I shall write immediately to Andrej
Karlovitch to beg him to send you away from Fort Belogorsk to some place
still further removed, so that you may get over this folly. "Upon hearing of your duel and wound your mother fell ill with sorrow,
and she is still confined to her bed. "What will become of you? I pray God may correct you, though I scarcely
dare trust in His goodness. "Your father,

"A.G."

The perusal of this letter aroused in me a medley of feelings. The
harsh expressions which my father had not scrupled to make use of hurt
me deeply; the contempt which he cast on Marya Ivanofna appeared to me
as unjust as it was unseemly; while, finally, the idea of being sent
away from Fort Belogorsk dismayed me. But I was, above all, grieved at
my mother's illness. I was disgusted with Saveliitch, never doubting that it was he who had
made known my duel to my parents. After walking up and down awhile in my
little room, I suddenly stopped short before him, and said to him,
angrily--

"It seems that it did not satisfy you that, thanks to you, I've been
wounded and at death's door, but that you must also want to kill my
mother as well." Saveliitch remained motionless, as it struck by a thunderbolt. "Have pity on me, sir," he exclaimed, almost sobbing. "What is it you
deign to tell me--that I am the cause of your wound? But God knows I was
only running to stand between you and Alexey Ivanytch's sword. Accursed
old age alone prevented me. What have I now done to your mother?" "What did you do?" I retorted. "Who told you to write and denounce me? Were you put in my service to be a spy upon me?" "I denounce you!" replied Saveliitch, in tears. "Oh, good heavens! 