



Produced by An Anonymous Volunteer





A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE

BEING THE MEMOIRS OF GASTON DE BONNE SIEUR DE MARSAC

By Stanley Weyman


Transcriber's Note:

In this Etext, text in italics has been written in capital letters. Many French words in the text have accents, etc. which have been
omitted. CONTENTS. CHAPTER I. THE SPORT OF FOOLS
     CHAPTER II. THE KING OF NAVARRE
     CHAPTER III. BOOT AND SADDLE
     CHAPTER IV. MADEMOISELLE DE LA VIRE
     CHAPTER V.        THE ROAD TO BLOIS
     CHAPTER VI. MY MOTHER'S LODGING
     CHAPTER VII. SIMON FLEIX
     CHAPTER VIII. AN EMPTY ROOM
     CHAPTER IX. THE HOUSE IN THE RUELLE D'ARCY
     CHAPTER X. THE FIGHT ON THE STAIRS
     CHAPTER XI. THE MAN AT THE DOOR
     CHAPTER XII. MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE, BARON DE ROSNY
     CHAPTER XIII. AT ROSNY
     CHAPTER XIV. M. DE RAMBOUILLET
     CHAPTER XV. VILAIN HERODES
     CHAPTER XVI. IN THE KING'S CHAMBER
     CHAPTER XVII. THE JACOBIN MONK
     CHAPTER XVIII. THE OFFER OF THE LEAGUE
     CHAPTER XIX. MEN CALL IT CHANCE
     CHAPTER XX. THE KING'S FACE
     CHAPTER XXI. TWO WOMEN
     CHAPTER XXII. 'LA FEMME DISPOSE'
     CHAPTER XXIII. THE LAST VALOIS
     CHAPTER XXIV. A ROYAL PERIL
     CHAPTER XXV. TERMS OF SURRENDER
     CHAPTER XXVI. MEDITATIONS
     CHAPTER XXVII. TO ME, MY FRIENDS! CHAPTER XXVIII. THE CASTLE ON THE HILL
     CHAPTER XXIX. PESTILENCE AND FAMINE
     CHAPTER XXX. STRICKEN
     CHAPTER XXXI. UNDER THE GREENWOOD
     CHAPTER XXXII. A TAVERN BRAWL
     CHAPTER XXXIII. AT MEUDON
     CHAPTER XXXIV. ''TIS AN ILL WIND'
     CHAPTER XXXV. 'LE ROI EST MORT'
     CHAPTER XXXVI. 'VIVE LE ROI!' A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE. CHAPTER I. THE SPORT OF FOOLS. The death of the Prince of Conde, which occurred in the spring of 1588,
by depriving me of my only patron, reduced me to such straits that the
winter of that year, which saw the King of Navarre come to spend his
Christmas at St. Jean d'Angely, saw also the nadir of my fortunes. I did
not know at this time--I may confess it to-day without shame--wither to
turn for a gold crown or a new scabbard, and neither had nor discerned
any hope of employment. The peace lately patched up at Blois between the
King of France and the League persuaded many of the Huguenots that their
final ruin was at hand; but it could not fill their exhausted treasury
or enable them to put fresh troops into the field. The death of the Prince had left the King of Navarre without a rival
in the affections of the Huguenots; the Vicomte de Turenne, whose
turbulent; ambition already began to make itself felt, and M. de
Chatillon, ranking next to him. It was my ill-fortune, however, to be
equally unknown to all three leaders, and as the month of December which
saw me thus miserably straitened saw me reach the age of forty, which I
regard, differing in that from many, as the grand climacteric of a
man's life, it will be believed that I had need of all the courage which
religion and a campaigner's life could supply. I had been compelled some time before to sell all my horses except the
black Sardinian with the white spot on its forehead; and I now found
myself obliged to part also with my valet de chambre and groom, whom I
dismissed on the same day, paying them their wages with the last links
of gold chain left to me. It was not without grief and dismay that I saw
myself thus stripped of the appurtenances of a man of birth, and driven
to groom my own horse under cover of night. But this was not the worst. My dress, which suffered inevitably from this menial employment, began
in no long time to bear witness to the change in my circumstances; so
that on the day of the King of Navarre's entrance into St. Jean I dared
not face the crowd, always quick to remark the poverty of those above
them, but was fain to keep within doors and wear out my patience in the
garret of the cutler's house in the Rue de la Coutellerie, which was all
the lodging I could now afford. Pardieu, 'tis a strange world! Strange that time seems to me; more
strange compared with this. My reflections on that day, I remember, were
of the most melancholy. Look at it how I would, I could not but see that
my life's spring was over. The crows' feet were gathering about my eyes,
and my moustachios, which seemed with each day of ill-fortune to stand
out more fiercely in proportion as my face grew leaner, were already
grey. I was out at elbows, with empty pockets, and a sword which peered
through the sheath. The meanest ruffler who, with broken feather and
tarnished lace, swaggered at the heels of Turenne, was scarcely to be
distinguished from me. I had still, it is true, a rock and a few barren
acres in Brittany, the last remains of the family property; but the
small small sums which the peasants could afford to pay were sent
annually to Paris, to my mother, who had no other dower. And this I
would not touch, being minded to die a gentleman, even if I could not
live in that estate. Small as were my expectations of success, since I had no one at the
king's side to push my business, nor any friend at Court, I nevertheless
did all I could, in the only way that occurred to me. I drew up a
petition, and lying in wait one day for M. Forget, the King of Navarre's
secretary, placed it in his hand, begging him to lay it before that
prince. He took it, and promised to do so, smoothly, and with as much
lip-civility as I had a right to expect. But the careless manner in
which he doubled up and thrust away the paper on which I had spent so
much labour, no less than the covert sneer of his valet, who ran after
me to get the customary present--and ran, as I still blush to remember,
in vain--warned me to refrain from hope. In this, however, having little save hope left, I failed so signally
as to spend the next day and the day after in a fever of alternate
confidence and despair, the cold fit following the hot with perfect
regularity. At length, on the morning of the third day--I remember it
lacked but three of Christmas--I heard a step on the stairs. My landlord
living in his shop, and the two intervening floors being empty, I had no
doubt the message was for me, and went outside the door to receive it,
my first glance at the messenger confirming me in my highest hopes,
as well as in all I had ever heard of the generosity of the King of
Navarre. For by chance I knew the youth to be one of the royal pages; a
saucy fellow who had a day or two before cried 'Old Clothes' after me in
the street. I was very far from resenting this now, however, nor did
he appear to recall it; so that I drew the happiest augury as to the
contents of the note he bore from the politeness with which he presented
it to me. I would not, however, run the risk of a mistake, and before holding out
my hand, I asked him directly and with formality if it was for me. He answered, with the utmost respect, that it was for the Sieur de
Marsac, and for me if I were he. 'There is an answer, perhaps?' I said, seeing that he lingered. 'The King of Navarre, sir,' he replied, with a low bow, 'will receive
your answer in person, I believe.' And with that, replacing the hat
which he had doffed out of respect to me, he turned and went down the
stairs. Returning to my room, and locking the door, I hastily opened the
missive, which was sealed with a large seal, and wore every appearance
of importance. I found its contents to exceed all my expectations. The
King of Navarre desired me to wait on him at noon on the following day,
and the letter concluded with such expressions of kindness and goodwill
as left me in no doubt of the Prince's intentions. I read it, I confess,
with emotions of joy and gratitude which would better have become a
younger man, and then cheerfully sat down to spend the rest of the
day in making such improvements in my dress as seemed possible. With a
thankful heart I concluded that I had now escaped from poverty, at any
rate from such poverty as is disgraceful to a gentleman; and consoled
myself for the meanness of the appearance I must make at Court with the
reflection that a day or two would mend both habit and fortune. Accordingly, it was with a stout heart that I left my lodgings a few
minutes before noon next morning, and walked towards the castle. It was
some time since I had made so public an appearance in the streets, which
the visit of the King of Navarre's Court; had filled with an unusual
crowd, and I could not help fancying as I passed that some of the
loiterers eyed me with a covert smile; and, indeed, I was shabby enough. But finding that a frown more than sufficed to restore the gravity of
these gentry, I set down the appearance to my own self-consciousness,
and, stroking my moustachios, strode along boldly until I saw before me,
and coming to meet me, the same page who had delivered the note. He stopped in front of me with an air of consequence, and making me a
low bow--whereat I saw the bystanders stare, for he was as gay a young
spark as maid-of-honour could desire--he begged me to hasten, as the
king awaited me in his closet. 'He has asked for you twice, sir,' he continued importantly, the feather
of his cap almost sweeping the ground. 'I think,' I answered, quickening my steps, 'that the king's letter says
noon, young sir. If I am late on such an occasion, he has indeed cause
to complain of me.' 'Tut, tut!' he rejoined waving his hand with a dandified 'It is no
matter. One man may steal a horse when another may not look over the
wall, you know.' A man may be gray-haired, he may be sad-complexioned, and yet he may
retain some of the freshness of youth. On receiving this indication of a
favour exceeding all expectation, I remember I felt the blood rise to
my face, and experienced the most lively gratitude. I wondered who had
spoken in my behalf, who had befriended me; and concluding at last that
my part in the affair at Brouage had come to the king's ears, though I
could not conceive through whom, I passed through the castle gates with
an air of confidence and elation which was not unnatural, I think, under
the circumstances. Thence, following my guide, I mounted the ramp and
entered the courtyard. A number of grooms and valets were lounging here, some leading horses
to and fro, others exchanging jokes with the wenches who leaned from
the windows, while their fellows again stamped up and down to keep
their feet warm, or played ball against the wall in imitation of their
masters. Such knaves are ever more insolent than their betters; but
I remarked that they made way for me with respect, and with rising
spirits, yet a little irony, I reminded myself as I mounted the stairs
of the words, 'whom the king delighteth to honour!' Reaching the head of the flight, where was a soldier on guard, the page
opened the door of the antechamber, and standing aside bade me enter. I
did so, and heard the door close behind me. For a moment I stood still, bashful and confused. It seemed to me that
there were a hundred people in the room, and that half the eyes which
met mine were women's, Though I was not altogether a stranger to such
state as the Prince of Conde had maintained, this crowded anteroom
filled me with surprise, and even with a degree of awe, of which I was
the next moment ashamed. True, the flutter of silk and gleam of jewels
surpassed anything I had then seen, for my fortunes had never led me
to the king's Court; but an instant's reflection reminded me that my
fathers had held their own in such scenes, and with a bow regulated
rather by this thought than by the shabbiness of my dress, I advanced
amid a sudden silence. 'M. de Marsac!' the page announced, in a tone which sounded a little
odd in my ears; so much so, that I turned quickly to look at him. He was
gone, however, and when I turned again the eyes which met mine were
full of smiles. A young girl who stood near me tittered. Put out of
countenance by this, I looked round in embarrassment to find someone to
whom I might apply. The room was long and narrow, panelled in chestnut, with a row of
windows on the one hand, and two fireplaces, now heaped with glowing
logs, on the other. Between the fireplaces stood a rack of arms. Round
the nearer hearth lounged a group of pages, the exact counterparts of
the young blade who had brought me hither; and talking with these were
as many young gentlewomen. Two great hounds lay basking in the heat,
and coiled between them, with her head on the back of the larger, was a
figure so strange that at another time I should have doubted my eyes. It
wore the fool's motley and cap and bells, but a second glance showed me
the features were a woman's. A torrent of black hair flowed loose about
her neck, her eyes shone with wild merriment, and her face, keen, thin,
and hectic, glared at me from the dog's back. Beyond her, round the
farther fireplace, clustered more than a score of gallants and ladies,
of whom one presently advanced to me. 'Sir,' he said politely--and I wished I could match his bow--'you wished
to see--?' 'The King of Navarre,' I answered, doing my best. He turned to the group behind him, and said, in a peculiarly even,
placid tone, 'He wishes to see the King of Navarre.' Then in solemn
silence he bowed to me again and went back to his fellows. Upon the instant, and before I could make up my mind how to take this, a
second tripped forward, and saluting me, said, 'M. de Marsac, I think?' 'At your service, sir,' I rejoined. In my eagerness to escape the gaze
of all those eyes, and the tittering which was audible behind me, I took
a step forward to be in readiness to follow him. But he gave no sign. 'M. de Marsac to see the King of Navarre' was all he said, speaking as
the other had close to those behind. And with that he too wheeled round
and went back to the fire. I stared, a first faint suspicion of the truth aroused in my mind. Before I could act upon it, however--in such a situation it was no
easy task to decide how to act--a third advanced with the same measured
steps. 'By appointment I think, sir?' he said, bowing lower than the
others. 'Yes,' I replied sharply, beginning to grow warm, 'by appointment at
noon.' 'M. de Marsac,' he announced in a sing-song tone to those behind him,
'to see the King of Navarre by appointment at noon.' And with a second
bow--while I grew scarlet with mortification he too wheeled gravely
round and returned to the fireplace. I saw another preparing to advance, but he came too late. Whether my
face of anger and bewilderment was too much for them, or some among
them lacked patience to see the end, a sudden uncontrollable shout of
laughter, in which all the room joined, cut short the farce. God knows
it hurt me: I winced, I looked this way and that, hoping here or there
to find sympathy and help. But it seemed to me that the place rang
with gibes, that every panel framed, however I turned myself, a cruel,
sneering face. One behind me cried 'Old Clothes,' and when I turned
the other hearth whispered the taunt. It added a thousandfold to my
embarrassment that there was in all a certain orderliness, so that while
no one moved, and none, while I looked at them, raised their voices, I
seemed the more singled out, and placed as a butt in the midst. One face amid the pyramid of countenances which hid the farther
fireplace so burned itself into my recollection in that miserable
moment, that I never thereafter forgot it; a small, delicate woman's
face, belonging to a young girl who stood boldly in front of her
companions. It was a face full of pride, and, as I saw it then, of
scorn--scorn that scarcely deigned to laugh; while the girl's graceful
figure, slight and maidenly, yet perfectly proportioned, seemed instinct
with the same feeling of contemptuous amusement. The play, which seemed long enough to me, might have lasted longer,
seeing that no one there had pity on me, had I not, in my desperation,
espied a door at the farther end of the room, and concluded, seeing no
other, that it was the door of the king's bedchamber. The mortification
I was suffering was so great that I did not hesitate, but advanced with
boldness towards it. On the instant there was a lull in the laughter
round me, and half a dozen voices called on me to stop. 'I have come to see the king,' I answered, turning on them fiercely, for
I was by this time in no mood for browbeating, 'and I will see him!' 'He is out hunting,' cried all with one accord; and they signed
imperiously to me to go back the way I had come. But having the king's appointment safe in my pouch, I thought I had good
reason to disbelieve them; and taking advantage of their surprise--for
they had not expected so bold a step on my part--I was at the door
before they could prevent me. I heard Mathurine, the fool, who had
sprung to her feet, cry 'Pardieu! he will take the Kingdom of Heaven
by force!' and those were the last words I heard; for, as I lifted the
latch--there was no one on guard there--a sudden swift silence fell upon
the room behind me. I pushed the door gently open and went in. There were two men sitting
in one of the windows, who turned and looked angrily towards me. For the
rest the room was empty. The king's walking-shoes lay by his chair, and
beside them the boot-hooks and jack. A dog before the fire got up slowly
and growled, and one of the men, rising from the trunk on which he
had been sitting, came towards me and asked me, with every sign of
irritation, what I wanted there, and who had given me leave to enter. I was beginning to explain, with some diffidence the stillness of
the room sobering me--that I wished to see the king, when he who had
advanced took me up sharply with, 'The king? the king? He is not here,
man. He is hunting at St. Valery. Did they not tell you so outside?' I thought I recognised the speaker, than whom I have seldom seen a man
more grave and thoughtful for his years, which were something less than
mine, more striking in presence, or more soberly dressed. And being
desirous to evade his question, I asked him if I had not the honour to
address M. du Plessis Mornay; for that wise and courtly statesman, now a
pillar of Henry's counsels, it was. 'The same, sir,' he replied, abruptly, and without taking his eyes from
me. 'I am Mornay. What of that?' 'I am M. de Marsac,' I explained. And there I stopped, supposing that,
as he was in the king's confidence, this would make my errand clear to
him. But I was disappointed. 'Well, sir?' he said, and waited impatiently. So cold a reception, following such treatment as I had suffered outside,
would have sufficed to have dashed my spirits utterly had I not felt
the king's letter in my pocket. Being pretty confident, however, that a
single glance at this would alter M. du Mornay's bearing for the better,
I hastened, looking on it as a kind of talisman, to draw it out and
present it to him. He took it, and looked at it, and opened it, but with so cold and
immovable an aspect as made my heart sink more than all that had gone
before. 'What is amiss?' I cried, unable to keep silence. ''Tis from the
king, sir.' 'A king in motley!' he answered, his lip curling. The sense of his words did not at once strike home to me, and I
murmured, in great disorder, that the king had sent for me. 'The king knows nothing of it,' was his blunt answer, bluntly given. And
he thrust the paper back into my hands. 'It is a trick,' he continued,
speaking with the same abruptness, 'for which you have doubtless
to thank some of those idle young rascals without. You had sent an
application to the king, I suppose? Just so. No doubt they got hold of
it, and this is the result. They ought to be whipped.' It was not possible for me to doubt any longer that what he said was
true. I saw in a moment all my hopes vanish, all my plans flung to the
winds; and in the first shock of the discovery I could neither find
voice to answer him nor strength to withdraw. In a kind of vision I
seemed to see my own lean, haggard face looking at me as in a glass,
and, reading despair in my eyes, could have pitied myself. My disorder was so great that M. du Mornay observed it. Looking more
closely at me, he two or three times muttered my name, and at last said,
'M. de Marsac? Ha! I remember. You were in the affair of Brouage, were
you not?' I nodded my head in token of assent, being unable at the moment to
speak, and so shaken that perforce I leaned against the wall, my head
sunk on my breast. The memory of my age, my forty years, and my poverty,
pressed hard upon me, filling me with despair and bitterness. I could
have wept, but no tears came. M. du Mornay, averting his eyes from me, took two or three short,
impatient turns up and down the chamber when he addressed me again his
tone was full of respect, mingled with such petulance as one brave man
might feel, seeing another so hard pressed. 'M. de Marsac,' he said,
'you have my sympathy. It is a shame that men who have served the
cause should be reduced to such straits. Were it, possible for me, to
increase my own train at present, I should consider it an honour to have
you with me. But I am hard put to it myself, and so are we all, and the
King of Navarre not least among us. He has lived for a month upon a wood
which M. de Rosny has cut down. I will mention your name to him, but I
should be cruel rather than kind were I not to warn you that nothing can
come of it.' With that he offered me his hand, and, cheered as much by this mark
of consideration as by the kindness of his expressions, I rallied my
spirits. True, I wanted comfort more substantial, but it was not to be
had. I thanked him therefore as becomingly as I could, and seeing there
was no help for it, took my leave of him, and slowly and sorrowfully
withdrew from the room. Alas! to escape I had to face the outside world, for which his kind
words were an ill preparation. I had to run the gauntlet of the
antechamber. The moment I appeared, or rather the moment the door closed
behind me, I was hailed with a shout of derision. While one cried,
'Way! way for the gentleman who has seen the king!' another hailed me
uproariously as Governor of Guyenne, and a third requested a commission
in my regiment. I heard these taunts with a heart full almost to bursting. It seemed to
me an unworthy thing that, merely by reason of my poverty, I should be
derided by youths who had still all their battles before them; but to
stop or reproach them would only, as I well knew, make matters worse,
and, moreover, I was so sore stricken that I had little spirit left
even to speak. Accordingly, I made my way through them with what speed I
might, my head bent, and my countenance heavy with shame and depression. In this way--I wonder there were not among them some generous enough
to pity me--I had nearly gained the door, and was beginning to breathe,
when I found my path stopped by that particular young lady of the Court
whom I have described above. Something had for the moment diverted her
attention from me, and it required a word from her companions to apprise
her of my near neighbourhood. She turned then, as one taken by surprise,
and finding me so close to her that my feet all but touched her gown,
she stepped quickly aside, and with a glance as cruel as her act, drew
her skirts away from contact with me. The insult stung me, I know not why, more than all the gibes which
were being flung at me from every side, and moved by a sudden impulse I
stopped, and in the bitterness of my heart spoke to her. 'Mademoiselle,'
I said, bowing low--for, as I have stated, she was small, and more
like a fairy than a woman, though her face expressed both pride and
self-will--'Mademoiselle,' I said sternly, 'such as I am, I have fought
for France! Some day you may learn that there are viler things in the
world--and have to bear them--than a poor gentleman!' The words were scarcely out of my mouth before I repented of them, for
Mathurine, the fool, who was at my elbow, was quick to turn them into
ridicule. Raising her hands above our heads, as in act to bless us,
she cried out that Monsieur, having gained so rich an office, desired
a bride to grace it; and this, bringing down upon us a coarse shout
of laughter and some coarser gibes, I saw the young girl's face flush
hotly. The next moment a voice in the crowd cried roughly 'Out upon his wedding
suit!' and with that a sweetmeat struck me in the face. Another and
another followed, covering me with flour and comfits. This was the last
straw. For a moment, forgetting where I was, I turned upon them, red
and furious, every hair in my moustachios bristling. The next, the full
sense of my impotence and of the folly of resentment prevailed with me,
and, dropping my head upon my breast, I rushed from the room. I believe that the younger among them followed me, and that the cry of
'Old Clothes!' pursued me even to the door of my lodgings in the Rue de
la Coutellerie. But in the misery of the moment, and my strong desire
to be within doors and alone, I barely noticed this, and am not certain
whether it was so or not. CHAPTER II. THE KING OF NAVARRE. I have already referred to the danger with which the alliance between
Henry the Third and the League menaced us, an alliance whereof the news,
it was said, had blanched the King of Navarre's moustache in a single
night. Notwithstanding this, the Court had never shown itself more
frolicsome or more free from care than at the time of which I am
speaking; even the lack of money seemed for the moment forgotten. One
amusement followed another, and though, without doubt, something was
doing under the surface for the wiser of his foes held our prince in
particular dread when he seemed most deeply sunk in pleasure--to the
outward eye St. Jean d'Angely appeared to be given over to enjoyment
from one end to the other. The stir and bustle of the Court reached me even in my garret, and
contributed to make that Christmas, which fell on a Sunday, a trial
almost beyond sufferance. All day long the rattle of hoofs on the
pavement, and the laughter of riders bent on diversion, came up to
me, making the hard stool seem harder, the bare walls more bare, and
increasing a hundredfold the solitary gloom in which I sat. For as
sunshine deepens the shadows which fall athwart it, and no silence is
like that which follows the explosion of a mine, so sadness and poverty
are never more intolerable than when hope and wealth rub elbows with
them. True, the great sermon which M. d'Amours preached in the market-house
on the morning of Christmas-day cheered me, as it cheered all the more
sober spirits. I was present myself, sitting in an obscure corner of
the building, and heard the famous prediction, which was so soon to be
fulfilled. 'Sire,' said the preacher, turning to the King of Navarre,
and referring, with the boldness that ever characterised that great
man and noble Christian, to the attempt, then being made to exclude the
prince from the succession--'Sire, what God at your birth gave you man
cannot take away. A little while, a little patience, and you shall cause
us to preach beyond the Loire! With you for our Joshua we shall cross
the Jordan, and in the Promised Land the Church shall be set up.' Words so brave, and so well adapted to encourage the Huguenots in
the crisis through which their affairs were then passing, charmed all
hearers; save indeed, those--and they were few--who, being devoted to
the Vicomte de Turenne, disliked, though they could not controvert, this
public acknowledgment of the King of Navarre, as the Huguenot leader. The pleasure of those present was evinced in a hundred ways, and to such
an extent that even I returned to my chamber soothed and exalted, and
found, in dreaming of the speedy triumph of the cause, some compensation
for my own ill-fortune. As the day wore on, however, and the evening brought no change, but
presented to me the same dreary prospect with which morning had made
me familiar, I confess without shame that my heart sank once more,
particularly as I saw that I should be forced in a day or two to sell
either my remaining horse or some part of my equipment as essential;
a step which I could not contemplate without feelings of the utmost
despair. In this state of mind I was adding up by the light of a
solitary candle the few coins I had left, when I heard footsteps
ascending the stairs. I made them out to be the steps of two persons,
and was still lost in conjectures who they might be, when a hand knocked
gently at my door. Fearing another trick, I did not at once open, the more so there was
something stealthy and insinuating in the knock. Thereupon my visitors
held a whispered consultation; then they knocked again. I asked loudly
who was there, but to this they did not choose to give any answer,
while I, on my part, determined not to open until they did. The door
was strong, and I smiled grimly at the thought that this time they would
have their trouble for their pains. To my surprise, however, they did not desist, and go away, as I
expected, but continued to knock at intervals and whisper much between
times. More than once they called me softly by name and bade me open,
but as they steadily refrained from saying who they were, I sat still. Occasionally I heard them laugh, but under their breath as it were;
and persuaded by this that they were bent on a frolic, I might have
persisted in my silence until midnight, which was not more than two
hours off, had not a slight sound, as of a rat gnawing behind the
wainscot, drawn my attention to the door. Raising my candle and shading
my eyes I espied something small and bright protruding beneath it, and
sprang up, thinking they were about to prise it in. To my surprise,
however, I could discover, on taking the candle to the threshold,
nothing more threatening than a couple of gold livres, which had been
thrust through the crevice between the door and the floor. My astonishment may be conceived. I stood for full a minute staring at
the coins, the candle in my hand. Then, reflecting that the young sparks
at the Court would be very unlikely to spend such a sum on a jest, I
hesitated no longer, but putting down the candle, drew the bolt of the
door, purposing to confer with my visitors outside. In this, however, I
was disappointed, for the moment the door was open they pushed forcibly
past me and, entering the room pell-mell, bade me by signs to close the
door again. I did so suspiciously, and without averting my eyes from my visitors. Great were my embarrassment and confusion, therefore, when, the door
being shut, they dropped their cloaks one after the other, and I saw
before me M. du Mornay and the well-known figure of the King of Navarre. They seemed so much diverted, looking at one another and laughing, that
for a moment I thought some chance resemblance deceived me, and that
here were my jokers again. Hence while a man might count ten I stood
staring; and the king was the first to speak. 'We have made no mistake,
Du Mornay, have we?' he said, casting a laughing glance at me. 'No, sire,' Du Mornay answered. 'This is the Sieur de Marsac, the
gentleman whom I mentioned to you.' I hastened, confused, wondering, and with a hundred apologies, to pay my
respects to the king. He speedily cut me short, however, saying, with an
air of much kindness, 'Of Marsac, in Brittany, I think, sir?' 'The same, sire,'

'Then you are of the family of Bonne?' 'I am the last survivor of that family, sire,' I answered respectfully. 'It has played its part,' he rejoined, and therewith he took his seat
on my stool with an easy grace which charmed me. 'Your motto is "BONNE
FOI," is it not? And Marsac, if I remember rightly, is not far from
Rennes, on the Vilaine?' I answered that it was, adding, with a full heart, that it grieved me to
be compelled to receive so great a prince in so poor a lodging. 'Well, I confess,' Du Mornay struck in, looking carelessly round him,
'you have a queer taste, M. de Marsac, in the arrangement of your
furniture. You--'

'Mornay!' the king cried sharply. 'Sire?' 'Chut! your elbow is in the candle. Beware of it!' But I well understood him. If my heart had been full before, it
overflowed now. Poverty is not so shameful as the shifts to which it
drives men. I had been compelled some days before, in order to make as
good a show as possible--since it is the undoubted duty of a gentleman
to hide his nakedness from impertinent eyes, and especially from the
eyes of the canaille, who are wont to judge from externals--to remove
such of my furniture and equipage as remained to that side of the room,
which was visible from without when the door was open. This left the
farther side of the room vacant and bare. To anyone within doors the
artifice was, of course, apparent, and I am bound to say that M. de
Mornay's words brought the blood to my brow. I rejoiced, however a moment later that he had uttered them; for without
them I might never have known, or known so early, the kindness of heart
and singular quickness of apprehension which ever distinguished the
king, my master. So, in my heart, I began to call him from that hour. The King of Navarre was at this time thirty-five years old, his hair
brown, his complexion ruddy, his moustache, on one side at least,
beginning to turn grey. His features, which Nature had cast in a harsh
and imperious mould, were relieved by a constant sparkle and animation
such as I have never seen in any other man, but in him became ever more
conspicuous in gloomy and perilous times. Inured to danger from his
earliest youth, he had come to enjoy it as others a festival, hailing
its advent with a reckless gaiety which astonished even brave men, and
led others to think him the least prudent of mankind. Yet such he was
not: nay, he was the opposite of this. Never did Marshal of France
make more careful dispositions for a battle--albeit once in it he bore
himself like any captain of horse--nor ever did Du Mornay himself sit
down to a conference with a more accurate knowledge of affairs. His
prodigious wit and the affability of his manners, while they endeared
him to his servants, again and again blinded his adversaries; who,
thinking that so much brilliance could arise only from a shallow nature,
found when it was too late that they had been outwitted by him whom
they contemptuously styled the Prince of Bearn, a man a hundredfold more
astute than themselves, and master alike of pen and sword. Much of this, which all the world now knows, I learned afterwards. At
the moment I could think of little save the king's kindness; to which
he added by insisting that I should sit on the bed while we talked. 'You
wonder, M. de Marsac,' he said, 'what brings me here, and why I have
come to you instead of sending for you? Still more, perhaps, why I have
come to you at night and with such precautions? I will tell you. But
first, that my coming may not fill you with false hopes, let me say
frankly, that though I may relieve your present necessities, whether you
fall into the plan I am going to mention, or not, I cannot take you
into my service; wherein, indeed, every post is doubly filled. Du Mornay
mentioned your name to me, but in fairness to others I had to answer
that I could do nothing.' I am bound to confess that this strange exordium dashed hopes which had
already risen to a high pitch. Recovering myself as quickly as possible,
however, I murmured that the honour of a visit from the King of Navarre
was sufficient happiness for me. 'Nay, but that honour I must take from you' he replied, smiling; 'though
I see that you would make an excellent courtier--far better than Du
Mornay here, who never in his life made so pretty a speech. For I must
lay my commands on you to keep this visit a secret, M. de Marsac. Should
but the slightest whisper of it get abroad, your usefulness, as far as I
am concerned, would be gone, and gone for good!' So remarkable a statement filled me with wonder I could scarcely
disguise. It was with difficulty I found words to assure the king that
his commands should be faithfully obeyed. 'Of that I am sure,' he answered with the utmost kindness. 'Where I not,
and sure, too, from what I am told of your gallantry when my cousin took
Brouage, that you are a man of deeds rather than words, I should not be
here with the proposition I am going to lay before you. It is this. I
can give you no hope of public employment, M. de Marsac, but I can offer
you an adventure if adventures be to your taste--as dangerous and as
thankless as any Amadis ever undertook.' 'As thankless, sire?' I stammered, doubting if I had heard aright, the
expression was so strange. 'As thankless,' he answered, his keen eyes seeming to read my soul. 'I am frank with you, you see, sir,' he continued, carelessly. 'I can
suggest this adventure--it is for the good of the State--I can do no
more. The King of Navarre cannot appear in it, nor can he protect you. Succeed or fail in it, you stead alone. The only promise I make is,
that if it ever be safe for me to acknowledge the act, I will reward the
doer.' He paused, and for a few moments I stared at him in sheer amazement. What did he mean? Were he and the other real figures, or was I dreaming? 'Do you understand?' he asked at length, with a touch of impatience. 'Yes, sire, I think I do,' I murmured, very certain in truth and reality
that I did not. 'What do you say, then--yes or no?' he rejoined. 'Will you undertake the
adventure, or would you hear more before you make up your mind?' I hesitated. Had I been a younger man by ten years I should doubtless
have cried assent there and then, having been all my life ready enough
to embark on such enterprises as offered a chance of distinction. But
something in the strangeness of the king's preface, although I had it in
my heart to die for him, gave me check, and I answered, with an air of
great humility, 'You will think me but a poor courtier now, sire, yet
he is a fool who jumps into a ditch without measuring the depth. I would
fain, if I may say it without disrespect, hear all that you can tell
me.' 'Then I fear,' he answered quickly, 'if you would have more light on the
matter, my friend, you must get another candle.' I started, he spoke so abruptly; but perceiving that the candle had
indeed burned down to the socket, I rose, with many apologies, and
fetched another from the cupboard. It did not occur to me at the moment,
though it did later, that the king had purposely sought this opportunity
of consulting with his companion. I merely remarked, when I returned to
my place on the bed, that they were sitting a little nearer one another,
and that the king eyed me before he spoke--though he still swung one
foot carelessly in the air with close attention. 'I speak to you, of course, sir,' he presently went on, 'in confidence,
believing you to be an honourable as well as a brave man. That which I
wish you to do is briefly, and in a word, to carry off a lady. Nay,'
he added quickly, with a laughing grimace, 'have no fear! She is no
sweetheart of mine, nor should I go to my grave friend here did I need
assistance of that kind. Henry of Bourbon, I pray God, will always be
able to free his own lady-love. This is a State affair, and a matter of
quite another character, though we cannot at present entrust you with
the meaning of it.' I bowed in silence, feeling somewhat chilled and perplexed, as who would
not, having such an invitation before him? I had anticipated an affair
with men only--a secret assault or a petard expedition. But seeing the
bareness of my room, and the honour the king was doing me, I felt I had
no choice, and I answered, 'That being the case, sire, I am wholly at
your service.' 'That is well,' he, answered briskly, though methought he looked at Du
Mornay reproachfully, as doubting his commendation of me. 'But will
you say the same,' he continued, removing his eyes to me, and speaking
slowly, as though he would try me, 'when I tell you that the lady to
be carried off is the ward of the Vicomte de Turenne, whose arm is
well-nigh as long as my own, and who would fain make it longer; who
never travels, as he told me yesterday, with less than fifty gentlemen,
and has a thousand arquebusiers in his pay? Is the adventure still to
your liking, M. de Marsac, now that you know that?' 'It is more to my liking, sire,' I answered stoutly. 'Understand this too,' he rejoined. 'It is essential that this lady,
who is at present confined in the Vicomte's house at Chize, should be
released; but it is equally essential that there should be no breach
between the Vicomte and myself. Therefore the affair must be the work
of an independent man, who has never been in my service, nor in any way
connected with me. If captured, you pay the penalty without recourse to
me.' 'I fully understand, sire,' I answered. 'Ventre Saint Gris!' he cried, breaking into a low laugh. I swear the
man is more afraid of the lady than he is of the Vicomte! That is not
the way of most of our Court.' Du Mornay, who had been sitting nursing his knee in silence, pursed up
his lips, though it was easy to see that he was well content with the
king's approbation. He now intervened. 'With your permission, sire,' he
said, 'I will let this gentleman know the details.' 'Do, my friend,' the king answered. 'And be short, for if we are here
much longer I shall be missed, and in a twinkling the Court will have
found me a new mistress.' He spoke in jest and with a laugh, but I saw Du Mornay start at
the words, as though they were little to his liking; and I learned
afterwards that the Court was really much exercised at this time with
the question who would be the next favourite, the king's passion for
the Countess de la Guiche being evidently on the wane, and that which
he presently evinced for Madame de Guercheville being as yet a matter of
conjecture. Du Mornay took no overt notice of the king's words, however, but
proceeded to give me my directions. 'Chize, which you know by name,' he
said, 'is six leagues from here. Mademoiselle de la Vire is confined in
the north-west room, on the first-floor, overlooking the park. More I
cannot tell you, except that her woman's name is Fanchette, and that she
is to be trusted. The house is well guarded, and you will need four or
five men, There are plenty of cut-throats to be hired, only see, M.
de Marsac, that they are such as you can manage, and that Mademoiselle
takes no hurt among them. Have horses in waiting, and the moment; you
have released the lady ride north with her as fast as her strength will
permit. Indeed, you must not spare her, if Turenne be on your heels. You
should be across the Loire in sixty hours after leaving Chize.' 'Across the Loire?' I exclaimed in astonishment. 'Yes, sir, across the Loire,' he replied, with some sternness. 'Your
task, be good enough to understand, is to convoy Mademoiselle de la Vire
with all speed to Blois. There, attracting as little notice as may be,
you will inquire for the Baron de Rosny at the Bleeding Heart, in the
Rue de St. Denys. He will take charge of the lady, or direct you how to
dispose of her, and your task will then be accomplished. You follow me?' 'Perfectly,' I answered, speaking in my turn with some dryness. 'But
Mademoiselle I understand is young. What if she will not accompany me, a
stranger, entering her room at night, and by the window?' 'That has been thought of' was the answer. He turned to the King of
Navarre, who, after a moment's search, produced a small object from his
pouch. This he gave to his companion, and the latter transferred it to
me. I took it with curiosity. It was the half of a gold carolus,
the broken edge of the coin being rough and jagged. 'Show that to
Mademoiselle, my friend,' Du Mornay continued, 'and she will accompany
you. She has the other half.' 'But be careful,' Henry added eagerly, 'to make no mention, even to her,
of the King of Navarre. You mark me, M. de Marsac! If you have at any
time occasion to speak of me, you may have the honour of calling me YOUR
FRIEND, and referring to me always in the same manner.' This he said with so gracious an air that I was charmed, and thought
myself happy indeed to be addressed in this wise by a prince whose name
was already so glorious. Nor was my satisfaction diminished when his
companion drew out a bag containing, as he told me, three hundred crowns
in gold, and placed it in my hands, bidding me defray therefrom the cost
of the journey. 'Be careful, however,' he added earnestly, 'to avoid, in
hiring your men, any appearance of wealth, lest the adventure seem to
be suggested by some outside person; instead of being dictated by the
desperate state of your own fortunes. Promise rather than give, so far
as that will avail. And for what you must give, let each livre seem to
be the last in your pouch.' Henry nodded assent. 'Excellent advice!' he muttered, rising and
drawing on his cloak, 'such as you ever give me, Mornay, and I as seldom
take--more's the pity! But, after all, of little avail without this.' He
lifted my sword from the table as he spoke, and weighed it in his hand. 'A pretty tool,' he continued, turning suddenly and looking me very
closely in the face. 'A very pretty tool. Were I in your place, M. de
Marsac, I would see that it hung loose in the scabbard. Ay, and more,
man, use it!' he added, sinking his voice and sticking out his chin,
while his grey eyes, looking ever closer into mine, seemed to grow cold
and hard as steel. 'Use it to the last, for if you fall into Turenne's
hands, God help you! I cannot!' 'If I am taken, sire,' I answered, trembling, but not with fear, 'my
fate be on my own head.' I saw the king's eyes soften, at that, and his face change so swiftly
that I scarce knew him for the same man. He let the weapon drop with
a clash on the table. 'Ventre Saint Gris!' he exclaimed with a strange
thrill of yearning in his tone. 'I swear by God, I would I were in your
shoes, sir. To strike a blow or two with no care what came of it. To
take the road with a good horse and a good sword, and see what fortune
would send. To be rid of all this statecraft and protocolling, and never
to issue another declaration in this world, but just to be for once a
Gentleman of France, with all to win and nothing to lose save the love
of my lady! Ah! Mornay, would it not be sweet to leave all this fret and
fume, and ride away to the green woods by Coarraze?' 'Certainly, if you prefer them to the Louvre, sire,' Du Mornay answered
drily; while I stood, silent and amazed, before this strange man, who
could so suddenly change from grave to gay, and one moment spoke so
sagely, and the next like any wild lad in his teens. 'Certainly,' he
answered, 'if that be your choice, sire; and if you think that even
there the Duke of Guise will leave you in peace. Turenne, I am sure,
will be glad to hear of your decision. Doubtless he will be elected
Protector of the Churches. Nay, sire, for shame!' Du Mornay continued
almost with sternness. 'Would you leave France, which at odd times I
have heard you say you loved, to shift for herself? Would you deprive
her of the only man who does love her for her own sake?' 'Well, well, but she is such a fickle sweetheart, my friend,' the king
answered, laughing, the side glance of his eye on me. 'Never was one so
coy or so hard to clip! And, besides, has not the Pope divorced us?' 'The Pope! A fig for the Pope!' Du Mornay rejoined with impatient heat. 'What has he to do with France? An impertinent meddler, and an Italian
to boot! I would he and all the brood of them were sunk a hundred
fathoms deep in the sea. But, meantime, I would send him a text to
digest.' 'EXEMPLUM?' said the king. 'Whom God has joined together let no man put asunder.' 'Amen! quoth Henry softly. 'And France is a fair and comely bride.' After that he kept such a silence, falling as it seemed to me into a
brown study, that he went away without so much as bidding me farewell,
or being conscious, as far as I could tell, of my presence. Du Mornay
exchanged a few words with me, to assure himself that I understood what
I had to do, and then, with many kind expressions, which I did not fail
to treasure up and con over in the times that were coming, hastened
downstairs after his master. My joy when I found myself alone may be conceived. Yet was it no
ecstasy, but a sober exhilaration; such as stirred my pulses indeed, and
bade me once more face the world with a firm eye and an assured brow,
but was far from holding out before me a troubadour's palace or any
dazzling prospect. The longer I dwelt on the interview, the more clearly
I saw the truth. As the glamour which Henry's presence and singular
kindness had cast over me began to lose some of its power, I recognised
more and more surely why he had come to me. It was not out of any
special favour for one whom he knew by report only, if at all by
name; but because he had need of a man poor, and therefore reckless,
middle-aged (of which comes discretion), obscure--therefore a safe
instrument; to crown all, a gentleman, seeing that both a secret and a
women were in question. Withal I wondered too. Looking from the bag of money on the table to
the broken coin in my hand, I scarcely knew which to admire more: the
confidence which entrusted the one to a man broken and beggared, or the
courage of the gentlewoman who should accompany me on the faith of the
other. CHAPTER III. BOOT AND SADDLE. As was natural, I meditated deeply and far into the night on the
difficulties of the task, entrusted to me. I saw that it fell into
two parts: the release of the lady, and her safe conduct to Blois, a
distance of sixty leagues. The release I thought it probable I could
effect single-handed, or with one companion only; but in the troubled
condition of the country at this time, more particularly on both sides
of the Loire, I scarcely saw how I could ensure a lady's safety on the
road northwards unless I had with me at least five swords. To get these together at a few hours' notice promised to be no easy
task; although the presence of the Court of Navarre had filled St. Jean
with a crowd of adventurers. Yet the king's command was urgent, and
at some sacrifice, even at some risk, must be obeyed. Pressed by these
considerations, I could think of no better man to begin with than
Fresnoy. His character was bad, and he had long forfeited such claim as he had
ever possessed--I believe it was a misty one, on the distaff side--to
gentility. But the same cause which had rendered me destitute I mean
the death of the prince of Conde--had stripped him to the last rag; and
this, perhaps, inclining me to serve him, I was the more quick to see
his merits. I knew him already for a hardy, reckless man, very capable
of striking a shrewd blow. I gave him credit for being trusty, as long
as his duty jumped with his interest. Accordingly, as soon as it was light, having fed and groomed the Cid,
which was always the first employment of my day, I set out in search of
Fresnoy, and was presently lucky enough to find him taking his morning
draught outside the 'Three Pigeons,' a little inn not far from the north
gate. It was more than a fortnight since I had set eyes on him, and the
lapse of time had worked so great a change for the worse in him that,
forgetting my own shabbiness, I looked at him askance, as doubting the
wisdom of enlisting one who bore so plainly the marks of poverty and
dissipation. His great face--he was a large man--had suffered recent
ill-usage, and was swollen and discoloured, one eye being as good as
closed. He was unshaven, his hair was ill-kempt, his doublet unfastened
at the throat, and torn and stained besides. Despite the cold--for the
morning was sharp and frosty, though free from wind--there were half a
dozen packmen drinking and squabbling before the inn, while the beasts
they drove quenched their thirst at the trough. But these men seemed
with one accord to leave him in possession of the bench at which he sat;
nor did I wonder much at this when I saw the morose and savage
glance which he shot at me as I approached. Whether he read my first
impressions in my face, or for some other reason felt distaste for my
company, I could not determine. But, undeterred by his behaviour, I sat
down beside him and called for wine. He nodded sulkily in answer to my greeting, and cast a half-shamed,
half-angry look at me out of the corners of his eyes. 'You need not look
at me as though I were a dog,' he muttered presently. 'You are not so
very spruce yourself, my friend. But I suppose you have grown proud
since you got that fat appointment at Court!' And he laughed out loud,
so that I confess I was in two minds whether I should not force the jest
down his ugly throat. However I restrained myself, though my cheeks burned. 'You have heard
about it, then,' I said, striving to speak indifferently. 'Who has not?' he said, laughing with his lips, though his eyes were far
from merry. 'The Sieur de Marsac's appointment! Ha! ha! Why, man--'

'Enough of it now!' I exclaimed. And I dare say I writhed on my seat. 'As far as I am concerned the jest is a stale one, sir, and does not
amuse me.' 'But it amuses me,' he rejoined with a grin. 'Let it be, nevertheless,' I said; and I think he read a warning in my
eyes. 'I have come to speak to you upon another matter.' He did not refuse to listen, but threw one leg over the other, and
looking up at the inn-sign began to whistle in a rude, offensive manner. Still, having an object in view, I controlled myself and continued. 'It
is this, my friend: money is not very plentiful at present with either
of us.' Before I could say any more he turned on me savagely, and with a loud
oath thrust his bloated face, flushed with passion, close to mine. 'Now
look here, M. de Marsac!' he cried violently, 'once for all, it is no
good! I have not got the money, and I cannot pay it. I said a fortnight
ago, when you lent it, that you should have it this week. Well,'
slapping his hand on the bench, I have not got it, and it is no good
beginning upon me. You cannot have it, and that is flat!' 'Damn the money!' I cried. 'What?' he exclaimed, scarcely believing his ears. 'Let the money be!' I repeated fiercely. 'Do you hear? I have not come
about it, I am here to offer you work--good, well-paid work--if you will
enlist with me and play me fair, Fresnoy.' 'Play fair!' he cried with an oath. 'There, there,' I said, 'I am willing to let bygones be bygones if you
are. The point is, that I have an adventure on hand, and, wanting help,
can pay you for it.' He looked at me cunningly, His eye travelling over each rent and darn
in my doublet. 'I will help you fast enough,' he said at last. 'But I
should like to see the money first.' 'You shall,' I answered. 'Then I am with you, my friend. Count on me till death!' he cried,
rising and laying his hand in mine with a boisterous frankness which did
not deceive me into trusting him far. 'And now, whose is the affair, and
what is it?' 'The affair is mine,' I said coldly. 'It is to carry off a lady.' He whistled and looked me over again, an impudent leer in his eyes. 'A
lady?' he exclaimed. 'Umph! I could understand a young spark going in
for such--but that's your affair. Who is it?' 'That is my affair, too,' I answered coolly, disgusted by the man's
venality and meanness, and fully persuaded that I must trust him no
farther than the length of my sword. 'All I want you to do, M. Fresnoy,'
I continued stiffly, 'is to place yourself at my disposal and under my
orders for ten days. I will find you a horse and pay you--the enterprise
is a hazardous one, and I take that into account--two gold crowns a day,
and ten more if we succeed in reaching a place of safety.' 'Such a place as--'

'Never mind that,' I replied. 'The question is, do you accept?' He looked down sullenly, and I could see he was greatly angered by my
determination to keep the matter to myself. 'Am I to know no more than
that?' he asked, digging the point of his scabbard again and again into
the ground. 'No more,' I answered firmly. 'I am bent on a desperate attempt to mend
my fortunes before they fall as low as yours; and that is as much as
I mean to tell living man. If you are loth to risk your life with your
eyes shut, say so, and I will go to someone else.' But he was not in a position, as I well knew, to refuse such an offer,
and presently he accepted it with a fresh semblance of heartiness. I
told him I should want four troopers to escort us, and these he offered
to procure, saying that he knew just the knaves to suit me. I bade him
hire two only, however, being too wise, to put myself altogether in his
hands; and then, having given him money to buy himself a horse--I made
it a term that the men should bring their own--and named a rendezvous
for the first hour after noon, I parted from him and went rather sadly
away. For I began to see that the king had not underrated the dangers of an
enterprise on which none but desperate men and such as were down in the
world could be expected to embark. Seeing this, and also a thing which
followed clearly from it--that I should have as much to fear from my
own company as from the enemy--I looked forward with little hope to a
journey during every day and every hour of which I must bear a growing
weight of fear and responsibility. It was too late to turn back, however, and I went about my preparations,
if with little cheerfulness, at least with steadfast purpose. I had
my sword ground and my pistols put in order by the cutler over whom I
lodged, and who performed this last office for me with the same goodwill
which had characterised, all his dealings with me. I sought out and
hired a couple of stout fellows whom I believed to be indifferently
honest, but who possessed the advantage of having horses; and besides
bought two led horses myself for mademoiselle and her woman. Such other
equipments as were absolutely necessary I purchased, reducing my stock
of money in this way to two hundred and ten crowns. How to dispose of
this sum so that it might be safe and yet at my command was a question
which greatly exercised me. In the end I had recourse to my friend
the cutler, who suggested hiding a hundred crowns of it in my cap, and
deftly contrived a place for the purpose. This, the cap being lined with
steel, was a matter of no great difficulty. A second hundred I sewed
up in the stuffing of my saddle, placing the remainder in my pouch for
present necessities. A small rain was falling in the streets when, a little after noon, I
started with my two knaves behind me and made for the north gate. So
many were moving this way and the other that we passed unnoticed, and
might have done so had we numbered six swords instead of three. When we
reached the rendezvous, a mile beyond the gate, we found Fresnoy already
there, taking shelter in the lee of a big holly-tree. He had four
horsemen with him, and on our appearance rode forward to meet us, crying
heartily, 'Welcome, M. le Capitaine!' 'Welcome, certainly,' I answered, pulling the Cid up sharply, and
holding off from him. 'But who are these, M. Fresnoy?' and I pointed
with my riding-cane to his four companions. He tried to pass the matter off with a laugh. 'Oh! these?' he said. 'That is soon explained. The Evangelists would not be divided, so I
brought them all--Matthew Mark, Luke, and John--thinking it likely
you might fail to secure your men. And I will warrant them for four as
gallant boys as you will ever find behind you!' They were certainly four as arrant ruffians as I had ever seen before
me, and I saw I must not hesitate. 'Two or none, M. Fresnoy,' I said
firmly. 'I gave you a commission for two, and two I will take--Matthew
and Mark, or Luke and John, as you please.' ''Tis a pity to break the party,' said he, scowling. 'If that be all,' I retorted, 'one of my men is called John. And we will
dub the other Luke, if that will mend the matter.' 'The Prince of Conde,' he muttered sullenly, 'employed these men.' 'The Prince of Conde employed some queer people sometimes, M. Fresnoy,'
I answered, looking him straight between the eyes, 'as we all must. A
truce to this, if you please. We will take Matthew and Mark. The other
two be good enough to dismiss.' He seemed to waver for a moment, as if he had a mind to disobey, but
in the end, thinking better of it, he bade the men return; and as I
complimented each of them with a piece of silver, they went off, after
some swearing, in tolerably good humour. Thereon Fresnoy was for taking
the road at once, but having no mind to be followed, I gave the word to
wait until the two were out of sight. I think, as we sat our horses in the rain, the holly-bush not being
large enough to shelter us all, we were as sorry a band as ever set out
to rescue a lady; nor was it without pain that I looked round and saw
myself reduced to command such people. There was scarcely one whole
unpatched garment among us, and three of my squires had but a spur
apiece. To make up for this deficiency we mustered two black eyes,
Fresnoy's included, and a broken nose. Matthew's nag lacked a tail,
and, more remarkable still, its rider, as I presently discovered, was
stone-deaf; while Mark's sword was innocent of a scabbard, and his
bridle was plain rope. One thing, indeed, I observed with pleasure. The
two men who had come with me looked askance at the two who had come with
Fresnoy, and these returned the stare with interest. On this division
and on the length of my sword I based all my hopes of safety and of
something more. On it I was about to stake, not my own life only--which
was no great thing, seeing what my prospects were--but the life and
honour of a woman, young, helpless, and as yet unknown to me. Weighed down as I was by these considerations, I had to bear the
additional burden of hiding my fears and suspicions under a cheerful
demeanour. I made a short speech to my following, who one and all
responded by swearing to stand by me to the death. I then gave the word,
and we started, Fresnoy and I leading the way, Luke and John with the
led horses following, and the other two bringing up the rear. The rain continuing to fall and the country in this part being dreary
and monotonous, even in fair weather, I felt my spirits sink still lower
as the day advanced. The responsibility I was going to incur assumed
more serious proportions each time I scanned my following; while
Fresnoy, plying me with perpetual questions respecting my plans, was as
uneasy a companion as my worst enemy could have wished me. 'Come!' he grumbled presently, when we had covered four leagues or
so, 'you have not told me yet, sieur, where we stay to-night. You are
travelling so slowly that--'

'I am saving the horses,' I answered shortly. 'We shall do a long day
to-morrow.' 'Yours looks fit for a week of days,' he sneered, with an evil look at
my Sardinian, which was, indeed, in better case than its master. 'It is
sleek enough, any way!' 'It is as good as it looks,' I answered, a little nettled by his tone. 'There is a better here,' he responded. 'I don't see it,' I said. I had already eyed the nags all round, and
assured myself that, ugly and blemished as they were, they were up to
their work. But I had discerned no special merit among them. I looked
them over again now, and came to the same conclusion--that, except the
led horses, which I had chosen with some care, there was nothing among
them to vie with the Cid, either in speed or looks. I told Fresnoy so. 'Would you like to try?' he said tauntingly. I laughed, adding, 'If you think I am going to tire our horses by racing
them, with such work as we have before us, you are mistaken, Fresnoy. I
am not a boy, you know.' 'There need be no question of racing,' he answered more quietly. 'You
have only to get on that rat-tailed bay of Matthew's to feel its paces
and say I am right.' I looked at the bay, a bald-faced, fiddle-headed horse, and saw that,
with no signs of breeding, it was still a big-boned animal with good
shoulders and powerful hips. I thought it possible Fresnoy might be
right, and if so, and the bay's manners were tolerable, it might do for
mademoiselle better than the horse I had chosen. At any rate, if we had
a fast horse among us, it was well to know the fact, so bidding Matthew
change with me, and be careful of the Cid, I mounted the bay, and
soon discovered that its paces were easy and promised speed, while its
manners seemed as good as even a timid rider could desire. Our road at the time lay across a flat desolate heath, dotted here and
there with, thorn-bushes; the track being broken and stony, extended
more than a score of yards in width, through travellers straying to this
side and that to escape the worst places. Fresnoy and I, in making the
change, had fallen slightly behind the other three, and were riding
abreast of Matthew on the Cid. 'Well,' he said, 'was I not right?' 'In part,' I answered. 'The horse is better than its looks.' 'Like many others,' he rejoined, a spark of resentment in his tone--'men
as well as horses, M. de Marsac. But What do you say? Shall we canter on
a little and overtake the others?' Thinking it well to do so, I assented readily, and we started together. We had ridden, however, no more than a hundred yards, and I was only
beginning to extend the bay, when Fresnoy, slightly drawing rein, turned
in his saddle and looked back. The next moment he cried, 'Hallo! what is
this? Those fellows are not following us, are they?' I turned sharply to look. At that moment, without falter or warning, the
bay horse went down under me as if shot dead, throwing me half a dozen
yards over its head; and that so suddenly that I had no time to raise my
arms, but, falling heavily on my head and shoulder, lost consciousness. I have had many falls, but no other to vie with that in utter
unexpectedness. When I recovered my senses I found myself leaning, giddy
and sick, against the bole of an old thorn-tree. Fresnoy and Matthew
supported me on either side, and asked me how I found myself; while the
other three men, their forms black against the stormy evening sky, sat
their horses a few paces in front of me. I was too much dazed at first
to see more, and this only in a mechanical fashion; but gradually, my
brain grew clearer, and I advanced from wondering who the strangers
round me were to recognising them, and finally to remembering what had
happened to me. 'Is the horse hurt?' I muttered as soon as I could speak. 'Not a whit,' Fresnoy answered, chuckling, or I was much mistaken. 'I am
afraid you came off the worse of the two, captain.' He exchanged a look with the men on horseback as he spoke, and in a dull
fashion I fancied I saw them smile. One even laughed, and another turned
in his saddle as if to hide his face. I had a vague general sense that
there was some joke on foot in which I had no part. But I was too much
shaken at the moment to be curious, and gratefully accepted the offer of
one, of the men to fetch me a little water. While he was away the rest
stood round me, the same look of ill-concealed drollery on their faces. Fresnoy alone talked, speaking volubly of the accident, pouring out
expressions of sympathy and cursing the road, the horse, and the wintry
light until the water came; when, much refreshed by the draught, I
managed to climb to the Cid's saddle and plod slowly onwards with them. 'A bad beginning,' Fresnoy said presently, stealing a sly glance at
me as we jogged along side by side, Chize half a league before us, and
darkness not far off. By this time, however, I was myself again, save for a little humming is
the head, and, shrugging my shoulders, I told him so. 'All's well that
ends well,' I added. 'Not that it was a pleasant fall, or that I wish to
have such another.' 'No, I should think not,' he answered. His face was turned from me, but
I fancied I heard him snigger. Something, which may have been a vague suspicion, led me a moment later
to put my hand into my pouch. Then I understood. I understood too well. The sharp surprise of the discovery was such that involuntarily I drove
my spurs into the Cid, and the horse sprang forward. 'What is the matter?' Fresnoy asked. 'The matter?' I echoed, my hand still at my belt, feeling--feeling
hopelessly. 'Yes, what is it?' he asked, a brazen smile on his rascally face. I looked at him, my brow as red as fire. 'Oh! nothing--nothing,' I said. 'Let us trot on.' In truth I had discovered that, taking advantage of my helplessness, the
scoundrels had robbed me, while I lay insensible, of every gold crown
in my purse! Nor was this all, or the worst, for I saw at once that
in doing so they had effected something which was a thousandfold more
ominous and formidable--established against me that secret understanding
which it was my especial aim to prevent, and on the absence of which I
had been counting. Nay, I saw that for my very life I had only my friend
the cutler and my own prudence to thank, seeing that these rogues would
certainly have murdered me without scruple had they succeeded in finding
the bulk of my money. Baffled in this, while still persuaded that I had
other resources, they had stopped short of that villany--or this memoir
had never been written. They had kindly permitted me to live until a
more favourable opportunity of enriching themselves at my expense should
put them in possession of my last crown! Though I was sufficiently master of myself to refrain from complaints
which I felt must be useless, and from menaces which it has never
been my habit to utter unless I had also the power to put them into
execution, it must not be imagined that I did not, as I rode on by
Fresnoy's side, feel my position acutely or see how absurd a figure
I cut in my dual character of leader and dupe. Indeed, the reflection
that, being in this perilous position, I was about to stake another's
safety as well as my own, made me feel the need of a few minutes'
thought so urgent that I determined to gain them, even at the risk
of leaving my men at liberty to plot further mischief. Coming almost
immediately afterwards within sight, of the turrets of the Chateau of
Chize, I told Fresnoy that we should lie the night at the village;
and bade him take the men on and secure quarters at the inn. Attacked
instantly by suspicion and curiosity, he demurred stoutly to leaving me,
and might have persisted in his refusal had I not pulled up, and clearly
shown him that I would have my own way in this case or come to an open
breach. He shrank, as I expected, from the latter alternative, and,
bidding me a sullen adieu, trotted on with his troop. I waited until
they were out of sight, and then, turning the Cid's head, crossed a
small brook which divided the road from the chase, and choosing a
ride which seemed to pierce the wood in the direction of the Chateau,
proceeded down it, keeping a sharp look-out on either hand. It was then, my thoughts turning to the lady who was now so near, and
who, noble, rich, and a stranger, seemed, as I approached her, not the
least formidable of the embarrassments before me--it was then that I
made a discovery which sent a cold shiver through my frame, and in
a moment swept all memory of my paltry ten crowns from my head. Ten crowns! Alas! I had lost that which was worth all my crowns put
together--the broken coin which the King of Navarre had entrusted to
me, and which formed my sole credential, my only means of persuading
Mademoiselle de la Vire that I came from him. I had put it in my pouch,
and of course, though the loss of it only came home to my mind now, it
had disappeared with the rest. I drew rein and sat for some time motionless, the image of despair. The wind which stirred the naked boughs overhead, and whirled the
dead leaves in volleys past my feet, and died away at last among the
whispering bracken, met nowhere with wretchedness greater, I believe,
than was mine at that moment. CHAPTER IV. MADEMOISELLE DE LA VIRE. My first desperate impulse on discovering the magnitude of my loss was
to ride after the knaves and demand the token at the sword's point. The
certainty, however, of finding them united, and the difficulty of saying
which of the five possessed what I wanted, led me to reject this plan
as I grew cooler; and since I did not dream, even in this dilemma, of
abandoning the expedition the only alternative seemed to be to act as
if I still had the broken coin, and essay what a frank explanation might
effect when the time came. After some wretched, very wretched, moments of debate, I resolved to
adopt this course; and, for the present, thinking I might gain
some knowledge of the surroundings while the light lasted, I pushed
cautiously forward through the trees and came in less than five minutes
within sight of a corner of the chateau, which I found to be a modern
building of the time of Henry II., raised, like the houses of that
time, for pleasure rather than defence, and decorated with many handsome
casements and tourelles. Despite this, it wore, as I saw it, a grey and
desolate air, due in part to the loneliness of the situation and the
lateness of the hour; and in part, I think, to the smallness of the
household maintained, for no one was visible on the terrace or at the
windows. The rain dripped from the trees, which on two sides pressed so
closely on the house as almost to darken the rooms, and everything I
saw encouraged me to hope that mademoiselle's wishes would second my
entreaties, and incline her to lend a ready ear to my story. The appearance of the house, indeed, was a strong inducement to me to
proceed, for it was impossible to believe that a young lady, a kinswoman
of the gay and vivacious Turenne, and already introduced to the
pleasures of the Court, would elect of her own free will to spend the
winter in so dreary a solitude. Taking advantage of the last moments of daylight, I rode cautiously
round the house, and, keeping in the shadow of the trees, had no
difficulty in discovering at the north-east corner the balcony of which
I had been told. It was semi-circular in shape, with a stone balustrade,
and hung some fifteen feet above a terraced walk which ran below it, and
was separated from the chase by a low sunk fence. I was surprised to observe that, notwithstanding the rain and the
coldness of the evening, the window which gave upon this balcony was
open. Nor was this all. Luck was in store for me at last. I had not
gazed at the window more than a minute, calculating its height and other
particulars, when, to my great joy, a female figure, closely hooded,
stepped out and stood looking up at the sky. I was too far off to be
able to discern by that uncertain light whether this was Mademoiselle de
la Vire or her woman; but the attitude was so clearly one of dejection
and despondency, that I felt sure it was either one or the other. Determined not to let the opportunity slip, I dismounted hastily
and, leaving the Cid loose, advanced on foot until I stood within
half-a-dozen paces of the window. At that point the watcher became aware of me. She started back, but did
not withdraw. Still peering down at me, she called softly to some one
inside the chamber, and immediately a second figure, taller and stouter,
appeared. I had already doffed my cap, and I now, in a low voice, begged
to know if I had the honour of speaking to Mademoiselle de la Vire. In
the growing darkness it was impossible to distinguish faces. 'Hush!' the stouter figure muttered in a tone of warning. 'Speak lower. Who are you, and what do you here?' 'I am here,' I answered respectfully, 'commissioned by a friend of the
lady I have named, to convey her to a place of safety.' 'Mon dieu!' was the sharp answer. 'Now? It is impossible.' 'No,' I murmured, 'not now, but to-night. The moon rises at half-past
two. My horses need rest and food. At three I will be below this window
with the means of escape, if mademoiselle choose to use them.' I felt that they were staring at me through the dusk, as though they
would read my breast. 'Your name, sir?' the shorter figure murmured at
last, after a pause which was full of suspense and excitement. 'I do not think my name of much import at present, Mademoiselle,' I
answered, reluctant to proclaim myself a stranger. 'When--'

'Your name, your name, sir!' she repeated imperiously, and I heard her
little heel rap upon the stone floor of the balcony. 'Gaston de Marsac,' I answered unwillingly. They both started, and cried out together. 'Impossible!' the last
speaker exclaimed, amazement and anger in her tone, 'This is a jest,
sir. This--'

What more she would have said I was left to guess, for at that moment
her attendant I had no doubt now which was mademoiselle and which
Fanchette--suddenly laid her hand on her mistress's mouth and pointed
to the room behind them. A second's suspense, and with a wanting gesture
the two turned and disappeared through the window. I lost no time in regaining the shelter of the trees; and concluding,
though I was far from satisfied with the interview, that I could do
nothing more now, but might rather, by loitering in the neighbourhood,
awaken suspicion, I remounted and made for the highway and the village,
where I found my men in noisy occupation of the inn, a poor place, with
unglazed windows, and a fire in the middle of the earthen floor. My first care wets to stable the Cid in a shed at the back, where I
provided for its wants as far as I could with the aid of a half-naked
boy, who seemed to be in hiding there. This done, I returned to the front of the house, having pretty well made
up my mind how I would set about the task before me. As I passed one of
the windows, which was partially closed by a rude curtain made of old
sacks, I stopped to look in. Fresnoy and his four rascals were seated
on blocks of wood round the hearth, talking loudly and fiercely, and
ruffling it as if the fire and the room were their own. A pedlar,
seated on his goods in one corner, was eyeing them with evident fear
and suspicion; in another corner two children had taken refuge under a
donkey, which some fowls had chosen as a roosting-pole. The innkeeper, a
sturdy fellow, with a great club in his fist, sat moodily at the foot of
a ladder which led to the loft above, while a slatternly woman, who was
going to and fro getting supper, seemed in equal terror of her guests
and her good man. Confirmed by what I saw, and assured that the villains were ripe for any
mischief, and, if not checked, would speedily be beyond my control, I
noisily flung the door open and entered. Fresnoy looked up with a sneer
as I did so, and one of the men laughed. The others became silent; but
no one moved or greeted me. Without a moment's hesitation I stepped to
the nearest fellow and, with a sturdy kick, sent his log from under him. 'Rise, you rascal, when I enter!' I cried, giving vent to the anger
I had long felt. 'And you, too!' and with a second kick I sent his
neighbour's stool flying also, and administered a couple of cuts with
my riding-cane across the man's shoulders. 'Have you no manners, sirrah? Across with you, and leave this side to your betters.' The two rose, snarling and feeling for their weapons, and for a moment
stood facing me, looking now at me and now askance at Fresnoy. But as he
gave no sign, and their comrades only laughed, the men's courage failed
them at the pinch, and with a very poor grace they sneaked over to the
other side of the fire and sat there, scowling. I seated myself beside their leader. 'This gentleman and I will eat
here,' I cried to the man at the foot of the ladder. 'Bid your wife lay
for us, and of the best you have; and do you give those knaves their
provender where the smell of their greasy jackets will not come between
us and our victuals.' The man came forward, glad enough, as I saw, to discover any one in
authority, and very civilly began to draw wine and place a board for us,
while his wife filled our platters from the black pot which hung over
the fire. Fresnoy's face meanwhile wore the amused smile of one who
comprehended my motives, but felt sufficiently sure of his position
and influence with his followers to be indifferent to my proceedings. I presently showed him, however, that I had not yet done with him. Our
table was laid in obedience to my orders at such a distance from the
men that they could not overhear our talk, and by-and-by I leant over to
him. 'M. Fresnoy,' I said, 'you are in danger of forgetting one thing, I
fancy, which it behoves you to remember.' 'What?' he muttered, scarcely deigning to look up at me. 'That you have to do with Gaston de Marsac,' I answered quietly. 'I
am making, as I told you this morning, a last attempt to recruit
my fortunes, and I will let no man--no man, do you understand, M. Fresnoy?--thwart me and go harmless.' 'Who wishes to thwart you?' he asked impudently. 'You,' I answered unmoved, helping myself, as I spoke, from the roll of
black bread which lay beside me. 'You robbed me this afternoon; I passed
it over. You encouraged those men to be insolent; I passed it over. But let me tell you this. If you fail me to-night, on the honour of a
gentleman, M. Fresnoy, I will run you through as I would spit a lark.' 'Will you? But two can play at that game,' he cried, rising nimbly from
his stool. 'Still better six! Don't you think, M. de Marsac, you had
better have waited--?' 'I think you had better hear one word more,' I answered coolly, keeping
my seat, 'before you appeal to your fellows there.' 'Well,' he said, still standing, 'what is it?' 'Nay,' I replied, after once more pointing to his stool in vain, 'if you
prefer to take my orders standing, well and good.' 'Your orders?' he shrieked, growing suddenly excited. 'Yes, my orders!' I retorted, rising as suddenly to my feet and hitching
forward my sword. 'My orders, sir,' I repeated fiercely, 'or, if you
dispute my right to command as well as to pay this party, let us decide
the question here and now--you and I, foot to foot, M. Fresnoy.' The quarrel flashed up so suddenly, though I had been preparing it all
along, that no one moved. The woman indeed, fell back to her children,
but the rest looked on open-mouthed. Had they stirred, or had a moment's
hurly-burly heated his blood, I doubt not Fresnoy would have taken up
my challenge, for he did not lack hardihood. But as it was, face to face
with me in the silence, his courage failed him. He paused, glowering at
me uncertainly, and did not speak. 'Well,' I said, 'don't you think that if I pay I ought to give orders,
sir?' 'Who wishes to oppose your orders?' he muttered, drinking off a bumper,
and sitting down with an air of impudent bravado, assumed to hide his
discomfiture. 'If you don't, no one else does,' I answered. So that is settled. Landlord, some more wine.' He was very sulky with me for a while, fingering his glass in silence
and scowling at the table. He had enough gentility to feel the
humiliation to which he had exposed himself, and a sufficiency of wit to
understand that that moment's hesitation had cost him the allegiance of
his fellow-ruffians. I hastened, therefore, to set him at his ease by
explaining my plans for the night, and presently succeeded beyond my
hopes; for when he heard who the lady was whom I proposed to carry
off, and that she was lying that evening at the Chateau de Chize, his
surprise swept away the last trace of resentment. He stared at me, as at
a maniac. 'Mon Dieu!' he exclaimed. 'Do you know what you are doing, Sieur?' 'I think so,' I answered. 'Do you know to whom the chateau belongs?' 'To the Vicomte de Turenne.' 'And that Mademoiselle de la Vire is his relation?' 'Yes,' I said. 'Mon Dieu!' he exclaimed again. And he looked at me open-mouthed. 'What is the matter?' I asked, though I had an uneasy consciousness that
I knew--that I knew very well. 'Man, he will crush you as I crush this hat!' he answered in great
excitement. 'As easily. Who do you think will protect you from him in a
private quarrel of this kind? Navarre? France? our good man? Not one
of them. You had better steal the king's crown jewels--he is weak;
or Guise's last plot--he is generous at times, or Navarre's last
sweetheart--he is as easy as an old shoe. You had better have to do with
all these together, I tell you, than touch Turenne's ewe-lambs, unless
your aim be to be broken on the wheel! Mon Dieu, yes!' 'I am much obliged to you for your advice,' I said stiffly, 'but the die
is cast. My mind is made up. On the other hand, if you are afraid, M.
Fresnoy--'

'I am afraid; very much afraid,' he answered frankly. 'Still your name need not be brought into the matter,' I replied, 'I
will take the responsibility. I will let them know my name here at the
inn, where, doubtless, inquiries will be made.' 'To be sure, that is something,' he answered thoughtfully. 'Well, it
is an ugly business, but I am in for it. You want me to go with you a
little after two, do you? and the others to be in the saddle at three? Is that it?' I assented, pleased to find him so far acquiescent; and in this
way, talking the details over more than once, we settled our course,
arranging to fly by way of Poitiers and Tours. Of course I did not tell
him why I selected Blois as our refuge, nor what was my purpose there;
though he pressed me more than once on the point, and grew thoughtful
and somewhat gloomy when I continually evaded it. A little after eight
we retired to the loft to sleep; our men remaining below round the fire
and snoring so merrily as almost to shake the crazy old building. The
host was charged to sit up and call us as soon as the moon rose, but,
as it turned out, I might as well have taken this office on myself, for
between excitement and distrust I slept little, and was wide awake when
I heard his step on the ladder and knew it was time to rise. I was up in a moment, and Fresnoy was little behind me; so that, losing
no time in talk, we were mounted and on the road, each with a spare
horse at his knee, before the moon was well above the trees. Once in the
Chase we found it necessary to proceed on foot, but, the distance being
short, we presently emerged without misadventure and stood opposite to
the chateau, the upper part of which shone cold and white in the moon's
rays. There was something so solemn in the aspect of the place, the night
being fine and the sky without a cloud, that I stood for a minute awed
and impressed, the sense of the responsibility I was here to accept
strong upon me. In that short space of time all the dangers before me,
as well the common risks of the road as the vengeance of Turenne and the
turbulence of my own men, presented themselves to my mind, and made
a last appeal to me to turn back from an enterprise so foolhardy. The
blood in a man's veins runs low and slow at that hour, and mine was
chilled by lack of sleep and the wintry air. It needed the remembrance
of my solitary condition, of my past spent in straits and failure, of
the grey hairs which swept my cheek, of the sword which I had long used
honourably, if with little profit to myself; it needed the thought of
all these things to restore me to courage and myself. I judged at a later period that my companion was affected in somewhat
the same way; for, as I stooped to press home the pegs which I had
brought to tether the horses, he laid his hand on my arm. Glancing up to
see what he wanted, I was struck by the wild look in his face (which the
moonlight invested with a peculiar mottled pallor), and particularly in
his eyes, which glittered like a madman's. He tried to speak, but seemed
to find a difficulty in doing so; and I had to question him roughly
before he found his tongue. When he did speak, it was only to implore me
in an odd, excited manner to give up the expedition and return. 'What, now?' I said, surprised. 'Now we are here, Fresnoy?' 'Ay, give it up!' he cried, shaking me almost fiercely by the arm. 'Give
it up, man! It will end badly, I tell you! In God's name, give it up,
and go home before worse comes of it.' 'Whatever comes of it,' I answered coldly, shaking his grasp from my
arm, and wondering much at this sudden fit of cowardice, 'I go on. You,
M. Fresnoy, may do as you please!' He started and drew back from me; but he did not reply, nor did he speak
again. When I presently went off to fetch a ladder, of the position of
which I had made a note during the afternoon, he accompanied me, and
followed me back in the same dull silence to the walk below the balcony. I had looked more than once and eagerly at mademoiselle's window without
any light or movement in that quarter rewarding my vigilance; but,
undeterred by this, which might mean either that my plot was known,
or that Mademoiselle de la Vire distrusted me, I set the ladder softly
against the balcony, which was in deep shadow, and paused only to give
Fresnoy his last instructions. These were simply to stand on guard
at the foot of the ladder and defend it in case of surprise; so that,
whatever happened inside the chateau, my retreat by the window might not
be cut off. Then I went cautiously up the ladder, and, with my sheathed sword in my
left hand, stepped over the balustrade. Taking one pace forward, with
fingers outstretched, I felt the leaded panes of the window and tapped
softly. As softly the casement gave way, and I followed it. A hand which I could
see but not feel was laid on mine. All was darkness in the room, and
before me, but the hand guided me two paces forward, then by a sudden
pressure bade me stand. I heard the sound of a curtain being drawn
behind me, and the next moment the cover of a rushlight was removed, and
a feeble but sufficient light filled the chamber. I comprehended that the drawing of that curtain over the window had cut
off my retreat as effectually as if a door had been closed behind me. But distrust and suspicion gave way the next moment to the natural
embarrassment of the man who finds himself in a false position and knows
he can escape from it only by an awkward explanation. The room in which I found myself was long, narrow, and low in the
ceiling; and being hung with some dark stuff which swallowed up the
light, terminated funereally at the farther end in the still deeper
gloom of an alcove. Two or three huge chests, one bearing the remnants
of a meal, stood against the walls. The middle of the floor was covered
with a strip of coarse matting, on which a small table, a chair and
foot-rest, and a couple of stools had place, with some smaller articles
which lay scattered round a pair of half-filled saddle-bags. The
slighter and smaller of the two figures I had seen stood beside the
table, wearing a mask and riding cloak; and by her silent manner of
gazing at me, as well as by a cold, disdainful bearing, which neither
her mask nor cloak could hide, did more to chill and discomfit me than
even my own knowledge that I had lost the pass-key which should have
admitted me to her confidence. The stouter figure of the afternoon turned out to be a red-cheeked,
sturdy woman of thirty, with bright black eyes and a manner which lost
nothing of its fierce impatience when she came a little later to address
me. All my ideas of Fanchette were upset by the appearance of this
woman, who, rustic in her speech and ways, seemed more like a duenna,
than the waiting-maid of a court beauty, and better fitted to guard a
wayward damsel than to aid her in such an escapade as we had in hand. She stood slightly behind her mistress, her coarse red hand resting on
the back of the chair from which mademoiselle had apparently risen on my
entrance. For a few seconds, which seemed minutes to me, we stood gazing
at one another in silence, mademoiselle acknowledging my bow by a slight
movement of the head. Then, seeing that they waited for me to speak, I
did so. 'Mademoiselle de la Vire?' I murmured doubtfully. She bent her head again; that was all. I strove to speak with confidence. 'You will pardon me, mademoiselle,'
I said, 'if I seem to be abrupt, but time is everything. The horses are
standing within a hundred yards of the house, and all the preparations
for your flight are made. If we leave now, we can do so without
opposition. The delay even of an hour may lead to discovery.' For answer she laughed behind her mask-laughed coldly and ironically. 'You go too fast, sir,' she said, her low clear voice matching the laugh
and rousing a feeling almost of anger in my heart. 'I do not know you;
or, rather, I know nothing of you which should entitle you to interfere
in my affairs. You are too quick to presume, sir. You say you come from
a friend. From whom?' 'From one whom I am proud to call by that title,' I answered with what
patience I might. 'His name!' I answered firmly that I could not give it. And I eyed her steadily as I
did so. This for the moment seemed to baffle and confuse her, but after a pause
she continued: 'Where do you propose to take me, sir?' 'To Blois; to the lodging of a friend of my friend.' 'You speak bravely,' she replied with a faint sneer. 'You have made some
great friends lately it seems! But you bring me some letter, no doubt;
at least some sign, some token, some warranty, that you are the person
you pretend to be, M. de Marsac?' 'The truth is, Mademoiselle,' I stammered, 'I must explain. I should
tell you--'

'Nay, sir,' she cried impetuously, 'there is no need of telling. If you
have what I say, show it me! It is you who lose time. Let us have no
more words!' I had used very few words, and, God knows, was not in the mind to use
many; but, being in the wrong, I had no answer to make except the truth,
and that humbly. 'I had such a token as you mention, mademoiselle,' I
said, 'no farther back than this afternoon, in the shape of half a gold
coin, entrusted to me by my friend. But, to my shame I say it, it was
stolen from me a few hours back.' 'Stolen from you!' she exclaimed. 'Yes, mademoiselle; and for that reason I cannot show it,' I answered. 'You cannot show it? And you dare to come to me without it!' she cried,
speaking with a vehemence which fairly startled me, prepared as I was
for reproaches. You come to me! You!' she continued. And with that,
scarcely stopping to take breath, she loaded me with abuse; calling me
impertinent, a meddler, and a hundred other things, which I now blush
to recall, and displaying in all a passion which even in her attendant
would have surprised me, but in one so slight and seemingly delicate,
overwhelmed and confounded me. In fault as I was, I could not understand
the peculiar bitterness she displayed, or the contemptuous force of her
language, and I stared at her in silent wonder until, of her own accord,
she supplied the key to her feelings. In a fresh outburst of rage she
snatched off her mask, and to my astonishment I saw before me the
young maid of honour whom I had encountered in the King of Navarre's
antechamber, and whom I had been so unfortunate as to expose to the
raillery of Mathurine. 'Who has paid you, sir,' she continued, clenching her small hands and
speaking with tears of anger in her eyes, 'to make me the laughing-stock
of the Court? It was bad enough when I thought you the proper agent of
those to whom I have a right to look for aid! It was bad enough when
I thought myself forced, through their inconsiderate choice, to
decide between an odious imprisonment and the ridicule to which your
intervention must expose me! But that you should have dared, of your own
notion, to follow me, you, the butt of the Court--'

'Mademoiselle!' I cried. 'A needy, out-at-elbows adventurer!' she persisted, triumphing in her
cruelty. 'It exceeds all bearing! It is not to be suffered! It--'

'Nay, mademoiselle; you SHALL hear me!' I cried, with a sternness which
at last stopped her. 'Granted I am poor, I am still a gentleman; yes,
mademoiselle,' I continued, firmly, 'a gentleman, and the last of a
family which has spoken with yours on equal terms. And I claim to be
heard. I swear that when I came here to-night I believed you to be a
perfect stranger! I was unaware that I had ever seen you, unaware that I
had ever met you before.' 'Then why did you come?' she said viciously. 'I was engaged to come by those whom you have mentioned, and there,
and there only am I in fault. They entrusted to me a token which I have
lost. For that I crave your pardon.' 'You have need to,' she answered bitterly, yet with a changed
countenance, or I was mistaken, 'if your story be true, sir.' 'Ay, that you have!' the woman beside her echoed. 'Hoity toity, indeed! Here is a fuss about nothing. You call yourself a
gentleman, and wear such a doublet as--'

'Peace, Fanchette,' mademoiselle said imperiously. And then for a moment
she stood silent, eyeing me intently, her lips trembling with excitement
and two red spots burning in her cheeks. It was clear from her dress
and other things that she had made up her mind to fly had the token been
forthcoming; and seeing this, and knowing how unwilling a young girl
is to forgo her own way, I still had some hopes that she might not
persevere in her distrust and refusal. And so it turned out. Her manner had changed to one of quiet scorn when she next spoke. 'You
defend yourself skilfully, sir,' she said, drumming with her fingers on
the table and eyeing me steadfastly. 'But can you give me any reason for
the person you name making choice of such a messenger?' 'Yes,' I answered, boldly. 'That he may not be suspected of conniving at
your escape.' 'Oh!' she cried, with a spark of her former passion. 'Then it is to be
put about that Mademoiselle de la Vire had fled from Chize with M. de
Marsac, is it? I thought that!' 'Through the assistance of M. de Marsac,' I retorted, correcting her
coldly. 'It is for you, mademoiselle,' I continued, 'to weigh that
disadvantage against the unpleasantness of remaining here. It only
remains for me to ask you to decide quickly. Time presses, and I have
stayed here too long already.' The words had barely passed my lips when they received unwelcome
confirmation in the shape of a distant sound--the noisy closing of a
door, which, clanging through the house at such an hour--I judged it to
be after three o'clock--could scarcely mean anything but mischief. This noise was followed immediately, even while we stood listening with
raised fingers, by other sounds--a muffled cry, and the tramp of heavy
footsteps in a distant passage. Mademoiselle looked at me, and I at her
woman. 'The door!' I muttered. 'Is it locked?' 'And bolted!' Fanchette answered; 'and a great chest set against it. Let
them ramp; they will do no harm for a bit.' 'Then you have still time, mademoiselle,' I whispered, retreating a step
and laying my hand on the curtain before the window. Perhaps I affected
greater coolness than I felt. 'It is not too late. If you choose to
remain, well and good. I cannot help it. If, on the other hand, you
decide to trust yourself to me, I swear, on the honour of a gentleman,
to be worthy of the trust--to serve you truly and protect you to the
last! I can say no more.' She trembled, looking from me to the door, on which some one had just
begun to knock loudly. That seemed to decide her. Her lips apart, her
eyes full of excitement, she turned hastily to Fanchette. 'Ay, go if you like,' the woman answered doggedly, reading the meaning
of her look. 'There cannot be a greater villain than the one we know
of. But once started, heaven help us, for if he overtakes us we'll pay
dearly for it!' The girl did not speak herself, but it was enough. The noise at the door
increased each second, and began to be mingled with angry appeals to
Fanchette to open, and with threats in case she delayed. 