



Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer, and David Widger





SCARAMOUCHE

A ROMANCE OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

By Rafael Sabatini



Contents

 BOOK I. CHAPTER I. THE REPUBLICAN
	  CHAPTER II. THE ARISTOCRAT
	  CHAPTER III. THE ELOQUENCE OF M. DE VILMORIN
	  CHAPTER IV. THE HERITAGE
	  CHAPTER V. 	THE LORD OF GAVRILLAC
	  CHAPTER VI. THE WINDMILL
	  CHAPTER VII. THE WIND
	  CHAPTER VIII. OMNES OMNIBUS
	  CHAPTER IX. THE AFTERMATH

 BOOK II. CHAPTER I. THE TRESPASSERS
	  CHAPTER II. THE SERVICE OF THESPIS
	  CHAPTER II. THE COMIC MUSE
	  CHAPTER IV. EXIT MONSIEUR PARVISSIMUS
	  CHAPTER V. 	ENTER SCARAMOUCHE
	  CHAPTER VI. CLIMENE
	  CHAPTER VII. THE CONQUEST OF NANTES
	  CHAPTER VIII. THE DREAM
	  CHAPTER IX. THE AWAKENING
	  CHAPTER X. 	CONTRITION
	  CHAPTER XI. THE FRACAS AT THE THEATRE FEYDAU

 BOOK III. CHAPTER I. TRANSITION
	  CHAPTER II. QUOS DEUS VULT PERDERE
	  CHAPTER III. PRESIDENT LE CHAPELIER
	  CHAPTER IV. AT MEUDON
	  CHAPTER V. 	MADAME DE PLOUGASTEL
	  CHAPTER VI. POLITICIANS
	  CHAPTER VII. THE SPADASSINICIDES
	  CHAPTER VIII. THE PALADIN OF THE THIRD
	  CHAPTER IX. TORN PRIDE
	  CHAPTER X. THE RETURNING CARRIAGE
	  CHAPTER XI. INFERENCES
	  CHAPTER XII. THE OVERWHELMING REASON
	  CHAPTER XIII. SANCTUARY
	  CHAPTER XIV. THE BARRIER
	  CHAPTER XV. SAFE-CONDUCT
	  CHAPTER XVI. SUNRISE



SCARAMOUCHE



BOOK I: THE ROBE



CHAPTER I. THE REPUBLICAN

He was born with a gift of laughter and a sense that the world was mad. And that was all his patrimony. His very paternity was obscure, although
the village of Gavrillac had long since dispelled the cloud of mystery
that hung about it. Those simple Brittany folk were not so simple as to
be deceived by a pretended relationship which did not even possess
the virtue of originality. When a nobleman, for no apparent reason,
announces himself the godfather of an infant fetched no man knew whence,
and thereafter cares for the lad's rearing and education, the most
unsophisticated of country folk perfectly understand the situation. And
so the good people of Gavrillac permitted themselves no illusions on the
score of the real relationship between Andre-Louis Moreau--as the lad had
been named--and Quintin de Kercadiou, Lord of Gavrillac, who dwelt in the
big grey house that dominated from its eminence the village clustering
below. Andre-Louis had learnt his letters at the village school, lodged the
while with old Rabouillet, the attorney, who in the capacity of fiscal
intendant, looked after the affairs of M. de Kercadiou. Thereafter, at
the age of fifteen, he had been packed off to Paris, to the Lycee of
Louis Le Grand, to study the law which he was now returned to practise
in conjunction with Rabouillet. All this at the charges of his
godfather, M. de Kercadiou, who by placing him once more under the
tutelage of Rabouillet would seem thereby quite clearly to be making
provision for his future. Andre-Louis, on his side, had made the most of his opportunities. You
behold him at the age of four-and-twenty stuffed with learning enough
to produce an intellectual indigestion in an ordinary mind. Out of
his zestful study of Man, from Thucydides to the Encyclopaedists, from
Seneca to Rousseau, he had confirmed into an unassailable conviction
his earliest conscious impressions of the general insanity of his own
species. Nor can I discover that anything in his eventful life ever
afterwards caused him to waver in that opinion. In body he was a slight wisp of a fellow, scarcely above middle height,
with a lean, astute countenance, prominent of nose and cheek-bones, and
with lank, black hair that reached almost to his shoulders. His mouth
was long, thin-lipped, and humorous. He was only just redeemed from
ugliness by the splendour of a pair of ever-questing, luminous eyes, so
dark as to be almost black. Of the whimsical quality of his mind and
his rare gift of graceful expression, his writings--unfortunately but too
scanty--and particularly his Confessions, afford us very ample evidence. Of his gift of oratory he was hardly conscious yet, although he had
already achieved a certain fame for it in the Literary Chamber of
Rennes--one of those clubs by now ubiquitous in the land, in which the
intellectual youth of France foregathered to study and discuss the
new philosophies that were permeating social life. But the fame he had
acquired there was hardly enviable. He was too impish, too caustic,
too much disposed--so thought his colleagues--to ridicule their sublime
theories for the regeneration of mankind. Himself he protested that
he merely held them up to the mirror of truth, and that it was not his
fault if when reflected there they looked ridiculous. All that he achieved by this was to exasperate; and his expulsion from a
society grown mistrustful of him must already have followed but for
his friend, Philippe de Vilmorin, a divinity student of Rennes, who,
himself, was one of the most popular members of the Literary Chamber. Coming to Gavrillac on a November morning, laden with news of the
political storms which were then gathering over France, Philippe found
in that sleepy Breton village matter to quicken his already lively
indignation. A peasant of Gavrillac, named Mabey, had been shot dead
that morning in the woods of Meupont, across the river, by a gamekeeper
of the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. The unfortunate fellow had been caught
in the act of taking a pheasant from a snare, and the gamekeeper had
acted under explicit orders from his master. Infuriated by an act of tyranny so absolute and merciless, M. de
Vilmorin proposed to lay the matter before M. de Kercadiou. Mabey was a
vassal of Gavrillac, and Vilmorin hoped to move the Lord of Gavrillac to
demand at least some measure of reparation for the widow and the three
orphans which that brutal deed had made. But because Andre-Louis was Philippe's dearest friend--indeed, his almost
brother--the young seminarist sought him out in the first instance. He
found him at breakfast alone in the long, low-ceilinged, white-panelled
dining-room at Rabouillet's--the only home that Andre-Louis had ever
known--and after embracing him, deafened him with his denunciation of M.
de La Tour d'Azyr. "I have heard of it already," said Andre-Louis. "You speak as if the thing had not surprised you," his friend reproached
him. "Nothing beastly can surprise me when done by a beast. And La Tour
d'Azyr is a beast, as all the world knows. The more fool Mabey for
stealing his pheasants. He should have stolen somebody else's." "Is that all you have to say about it?" "What more is there to say? I've a practical mind, I hope." "What more there is to say I propose to say to your godfather, M. de
Kercadiou. I shall appeal to him for justice." "Against M. de La Tour d'Azyr?" Andre-Louis raised his eyebrows. "Why not?" "My dear ingenuous Philippe, dog doesn't eat dog." "You are unjust to your godfather. He is a humane man." "Oh, as humane as you please. But this isn't a question of humanity. It's a question of game-laws." M. de Vilmorin tossed his long arms to Heaven in disgust. He was a tall,
slender young gentleman, a year or two younger than Andre-Louis. He was
very soberly dressed in black, as became a seminarist, with white bands
at wrists and throat and silver buckles to his shoes. His neatly clubbed
brown hair was innocent of powder. "You talk like a lawyer," he exploded. "Naturally. But don't waste anger on me on that account. Tell me what
you want me to do." "I want you to come to M. de Kercadiou with me, and to use your
influence to obtain justice. I suppose I am asking too much." "My dear Philippe, I exist to serve you. I warn you that it is a futile
quest; but give me leave to finish my breakfast, and I am at your
orders." M. de Vilmorin dropped into a winged armchair by the well-swept hearth,
on which a piled-up fire of pine logs was burning cheerily. And whilst
he waited now he gave his friend the latest news of the events in
Rennes. Young, ardent, enthusiastic, and inspired by Utopian ideals, he
passionately denounced the rebellious attitude of the privileged. Andre-Louis, already fully aware of the trend of feeling in the ranks of
an order in whose deliberations he took part as the representative of
a nobleman, was not at all surprised by what he heard. M. de Vilmorin
found it exasperating that his friend should apparently decline to share
his own indignation. "Don't you see what it means?" he cried. "The nobles, by disobeying the
King, are striking at the very foundations of the throne. Don't they
perceive that their very existence depends upon it; that if the throne
falls over, it is they who stand nearest to it who will be crushed? Don't they see that?" "Evidently not. They are just governing classes, and I never heard of
governing classes that had eyes for anything but their own profit." "That is our grievance. That is what we are going to change." "You are going to abolish governing classes? An interesting experiment. I believe it was the original plan of creation, and it might have
succeeded but for Cain." "What we are going to do," said M. de Vilmorin, curbing his
exasperation, "is to transfer the government to other hands." "And you think that will make a difference?" "I know it will." "Ah! I take it that being now in minor orders, you already possess the
confidence of the Almighty. He will have confided to you His intention
of changing the pattern of mankind." M. de Vilmorin's fine ascetic face grew overcast. "You are profane,
Andre," he reproved his friend. "I assure you that I am quite serious. To do what you imply would
require nothing short of divine intervention. You must change man, not
systems. Can you and our vapouring friends of the Literary Chamber
of Rennes, or any other learned society of France, devise a system of
government that has never yet been tried? Surely not. And can they say
of any system tried that it proved other than a failure in the end? My
dear Philippe, the future is to be read with certainty only in the
past. Ab actu ad posse valet consecutio. Man never changes. He is always
greedy, always acquisitive, always vile. I am speaking of Man in the
bulk." "Do you pretend that it is impossible to ameliorate the lot of the
people?" M. de Vilmorin challenged him. "When you say the people you mean, of course, the populace. Will you
abolish it? That is the only way to ameliorate its lot, for as long as
it remains populace its lot will be damnation." "You argue, of course, for the side that employs you. That is natural, I
suppose." M. de Vilmorin spoke between sorrow and indignation. "On the contrary, I seek to argue with absolute detachment. Let us
test these ideas of yours. To what form of government do you aspire? A
republic, it is to be inferred from what you have said. Well, you have
it already. France in reality is a republic to-day." Philippe stared at him. "You are being paradoxical, I think. What of the
King?" "The King? All the world knows there has been no king in France since
Louis XIV. There is an obese gentleman at Versailles who wears the
crown, but the very news you bring shows for how little he really
counts. It is the nobles and clergy who sit in the high places, with the
people of France harnessed under their feet, who are the real rulers. That is why I say that France is a republic; she is a republic built
on the best pattern--the Roman pattern. Then, as now, there were great
patrician families in luxury, preserving for themselves power and
wealth, and what else is accounted worth possessing; and there was
the populace crushed and groaning, sweating, bleeding, starving, and
perishing in the Roman kennels. That was a republic; the mightiest we
have seen." Philippe strove with his impatience. "At least you will admit--you have,
in fact, admitted it--that we could not be worse governed than we are?" "That is not the point. The point is should we be better governed if we
replaced the present ruling class by another? Without some guarantee of
that I should be the last to lift a finger to effect a change. And what
guarantees can you give? What is the class that aims at government? I
will tell you. The bourgeoisie." "What?" "That startles you, eh? Truth is so often disconcerting. You hadn't
thought of it? Well, think of it now. Look well into this Nantes
manifesto. Who are the authors of it?" "I can tell you who it was constrained the municipality of Nantes to
send it to the King. Some ten thousand workmen--shipwrights, weavers,
labourers, and artisans of every kind." "Stimulated to it, driven to it, by their employers, the wealthy traders
and shipowners of that city," Andre-Louis replied. "I have a habit of
observing things at close quarters, which is why our colleagues of the
Literary Chamber dislike me so cordially in debate. Where I delve they
but skim. Behind those labourers and artisans of Nantes, counselling
them, urging on these poor, stupid, ignorant toilers to shed their blood
in pursuit of the will o' the wisp of freedom, are the sail-makers, the
spinners, the ship-owners and the slave-traders. The slave-traders! The
men who live and grow rich by a traffic in human flesh and blood in
the colonies, are conducting at home a campaign in the sacred name
of liberty! Don't you see that the whole movement is a movement of
hucksters and traders and peddling vassals swollen by wealth into envy
of the power that lies in birth alone? The money-changers in Paris
who hold the bonds in the national debt, seeing the parlous financial
condition of the State, tremble at the thought that it may lie in
the power of a single man to cancel the debt by bankruptcy. To secure
themselves they are burrowing underground to overthrow a state and build
upon its ruins a new one in which they shall be the masters. And to
accomplish this they inflame the people. Already in Dauphiny we have
seen blood run like water--the blood of the populace, always the blood of
the populace. Now in Brittany we may see the like. And if in the end the
new ideas prevail? if the seigneurial rule is overthrown, what then? You will have exchanged an aristocracy for a plutocracy. Is that worth
while? Do you 'think that under money-changers and slave-traders and
men who have waxed rich in other ways by the ignoble arts of buying
and selling, the lot of the people will be any better than under their
priests and nobles? Has it ever occurred to you, Philippe, what it
is that makes the rule of the nobles so intolerable? Acquisitiveness. Acquisitiveness is the curse of mankind. And shall you expect less
acquisitiveness in men who have built themselves up by acquisitiveness? Oh, I am ready to admit that the present government is execrable,
unjust, tyrannical--what you will; but I beg you to look ahead, and to
see that the government for which it is aimed at exchanging it may be
infinitely worse." Philippe sat thoughtful a moment. Then he returned to the attack. "You do not speak of the abuses, the horrible, intolerable abuses of
power under which we labour at present." "Where there is power there will always be the abuse of it." "Not if the tenure of power is dependent upon its equitable
administration." "The tenure of power is power. We cannot dictate to those who hold it." "The people can--the people in its might." "Again I ask you, when you say the people do you mean the populace? You
do. What power can the populace wield? It can run wild. It can burn
and slay for a time. But enduring power it cannot wield, because power
demands qualities which the populace does not possess, or it would
not be populace. The inevitable, tragic corollary of civilization is
populace. For the rest, abuses can be corrected by equity; and equity,
if it is not found in the enlightened, is not to be found at all. M.
Necker is to set about correcting abuses, and limiting privileges. That
is decided. To that end the States General are to assemble." "And a promising beginning we have made in Brittany, as Heaven hears
me!" cried Philippe. "Pooh! That is nothing. Naturally the nobles will not yield without a
struggle. It is a futile and ridiculous struggle--but then... it is human
nature, I suppose, to be futile and ridiculous." M. de Vilmorin became witheringly sarcastic. "Probably you will also
qualify the shooting of Mabey as futile and ridiculous. I should even be
prepared to hear you argue in defence of the Marquis de La Tour
d'Azyr that his gamekeeper was merciful in shooting Mabey, since the
alternative would have been a life-sentence to the galleys." Andre-Louis drank the remainder of his chocolate; set down his cup, and
pushed back his chair, his breakfast done. "I confess that I have not your big charity, my dear Philippe. I am
touched by Mabey's fate. But, having conquered the shock of this news to
my emotions, I do not forget that, after all, Mabey was thieving when he
met his death." M. de Vilmorin heaved himself up in his indignation. "That is the point of view to be expected in one who is the assistant
fiscal intendant of a nobleman, and the delegate of a nobleman to the
States of Brittany." "Philippe, is that just? You are angry with me!" he cried, in real
solicitude. "I am hurt," Vilmorin admitted. "I am deeply hurt by your attitude. And
I am not alone in resenting your reactionary tendencies. Do you know
that the Literary Chamber is seriously considering your expulsion?" Andre-Louis shrugged. "That neither surprises nor troubles me." M. de Vilmorin swept on, passionately: "Sometimes I think that you have
no heart. With you it is always the law, never equity. It occurs to me,
Andre, that I was mistaken in coming to you. You are not likely to be of
assistance to me in my interview with M. de Kercadiou." He took up his
hat, clearly with the intention of departing. Andre-Louis sprang up and caught him by the arm. "I vow," said he, "that this is the last time ever I shall consent to
talk law or politics with you, Philippe. I love you too well to quarrel
with you over other men's affairs." "But I make them my own," Philippe insisted vehemently. "Of course you do, and I love you for it. It is right that you should. You are to be a priest; and everybody's business is a priest's business. Whereas I am a lawyer--the fiscal intendant of a nobleman, as you
say--and a lawyer's business is the business of his client. That is the
difference between us. Nevertheless, you are not going to shake me off." "But I tell you frankly, now that I come to think of it, that I should
prefer you did not see M. de Kercadiou with me. Your duty to your client
cannot be a help to me." His wrath had passed; but his determination remained firm, based upon
the reason he gave. "Very well," said Andre-Louis. "It shall be as you please. But nothing
shall prevent me at least from walking with you as far as the chateau,
and waiting for you while you make your appeal to M. de Kercadiou." And so they left the house good friends, for the sweetness of M. de
Vilmorin's nature did not admit of rancour, and together they took their
way up the steep main street of Gavrillac. CHAPTER II. THE ARISTOCRAT

The sleepy village of Gavrillac, a half-league removed from the main
road to Rennes, and therefore undisturbed by the world's traffic, lay
in a curve of the River Meu, at the foot, and straggling halfway up the
slope, of the shallow hill that was crowned by the squat manor. By the
time Gavrillac had paid tribute to its seigneur--partly in money and
partly in service--tithes to the Church, and imposts to the King, it was
hard put to it to keep body and soul together with what remained. Yet,
hard as conditions were in Gavrillac, they were not so hard as in many
other parts of France, not half so hard, for instance, as with the
wretched feudatories of the great Lord of La Tour d'Azyr, whose vast
possessions were at one point separated from this little village by the
waters of the Meu. The Chateau de Gavrillac owed such seigneurial airs as might be claimed
for it to its dominant position above the village rather than to any
feature of its own. Built of granite, like all the rest of Gavrillac,
though mellowed by some three centuries of existence, it was a squat,
flat-fronted edifice of two stories, each lighted by four windows with
external wooden shutters, and flanked at either end by two square towers
or pavilions under extinguisher roofs. Standing well back in a garden,
denuded now, but very pleasant in summer, and immediately fronted by a
fine sweep of balustraded terrace, it looked, what indeed it was, and
always had been, the residence of unpretentious folk who found more
interest in husbandry than in adventure. Quintin de Kercadiou, Lord of Gavrillac--Seigneur de Gavrillac was all
the vague title that he bore, as his forefathers had borne before him,
derived no man knew whence or how--confirmed the impression that his
house conveyed. Rude as the granite itself, he had never sought the
experience of courts, had not even taken service in the armies of his
King. He left it to his younger brother, Etienne, to represent the
family in those exalted spheres. His own interests from earliest years
had been centred in his woods and pastures. He hunted, and he cultivated
his acres, and superficially he appeared to be little better than any of
his rustic metayers. He kept no state, or at least no state commensurate
with his position or with the tastes of his niece Aline de Kercadiou. Aline, having spent some two years in the court atmosphere of Versailles
under the aegis of her uncle Etienne, had ideas very different from
those of her uncle Quintin of what was befitting seigneurial dignity. But though this only child of a third Kercadiou had exercised, ever
since she was left an orphan at the early age of four, a tyrannical rule
over the Lord of Gavrillac, who had been father and mother to her, she
had never yet succeeded in beating down his stubbornness on that
score. She did not yet despair--persistence being a dominant note in
her character--although she had been assiduously and fruitlessly at work
since her return from the great world of Versailles some three months
ago. She was walking on the terrace when Andre-Louis and M. de Vilmorin
arrived. Her slight body was wrapped against the chill air in a white
pelisse; her head was encased in a close-fitting bonnet, edged with
white fur. It was caught tight in a knot of pale-blue ribbon on the
right of her chin; on the left a long ringlet of corn-coloured hair had
been permitted to escape. The keen air had whipped so much of her cheeks
as was presented to it, and seemed to have added sparkle to eyes that
were of darkest blue. Andre-Louis and M. de Vilmorin had been known to her from childhood. The
three had been playmates once, and Andre-Louis--in view of his spiritual
relationship with her uncle--she called her cousin. The cousinly
relations had persisted between these two long after Philippe de
Vilmorin had outgrown the earlier intimacy, and had become to her
Monsieur de Vilmorin. She waved her hand to them in greeting as they advanced, and stood--an
entrancing picture, and fully conscious of it--to await them at the end
of the terrace nearest the short avenue by which they approached. "If you come to see monsieur my uncle, you come inopportunely,
messieurs," she told them, a certain feverishness in her air. "He is
closely--oh, so very closely--engaged." "We will wait, mademoiselle," said M. de Vilmorin, bowing gallantly over
the hand she extended to him. "Indeed, who would haste to the uncle that
may tarry a moment with the niece?" "M. l'abbe," she teased him, "when you are in orders I shall take you
for my confessor. You have so ready and sympathetic an understanding." "But no curiosity," said Andre-Louis. "You haven't thought of that." "I wonder what you mean, Cousin Andre." "Well you may," laughed Philippe. "For no one ever knows." And then,
his glance straying across the terrace settled upon a carriage that was
drawn up before the door of the chateau. It was a vehicle such as was
often to be seen in the streets of a great city, but rarely in the
country. It was a beautifully sprung two-horse cabriolet of walnut,
with a varnish upon it like a sheet of glass and little pastoral scenes
exquisitely painted on the panels of the door. It was built to carry two
persons, with a box in front for the coachman, and a stand behind for
the footman. This stand was empty, but the footman paced before the
door, and as he emerged now from behind the vehicle into the range of M.
de Vilmorin's vision, he displayed the resplendent blue-and-gold livery
of the Marquis de La Tour d'Azyr. "Why!" he exclaimed. "Is it M. de La Tour d'Azyr who is with your
uncle?" "It is, monsieur," said she, a world of mystery in voice and eyes, of
which M. de Vilmorin observed nothing. "Ah, pardon!" he bowed low, hat in hand. "Serviteur, mademoiselle," and
he turned to depart towards the house. "Shall I come with you, Philippe?" Andre-Louis called after him. "It would be ungallant to assume that you would prefer it," said M. de
Vilmorin, with a glance at mademoiselle. "Nor do I think it would serve. If you will wait..."

M. de Vilmorin strode off. Mademoiselle, after a moment's blank pause,
laughed ripplingly. "Now where is he going in such a hurry?" "To see M. de La Tour d'Azyr as well as your uncle, I should say." "But he cannot. They cannot see him. Did I not say that they are
very closely engaged? You don't ask me why, Andre." There was an arch
mysteriousness about her, a latent something that may have been elation
or amusement, or perhaps both. Andre-Louis could not determine it. "Since obviously you are all eagerness to tell, why should I ask?" quoth
he. "If you are caustic I shall not tell you even if you ask. Oh, yes, I
will. It will teach you to treat me with the respect that is my due." "I hope I shall never fail in that." "Less than ever when you learn that I am very closely concerned in the
visit of M. de La Tour d'Azyr. I am the object of this visit." And she
looked at him with sparkling eyes and lips parted in laughter. "The rest, you would seem to imply, is obvious. But I am a dolt, if you
please; for it is not obvious to me." "Why, stupid, he comes to ask my hand in marriage." "Good God!" said Andre-Louis, and stared at her, chapfallen. She drew back from him a little with a frown and an upward tilt of her
chin. "It surprises you?" "It disgusts me," said he, bluntly. "In fact, I don't believe it. You
are amusing yourself with me." For a moment she put aside her visible annoyance to remove his doubts. "I am quite serious, monsieur. There came a formal letter to my uncle
this morning from M. de La Tour d'Azyr, announcing the visit and its
object. I will not say that it did not surprise us a little..."

"Oh, I see," cried Andre-Louis, in relief. "I understand. For a moment I
had almost feared..." He broke off, looked at her, and shrugged. "Why do you stop? You had almost feared that Versailles had been wasted
upon me. That I should permit the court-ship of me to be conducted like
that of any village wench. It was stupid of you. I am being sought in
proper form, at my uncle's hands." "Is his consent, then, all that matters, according to Versailles?" "What else?" "There is your own." She laughed. "I am a dutiful niece... when it suits me." "And will it suit you to be dutiful if your uncle accepts this monstrous
proposal?" "Monstrous!" She bridled. "And why monstrous, if you please?" "For a score of reasons," he answered irritably. "Give me one," she challenged him. "He is twice your age." "Hardly so much," said she. "He is forty-five, at least." "But he looks no more than thirty. He is very handsome--so much you will
admit; nor will you deny that he is very wealthy and very powerful; the
greatest nobleman in Brittany. He will make me a great lady." "God made you that, Aline." "Come, that's better. Sometimes you can almost be polite." And she moved
along the terrace, Andre-Louis pacing beside her. "I can be more than that to show reason why you should not let this
beast befoul the beautiful thing that God has made." She frowned, and her lips tightened. "You are speaking of my future
husband," she reproved him. His lips tightened too; his pale face grew paler. "And is it so? It is settled, then? Your uncle is to agree? You are to
be sold thus, lovelessly, into bondage to a man you do not know. I had
dreamed of better things for you, Aline." "Better than to be Marquise de La Tour d'Azyr?" He made a gesture of exasperation. "Are men and women nothing more than
names? Do the souls of them count for nothing? Is there no joy in life,
no happiness, that wealth and pleasure and empty, high-sounding titles
are to be its only aims? I had set you high--so high, Aline--a thing
scarce earthly. There is joy in your heart, intelligence in your mind;
and, as I thought, the vision that pierces husks and shams to claim the
core of reality for its own. Yet you will surrender all for a parcel of
make-believe. You will sell your soul and your body to be Marquise de La
Tour d'Azyr." "You are indelicate," said she, and though she frowned her eyes laughed. "And you go headlong to conclusions. My uncle will not consent to more
than to allow my consent to be sought. We understand each other, my
uncle and I. I am not to be bartered like a turnip." He stood still to face her, his eyes glowing, a flush creeping into his
pale cheeks. "You have been torturing me to amuse yourself!" he cried. "Ah, well, I
forgive you out of my relief." "Again you go too fast, Cousin Andre I have permitted my uncle to
consent that M. le Marquis shall make his court to me. I like the look
of the gentleman. I am flattered by his preference when I consider his
eminence. It is an eminence that I may find it desirable to share. M. le
Marquis does not look as if he were a dullard. It should be interesting
to be wooed by him. It may be more interesting still to marry him, and
I think, when all is considered, that I shall probably--very
probably--decide to do so." He looked at her, looked at the sweet, challenging loveliness of that
childlike face so tightly framed in the oval of white fur, and all the
life seemed to go out of his own countenance. "God help you, Aline!" he groaned. She stamped her foot. He was really very exasperating, and something
presumptuous too, she thought. "You are insolent, monsieur." "It is never insolent to pray, Aline. And I did no more than pray, as I
shall continue to do. You'll need my prayers, I think." "You are insufferable!" She was growing angry, as he saw by the
deepening frown, the heightened colour. "That is because I suffer. Oh, Aline, little cousin, think well of what
you do; think well of the realities you will be bartering for these
shams--the realities that you will never know, because these cursed shams
will block your way to them. When M. de La Tour d'Azyr comes to make his
court, study him well; consult your fine instincts; leave your own noble
nature free to judge this animal by its intuitions. Consider that..."

"I consider, monsieur, that you presume upon the kindness I have always
shown you. You abuse the position of toleration in which you stand. Who
are you? What are you, that you should have the insolence to take this
tone with me?" He bowed, instantly his cold, detached self again, and resumed the
mockery that was his natural habit. "My congratulations, mademoiselle, upon the readiness with which you
begin to adapt yourself to the great role you are to play." "Do you adapt yourself also, monsieur," she retorted angrily, and turned
her shoulder to him. "To be as the dust beneath the haughty feet of Madame la Marquise. I
hope I shall know my place in future." The phrase arrested her. She turned to him again, and he perceived that
her eyes were shining now suspiciously. In an instant the mockery in him
was quenched in contrition. "Lord, what a beast I am, Aline!" he cried, as he advanced. "Forgive me
if you can." Almost had she turned to sue forgiveness from him. But his contrition
removed the need. "I'll try," said she, "provided that you undertake not to offend again." "But I shall," said he. "I am like that. I will fight to save you, from
yourself if need be, whether you forgive me or not." They were standing so, confronting each other a little breathlessly, a
little defiantly, when the others issued from the porch. First came the Marquis of La Tour d'Azyr, Count of Solz, Knight of the
Orders of the Holy Ghost and Saint Louis, and Brigadier in the armies
of the King. He was a tall, graceful man, upright and soldierly of
carriage, with his head disdainfully set upon his shoulders. He was
magnificently dressed in a full-skirted coat of mulberry velvet that was
laced with gold. His waistcoat, of velvet too, was of a golden
apricot colour; his breeches and stockings were of black silk, and his
lacquered, red-heeled shoes were buckled in diamonds. His powdered hair
was tied behind in a broad ribbon of watered silk; he carried a little
three-cornered hat under his arm, and a gold-hilted slender dress-sword
hung at his side. Considering him now in complete detachment, observing the magnificence
of him, the elegance of his movements, the great air, blending in so
extraordinary a manner disdain and graciousness, Andre-Louis trembled
for Aline. Here was a practised, irresistible wooer, whose bonnes
fortunes were become a by-word, a man who had hitherto been the despair
of dowagers with marriageable daughters, and the desolation of husbands
with attractive wives. He was immediately followed by M. de Kercadiou, in completest contrast. On legs of the shortest, the Lord of Gavrillac carried a body that at
forty-five was beginning to incline to corpulence and an enormous head
containing an indifferent allotment of intelligence. His countenance
was pink and blotchy, liberally branded by the smallpox which had almost
extinguished him in youth. In dress he was careless to the point
of untidiness, and to this and to the fact that he had never
married--disregarding the first duty of a gentleman to provide himself
with an heir--he owed the character of misogynist attributed to him by
the countryside. After M. de Kercadiou came M. de Vilmorin, very pale and self-contained,
with tight lips and an overcast brow. To meet them, there stepped from the carriage a very elegant young
gentleman, the Chevalier de Chabrillane, M. de La Tour d'Azyr's
cousin, who whilst awaiting his return had watched with considerable
interest--his own presence unsuspected--the perambulations of Andre-Louis
and mademoiselle. Perceiving Aline, M. de La Tour d'Azyr detached himself from the others,
and lengthening his stride came straight across the terrace to her. To Andre-Louis the Marquis inclined his head with that mixture of
courtliness and condescension which he used. Socially, the young lawyer
stood in a curious position. By virtue of the theory of his birth, he
ranked neither as noble nor as simple, but stood somewhere between the
two classes, and whilst claimed by neither he was used familiarly
by both. Coldly now he returned M. de La Tour d'Azyr's greeting, and
discreetly removed himself to go and join his friend. The Marquis took the hand that mademoiselle extended to him, and bowing
over it, bore it to his lips. "Mademoiselle," he said, looking into the blue depths of her eyes, that
met his gaze smiling and untroubled, "monsieur your uncle does me the
honour to permit that I pay my homage to you. Will you, mademoiselle,
do me the honour to receive me when I come to-morrow? I shall have
something of great importance for your ear." "Of importance, M. le Marquis? You almost frighten me." But there was
no fear on the serene little face in its furred hood. It was not
for nothing that she had graduated in the Versailles school of
artificialities. "That," said he, "is very far from my design." "But of importance to yourself, monsieur, or to me?" "To us both, I hope," he answered her, a world of meaning in his fine,
ardent eyes. "You whet my curiosity, monsieur; and, of course, I am a dutiful niece. It follows that I shall be honoured to receive you." "Not honoured, mademoiselle; you will confer the honour. To-morrow at
this hour, then, I shall have the felicity to wait upon you." He bowed again; and again he bore her fingers to his lips, what time she
curtsied. Thereupon, with no more than this formal breaking of the ice,
they parted. She was a little breathless now, a little dazzled by the beauty of the
man, his princely air, and the confidence of power he seemed to radiate. Involuntarily almost, she contrasted him with his critic--the lean and
impudent Andre-Louis in his plain brown coat and steel-buckled shoes--and
she felt guilty of an unpardonable offence in having permitted even one
word of that presumptuous criticism. To-morrow M. le Marquis would
come to offer her a great position, a great rank. And already she had
derogated from the increase of dignity accruing to her from his very
intention to translate her to so great an eminence. Not again would
she suffer it; not again would she be so weak and childish as to permit
Andre-Louis to utter his ribald comments upon a man by comparison with
whom he was no better than a lackey. Thus argued vanity and ambition with her better self and to her vast
annoyance her better self would not admit entire conviction. Meanwhile, M. de La Tour d'Azyr was climbing into his carriage. He had
spoken a word of farewell to M. de Kercadiou, and he had also had a
word for M. de Vilmorin in reply to which M. de Vilmorin had bowed in
assenting silence. The carriage rolled away, the powdered footman in
blue-and-gold very stiff behind it, M. de La Tour d'Azyr bowing to
mademoiselle, who waved to him in answer. Then M. de Vilmorin put his arm through that of Andre Louis, and said to
him, "Come, Andre." "But you'll stay to dine, both of you!" cried the hospitable Lord of
Gavrillac. "We'll drink a certain toast," he added, winking an eye that
strayed towards mademoiselle, who was approaching. He had no subtleties,
good soul that he was. M. de Vilmorin deplored an appointment that prevented him doing himself
the honour. He was very stiff and formal. "And you, Andre?" "I? Oh, I share the appointment, godfather," he lied, "and I have a
superstition against toasts." He had no wish to remain. He was angry
with Aline for her smiling reception of M. de La Tour d'Azyr and the
sordid bargain he saw her set on making. He was suffering from the loss
of an illusion. CHAPTER III. THE ELOQUENCE OF M. DE VILMORIN

As they walked down the hill together, it was now M. de Vilmorin who
was silent and preoccupied, Andre-Louis who was talkative. He had
chosen Woman as a subject for his present discourse. He claimed--quite
unjustifiably--to have discovered Woman that morning; and the things he
had to say of the sex were unflattering, and occasionally almost gross. M. de Vilmorin, having ascertained the subject, did not listen. Singular
though it may seem in a young French abbe of his day, M. de Vilmorin was
not interested in Woman. Poor Philippe was in several ways exceptional. Opposite the Breton arme--the inn and posting-house at the entrance of
the village of Gavrillac--M. de Vilmorin interrupted his companion just
as he was soaring to the dizziest heights of caustic invective, and
Andre-Louis, restored thereby to actualities, observed the carriage of
M. de La Tour d'Azyr standing before the door of the hostelry. "I don't believe you've been listening to me," said he. "Had you been less interested in what you were saying, you might have
observed it sooner and spared your breath. The fact is, you disappoint
me, Andre. You seem to have forgotten what we went for. I have an
appointment here with M. le Marquis. He desires to hear me further in
the matter. Up there at Gavrillac I could accomplish nothing. The time
was ill-chosen as it happened. But I have hopes of M. le Marquis." "Hopes of what?" "That he will make what reparation lies in his power. Provide for the
widow and the orphans. Why else should he desire to hear me further?" "Unusual condescension," said Andre-Louis, and quoted "Timeo Danaos et
dona ferentes." "Why?" asked Philippe. "Let us go and discover--unless you consider that I shall be in the way." Into a room on the right, rendered private to M. le Marquis for so long
as he should elect to honour it, the young men were ushered by the host. A fire of logs was burning brightly at the room's far end, and by
this sat now M. de La Tour d'Azyr and his cousin, the Chevalier de
Chabrillane. Both rose as M. de Vilmorin came in. Andre-Louis following,
paused to close the door. "You oblige me by your prompt courtesy, M. de Vilmorin," said the
Marquis, but in a tone so cold as to belie the politeness of his words. "A chair, I beg. Ah, Moreau?" The note was frigidly interrogative. "He
accompanies you, monsieur?" he asked. "If you please, M. le Marquis." "Why not? Find yourself a seat, Moreau." He spoke over his shoulder as
to a lackey. "It is good of you, monsieur," said Philippe, "to have offered me this
opportunity of continuing the subject that took me so fruitlessly, as it
happens, to Gavrillac." The Marquis crossed his legs, and held one of his fine hands to the
blaze. He replied, without troubling to turn to the young man, who was
slightly behind him. "The goodness of my request we will leave out of question for the
moment," said he, darkly, and M. de Chabrillane laughed. Andre-Louis
thought him easily moved to mirth, and almost envied him the faculty. "But I am grateful," Philippe insisted, "that you should condescend to
hear me plead their cause." The Marquis stared at him over his shoulder. "Whose cause?" quoth he. "Why, the cause of the widow and orphans of this unfortunate Mabey." The Marquis looked from Vilmorin to the Chevalier, and again the
Chevalier laughed, slapping his leg this time. "I think," said M. de La Tour d'Azyr, slowly, "that we are at
cross-purposes. I asked you to come here because the Chateau de
Gavrillac was hardly a suitable place in which to carry our discussion
further, and because I hesitated to incommode you by suggesting that you
should come all the way to Azyr. But my object is connected with certain
expressions that you let fall up there. It is on the subject of those
expressions, monsieur, that I would hear you further--if you will honour
me." Andre-Louis began to apprehend that there was something sinister in the
air. He was a man of quick intuitions, quicker far than those of M. de
Vilmorin, who evinced no more than a mild surprise. "I am at a loss, monsieur," said he. "To what expressions does monsieur
allude?" "It seems, monsieur, that I must refresh your memory." The Marquis
crossed his legs, and swung sideways on his chair, so that at last he
directly faced M. de Vilmorin. "You spoke, monsieur--and however mistaken
you may have been, you spoke very eloquently, too eloquently almost, it
seemed to me--of the infamy of such a deed as the act of summary justice
upon this thieving fellow Mabey, or whatever his name may be. Infamy was
the precise word you used. You did not retract that word when I had the
honour to inform you that it was by my orders that my gamekeeper Benet
proceeded as he did." "If," said M. de Vilmorin, "the deed was infamous, its infamy is not
modified by the rank, however exalted, of the person responsible. Rather
is it aggravated." "Ah!" said M. le Marquis, and drew a gold snuffbox from his pocket. "You
say, 'if the deed was infamous,' monsieur. Am I to understand that you
are no longer as convinced as you appeared to be of its infamy?" M. de Vilmorin's fine face wore a look of perplexity. He did not
understand the drift of this. "It occurs to me, M. le Marquis, in view of your readiness to assume
responsibility, that you must believe justification for the deed which
is not apparent to myself." "That is better. That is distinctly better." The Marquis took snuff
delicately, dusting the fragments from the fine lace at his throat. "You
realize that with an imperfect understanding of these matters, not being
yourself a landowner, you may have rushed to unjustifiable conclusions. That is indeed the case. May it be a warning to you, monsieur. When
I tell you that for months past I have been annoyed by similar
depredations, you will perhaps understand that it had become necessary
to employ a deterrent sufficiently strong to put an end to them. Now
that the risk is known, I do not think there will be any more prowling
in my coverts. And there is more in it than that, M. de Vilmorin. It is
not the poaching that annoys me so much as the contempt for my absolute
and inviolable rights. There is, monsieur, as you cannot fail to have
observed, an evil spirit of insubordination in the air, and there is
one only way in which to meet it. To tolerate it, in however slight
a degree, to show leniency, however leniently disposed, would entail
having recourse to still harsher measures to-morrow. You understand me,
I am sure, and you will also, I am sure, appreciate the condescension
of what amounts to an explanation from me where I cannot admit that any
explanations were due. If anything in what I have said is still obscure
to you, I refer you to the game laws, which your lawyer friend there
will expound for you at need." With that the gentleman swung round again to face the fire. It appeared
to convey the intimation that the interview was at an end. And yet this
was not by any means the intimation that it conveyed to the watchful,
puzzled, vaguely uneasy Andre-Louis. It was, thought he, a very curious,
a very suspicious oration. It affected to explain, with a politeness of
terms and a calculated insolence of tone; whilst in fact it could only
serve to stimulate and goad a man of M. de Vilmorin's opinions. And that
is precisely what it did. He rose. "Are there in the world no laws but game laws?" he demanded, angrily. "Have you never by any chance heard of the laws of humanity?" The Marquis sighed wearily. "What have I to do with the laws of
humanity?" he wondered. M. de Vilmorin looked at him a moment in speechless amazement. "Nothing, M. le Marquis. That is--alas!--too obvious. I hope you will
remember it in the hour when you may wish to appeal to those laws which
you now deride." M. de La Tour d'Azyr threw back his head sharply, his high-bred face
imperious. "Now what precisely shall that mean? It is not the first time to-day
that you have made use of dark sayings that I could almost believe to
veil the presumption of a threat." "Not a threat, M. le Marquis--a warning. A warning that such deeds as
these against God's creatures... Oh, you may sneer, monsieur, but they
are God's creatures, even as you or I--neither more nor less, deeply
though the reflection may wound your pride, In His eyes..."

"Of your charity, spare me a sermon, M. l'abbe!" "You mock, monsieur. You laugh. Will you laugh, I wonder, when God
presents His reckoning to you for the blood and plunder with which your
hands are full?" "Monsieur!" The word, sharp as the crack of a whip, was from M.
de Chabrillane, who bounded to his feet. But instantly the Marquis
repressed him. "Sit down, Chevalier. You are interrupting M. l'abbe, and I should like
to hear him further. He interests me profoundly." In the background Andre-Louis, too, had risen, brought to his feet by
alarm, by the evil that he saw written on the handsome face of M. de La
Tour d'Azyr. He approached, and touched his friend upon the arm. "Better be going, Philippe," said he. But M. de Vilmorin, caught in the relentless grip of passions long
repressed, was being hurried by them recklessly along. "Oh, monsieur," said he, "consider what you are and what you will be. Consider how you and your kind live by abuses, and consider the harvest
that abuses must ultimately bring." "Revolutionist!" said M. le Marquis, contemptuously. "You have the
effrontery to stand before my face and offer me this stinking cant of
your modern so-called intellectuals!" "Is it cant, monsieur? Do you think--do you believe in your soul--that
it is cant? Is it cant that the feudal grip is on all things that live,
crushing them like grapes in the press, to its own profit? Does it not
exercise its rights upon the waters of the river, the fire that bakes
the poor man's bread of grass and barley, on the wind that turns the
mill? The peasant cannot take a step upon the road, cross a crazy bridge
over a river, buy an ell of cloth in the village market, without meeting
feudal rapacity, without being taxed in feudal dues. Is not that enough,
M. le Marquis? Must you also demand his wretched life in payment for the
least infringement of your sacred privileges, careless of what widows
or orphans you dedicate to woe? Will naught content you but that your
shadow must lie like a curse upon the land? And do you think in your
pride that France, this Job among the nations, will suffer it forever?" He paused as if for a reply. But none came. The Marquis considered him,
strangely silent, a half smile of disdain at the corners of his lips, an
ominous hardness in his eyes. Again Andre-Louis tugged at his friend's sleeve. "Philippe." Philippe shook him off, and plunged on, fanatically. "Do you see nothing of the gathering clouds that herald the coming of
the storm? You imagine, perhaps, that these States General summoned
by M. Necker, and promised for next year, are to do nothing but devise
fresh means of extortion to liquidate the bankruptcy of the State? You delude yourselves, as you shall find. The Third Estate, which you
despise, will prove itself the preponderating force, and it will find
a way to make an end of this canker of privilege that is devouring the
vitals of this unfortunate country." M. le Marquis shifted in his chair, and spoke at last. "You have, monsieur," said he, "a very dangerous gift of eloquence. And
it is of yourself rather than of your subject. For after all, what
do you offer me? A rechauffe of the dishes served to out-at-elbow
enthusiasts in the provincial literary chambers, compounded of the
effusions of your Voltaires and Jean-Jacques and such dirty-fingered
scribblers. You have not among all your philosophers one with the wit to
understand that we are an order consecrated by antiquity, that for our
rights and privileges we have behind us the authority of centuries." "Humanity, monsieur," Philippe replied, "is more ancient than nobility. Human rights are contemporary with man." The Marquis laughed and shrugged. "That is the answer I might have expected. It has the right note of cant
that distinguishes the philosophers." And then M. de Chabrillane spoke. "You go a long way round," he criticized his cousin, on a note of
impatience. "But I am getting there," he was answered. "I desired to make quite
certain first." "Faith, you should have no doubt by now." "I have none." The Marquis rose, and turned again to M. de Vilmorin, who
had understood nothing of that brief exchange. "M. l'abbe," said he once
more, "you have a very dangerous gift of eloquence. I can conceive of
men being swayed by it. Had you been born a gentleman, you would not so
easily have acquired these false views that you express." M. de Vilmorin stared blankly, uncomprehending. "Had I been born a gentleman, do you say?" quoth he, in a slow,
bewildered voice. "But I was born a gentleman. My race is as old, my
blood as good as yours, monsieur." From M. le Marquis there was a slight play of eyebrows, a vague,
indulgent smile. His dark, liquid eyes looked squarely into the face of
M. de Vilmorin. "You have been deceived in that, I fear." "Deceived?" "Your sentiments betray the indiscretion of which madame your mother
must have been guilty." The brutally affronting words were sped beyond recall, and the lips that
had uttered them, coldly, as if they had been the merest commonplace,
remained calm and faintly sneering. A dead silence followed. Andre-Louis' wits were numbed. He stood aghast,
all thought suspended in him, what time M. de Vilmorin's eyes continued
fixed upon M. de La Tour d'Azyr's, as if searching there for a meaning
that eluded him. Quite suddenly he understood the vile affront. The
blood leapt to his face, fire blazed in his gentle eyes. A convulsive
quiver shook him. Then, with an inarticulate cry, he leaned forward, and
with his open hand struck M. le Marquis full and hard upon his sneering
face. In a flash M. de Chabrillane was on his feet, between the two men. Too late Andre-Louis had seen the trap. La Tour d'Azyr's words were but
as a move in a game of chess, calculated to exasperate his opponent into
some such counter-move as this--a counter-move that left him entirely at
the other's mercy. M. le Marquis looked on, very white save where M. de Vilmorin's
finger-prints began slowly to colour his face; but he said nothing more. Instead, it was M. de Chabrillane who now did the talking, taking up his
preconcerted part in this vile game. "You realize, monsieur, what you have done," said he, coldly, to
Philippe. "And you realize, of course, what must inevitably follow." M. de Vilmorin had realized nothing. The poor young man had acted upon
impulse, upon the instinct of decency and honour, never counting the
consequences. But he realized them now at the sinister invitation of M.
de Chabrillane, and if he desired to avoid these consequences, it was
out of respect for his priestly vocation, which strictly forbade such
adjustments of disputes as M. de Chabrillane was clearly thrusting upon
him. He drew back. "Let one affront wipe out the other," said he, in a dull
voice. "The balance is still in M. le Marquis's favour. Let that content
him." "Impossible." The Chevalier's lips came together tightly. Thereafter he
was suavity itself, but very firm. "A blow has been struck, monsieur. I
think I am correct in saying that such a thing has never happened before
to M. le Marquis in all his life. If you felt yourself affronted, you
had but to ask the satisfaction due from one gentleman to another. Your
action would seem to confirm the assumption that you found so
offensive. But it does not on that account render you immune from the
consequences." It was, you see, M. de Chabrillane's part to heap coals upon this fire,
to make quite sure that their victim should not escape them. "I desire no immunity," flashed back the young seminarist, stung by
this fresh goad. After all, he was nobly born, and the traditions of his
class were strong upon him--stronger far than the seminarist schooling in
humility. He owed it to himself, to his honour, to be killed rather than
avoid the consequences of the thing he had done. "But he does not wear a sword, messieurs!" cried Andre Louis, aghast. "That is easily amended. He may have the loan of mine." "I mean, messieurs," Andre-Louis insisted, between fear for his friend
and indignation, "that it is not his habit to wear a sword, that he has
never worn one, that he is untutored in its uses. He is a seminarist--a
postulant for holy orders, already half a priest, and so forbidden from
such an engagement as you propose." "All that he should have remembered before he struck a blow," said M. de
Chabrillane, politely. "The blow was deliberately provoked," raged Andre-Louis. Then he
recovered himself, though the other's haughty stare had no part in
that recovery. "O my God, I talk in vain! How is one to argue against a
purpose formed! Come away, Philippe. Don't you see the trap..."

M. de Vilmorin cut him short, and flung him off. "Be quiet, Andre. M. le
Marquis is entirely in the right." "M. le Marquis is in the right?" Andre-Louis let his arms fall
helplessly. This man he loved above all other living men was caught in
the snare of the world's insanity. He was baring his breast to the knife
for the sake of a vague, distorted sense of the honour due to himself. It was not that he did not see the trap. It was that his honour
compelled him to disdain consideration of it. To Andre-Louis in that
moment he seemed a singularly tragic figure. Noble, perhaps, but very
pitiful. CHAPTER IV. THE HERITAGE

It was M. de Vilmorin's desire that the matter should be settled out
of hand. In this he was at once objective and subjective. A prey to
emotions sadly at conflict with his priestly vocation, he was above
all in haste to have done, so that he might resume a frame of mind more
proper to it. Also he feared himself a little; by which I mean that his
honour feared his nature. The circumstances of his education, and the
goal that for some years now he had kept in view, had robbed him of much
of that spirited brutality that is the birthright of the male. He had
grown timid and gentle as a woman. Aware of it, he feared that once the
heat of his passion was spent he might betray a dishonouring weakness,
in the ordeal. M. le Marquis, on his side, was no less eager for an immediate
settlement; and since they had M. de Chabrillane to act for his cousin,
and Andre-Louis to serve as witness for M. de Vilmorin, there was
nothing to delay them. And so, within a few minutes, all arrangements were concluded, and you
behold that sinisterly intentioned little group of four assembled in
the afternoon sunshine on the bowling-green behind the inn. They were
entirely private, screened more or less from the windows of the house by
a ramage of trees, which, if leafless now, was at least dense enough to
provide an effective lattice. There were no formalities over measurements of blades or selection
of ground. M. le Marquis removed his sword-belt and scabbard, but
declined--not considering it worth while for the sake of so negligible an
opponent--to divest himself either of his shoes or his coat. Tall, lithe,
and athletic, he stood to face the no less tall, but very delicate and
frail, M. de Vilmorin. The latter also disdained to make any of the
usual preparations. Since he recognized that it could avail him nothing
to strip, he came on guard fully dressed, two hectic spots above the
cheek-bones burning on his otherwise grey face. M. de Chabrillane, leaning upon a cane--for he had relinquished his sword
to M. de Vilmorin--looked on with quiet interest. Facing him on the
other side of the combatants stood Andre-Louis, the palest of the four,
staring from fevered eyes, twisting and untwisting clammy hands. His every instinct was to fling himself between the antagonists, to
protest against and frustrate this meeting. That sane impulse was
curbed, however, by the consciousness of its futility. To calm him, he
clung to the conviction that the issue could not really be very serious. If the obligations of Philippe's honour compelled him to cross swords
with the man he had struck, M. de La Tour d'Azyr's birth compelled him
no less to do no serious hurt to the unfledged lad he had so grievously
provoked. M. le Marquis, after all, was a man of honour. He could intend
no more than to administer a lesson; sharp, perhaps, but one by which
his opponent must live to profit. Andre-Louis clung obstinately to that
for comfort. Steel beat on steel, and the men engaged. The Marquis presented to his
opponent the narrow edge of his upright body, his knees slightly flexed
and converted into living springs, whilst M. de Vilmorin stood squarely,
a full target, his knees wooden. Honour and the spirit of fair play
alike cried out against such a match. The encounter was very short, of course. In youth, Philippe had received
the tutoring in sword-play that was given to every boy born into his
station of life. And so he knew at least the rudiments of what was
now expected of him. But what could rudiments avail him here? Three
disengages completed the exchanges, and then without any haste the
Marquis slid his right foot along the moist turf, his long, graceful
body extending itself in a lunge that went under M. de Vilmorin's clumsy
guard, and with the utmost deliberation he drove his blade through the
young man's vitals. Andre-Louis sprang forward just in time to catch his friend's body under
the armpits as it sank. Then, his own legs bending beneath the weight of
it, he went down with his burden until he was kneeling on the damp turf. Philippe's limp head lay against Andre-Louis' left shoulder; Philippe's
relaxed arms trailed at his sides; the blood welled and bubbled from the
ghastly wound to saturate the poor lad's garments. With white face and twitching lips, Andre-Louis looked up at M. de La
Tour d'Azyr, who stood surveying his work with a countenance of grave
but remorseless interest. "You have killed him!" cried Andre-Louis. "Of course." The Marquis ran a lace handkerchief along his blade to wipe it. As he
let the dainty fabric fall, he explained himself. "He had, as I told
him, a too dangerous gift of eloquence." And he turned away, leaving completest understanding with Andre-Louis. Still supporting the limp, draining body, the young man called to him. "Come back, you cowardly murderer, and make yourself quite safe by
killing me too!" The Marquis half turned, his face dark with anger. Then M. de
Chabrillane set a restraining hand upon his arm. Although a party
throughout to the deed, the Chevalier was a little appalled now that it
was done. He had not the high stomach of M. de La Tour d'Azyr, and he
was a good deal younger. "Come away," he said. "The lad is raving. They were friends." "You heard what he said?" quoth the Marquis. "Nor can he, or you, or any man deny it," flung back Andre-Louis. "Yourself, monsieur, you made confession when you gave me now the reason
why you killed him. You did it because you feared him." "If that were true--what, then?" asked the great gentleman. "Do you ask? Do you understand of life and humanity nothing but how to
wear a coat and dress your hair--oh, yes, and to handle weapons against
boys and priests? Have you no mind to think, no soul into which you can
turn its vision? Must you be told that it is a coward's part to kill the
thing he fears, and doubly a coward's part to kill in this way? Had you
stabbed him in the back with a knife, you would have shown the courage
of your vileness. It would have been a vileness undisguised. But you
feared the consequences of that, powerful as you are; and so you shelter
your cowardice under the pretext of a duel." The Marquis shook off his cousin's hand, and took a step forward,
holding now his sword like a whip. But again the Chevalier caught and
held him. "No, no, Gervais! Let be, in God's name!" "Let him come, monsieur," raved Andre-Louis, his voice thick and
concentrated. "Let him complete his coward's work on me, and thus make
himself safe from a coward's wages." M. de Chabrillane let his cousin go. He came white to the lips, his eyes
glaring at the lad who so recklessly insulted him. And then he checked. It may be that he remembered suddenly the relationship in which this
young man was popularly believed to stand to the Seigneur de Gavrillac,
and the well-known affection in which the Seigneur held him. And so he
may have realized that if he pushed this matter further, he might find
himself upon the horns of a dilemma. He would be confronted with the
alternatives of shedding more blood, and so embroiling himself with the
Lord of Gavrillac at a time when that gentleman's friendship was of the
first importance to him, or else of withdrawing with such hurt to his
dignity as must impair his authority in the countryside hereafter. Be it so or otherwise, the fact remains that he stopped short; then,
with an incoherent ejaculation, between anger and contempt, he tossed
his arms, turned on his heel and strode off quickly with his cousin. When the landlord and his people came, they found Andre-Louis, his arms
about the body of his dead friend, murmuring passionately into the deaf
ear that rested almost against his lips:

"Philippe! Speak to me, Philippe! Philippe... Don't you hear me? O God
of Heaven! Philippe!" At a glance they saw that here neither priest nor doctor could avail. The cheek that lay against Andre-Louis's was leaden-hued, the half-open
eyes were glazed, and there was a little froth of blood upon the
vacuously parted lips. Half blinded by tears Andre-Louis stumbled after them when they bore the
body into the inn. Upstairs in the little room to which they conveyed
it, he knelt by the bed, and holding the dead man's hand in both his
own, he swore to him out of his impotent rage that M. de La Tour d'Azyr
should pay a bitter price for this. "It was your eloquence he feared, Philippe," he said. "Then if I can
get no justice for this deed, at least it shall be fruitless to him. The
thing he feared in you, he shall fear in me. He feared that men might be
swayed by your eloquence to the undoing of such things as himself. Men
shall be swayed by it still. For your eloquence and your arguments shall
be my heritage from you. I will make them my own. It matters nothing
that I do not believe in your gospel of freedom. I know it--every word of
it; that is all that matters to our purpose, yours and mine. If all else
fails, your thoughts shall find expression in my living tongue. Thus
at least we shall have frustrated his vile aim to still the voice he
feared. It shall profit him nothing to have your blood upon his soul. That voice in you would never half so relentlessly have hounded him and
his as it shall in me--if all else fails." It was an exulting thought. It calmed him; it soothed his grief, and he
began very softly to pray. And then his heart trembled as he considered
that Philippe, a man of peace, almost a priest, an apostle of
Christianity, had gone to his Maker with the sin of anger on his soul. It was horrible. Yet God would see the righteousness of that anger. And
in no case--be man's interpretation of Divinity what it might--could that
one sin outweigh the loving good that Philippe had ever practised, the
noble purity of his great heart. God after all, reflected Andre-Louis,
was not a grand-seigneur. CHAPTER V. THE LORD OF GAVRILLAC

For the second time that day Andre-Louis set out for the chateau,
walking briskly, and heeding not at all the curious eyes that followed
him through the village, and the whisperings that marked his passage
through the people, all agog by now with that day's event in which he
had been an actor. He was ushered by Benoit, the elderly body-servant, rather
grandiloquently called the seneschal, into the ground-floor room known
traditionally as the library. It still contained several shelves of
neglected volumes, from which it derived its title, but implements
of the chase--fowling-pieces, powder-horns, hunting-bags,
sheath-knives--obtruded far more prominently than those of study. The
furniture was massive, of oak richly carved, and belonging to another
age. Great massive oak beams crossed the rather lofty whitewashed
ceiling. Here the squat Seigneur de Gavrillac was restlessly pacing when
Andre-Louis was introduced. He was already informed, as he announced at
once, of what had taken place at the Breton arme. M. de Chabrillane
had just left him, and he confessed himself deeply grieved and deeply
perplexed. "The pity of it!" he said. "The pity of it!" He bowed his enormous head. "So estimable a young man, and so full of promise. Ah, this La Tour
d'Azyr is a hard man, and he feels very strongly in these matters. He may be right. I don't know. I have never killed a man for holding
different views from mine. In fact, I have never killed a man at all. It isn't in my nature. I shouldn't sleep of nights if I did. But men are
differently made." "The question, monsieur my godfather," said Andre-Louis, "is what is to
be done." He was quite calm and self-possessed, but very white. M. de Kercadiou stared at him blankly out of his pale eyes. "Why, what the devil is there to do? From what I am told, Vilmorin went
so far as to strike M. le Marquis." "Under the very grossest provocation." "Which he himself provoked by his revolutionary language. The poor
lad's head was full of this encyclopaedist trash. It comes of too much
reading. I have never set much store by books, Andre; and I have never
known anything but trouble to come out of learning. It unsettles a man. It complicates his views of life, destroys the simplicity which makes
for peace of mind and happiness. Let this miserable affair be a warning
to you, Andre. You are, yourself, too prone to these new-fashioned
speculations upon a different constitution of the social order. You
see what comes of it. A fine, estimable young man, the only prop of
his widowed mother too, forgets himself, his position, his duty to that
mother--everything; and goes and gets himself killed like this. It is
infernally sad. On my soul it is sad." He produced a handkerchief, and
blew his nose with vehemence. Andre-Louis felt a tightening of his heart, a lessening of the hopes,
never too sanguine, which he had founded upon his godfather. "Your criticisms," he said, "are all for the conduct of the dead, and
none for that of the murderer. It does not seem possible that you should
be in sympathy with such a crime." "Crime?" shrilled M. de Kercadiou. "My God, boy, you are speaking of M.
de La Tour d'Azyr." "I am, and of the abominable murder he has committed..."

"Stop!" M. de Kercadiou was very emphatic. "I cannot permit that you
apply such terms to him. I cannot permit it. M. le Marquis is my friend,
and is likely very soon to stand in a still closer relationship." "Notwithstanding this?" asked Andre-Louis. M. de Kercadiou was frankly impatient. "Why, what has this to do with it? I may deplore it. But I have no
right to condemn it. It is a common way of adjusting differences between
gentlemen." "You really believe that?" "What the devil do you imply, Andre? Should I say a thing that I don't
believe? You begin to make me angry." "'Thou shalt not kill,' is the King's law as well as God's." "You are determined to quarrel with me, I think. It was a duel..."

Andre-Louis interrupted him. "It is no more a duel than if it had been
fought with pistols of which only M. le Marquis's was loaded. He invited
Philippe to discuss the matter further, with the deliberate intent of
forcing a quarrel upon him and killing him. Be patient with me, monsieur
my god-father. I am not telling you of what I imagine but what M. le
Marquis himself admitted to me." Dominated a little by the young man's earnestness, M. de Kercadiou's
pale eyes fell away. He turned with a shrug, and sauntered over to the
window. "It would need a court of honour to decide such an issue. And we have no
courts of honour," he said. "But we have courts of justice." With returning testiness the seigneur swung round to face him again. "And what court of justice, do you think, would listen to such a plea as
you appear to have in mind?" "There is the court of the King's Lieutenant at Rennes." "And do you think the King's Lieutenant would listen to you?" "Not to me, perhaps, Monsieur. But if you were to bring the plaint..."

"I bring the plaint?" M. de Kercadiou's pale eyes were wide with horror
of the suggestion. "The thing happened here on your domain." "I bring a plaint against M. de La Tour d'Azyr! You are out of your
senses, I think. Oh, you are mad; as mad as that poor friend of yours
who has come to this end through meddling in what did not concern him. The language he used here to M. le Marquis on the score of Mabey was
of the most offensive. Perhaps you didn't know that. It does not at all
surprise me that the Marquis should have desired satisfaction." "I see," said Andre-Louis, on a note of hopelessness. "You see? What the devil do you see?" "That I shall have to depend upon myself alone." "And what the devil do you propose to do, if you please?" "I shall go to Rennes, and lay the facts before the King's Lieutenant." "He'll be too busy to see you." And M. de Kercadiou's mind swung a
trifle inconsequently, as weak minds will. "There is trouble enough in
Rennes already on the score of these crazy States General, with which
the wonderful M. Necker is to repair the finances of the kingdom. As
if a peddling Swiss bank-clerk, who is also a damned Protestant, could
succeed where such men as Calonne and Brienne have failed." "Good-afternoon, monsieur my godfather," said Andre-Louis. "Where are you going?" was the querulous demand. "Home at present. To Rennes in the morning." "Wait, boy, wait!" The squat little man rolled forward, affectionate
concern on his great ugly face, and he set one of his podgy hands on
his godson's shoulder. "Now listen to me, Andre," he reasoned. "This is
sheer knight-errantry--moonshine, lunacy. You'll come to no good by it if
you persist. You've read 'Don Quixote,' and what happened to him when
he went tilting against windmills. It's what will happen to you, neither
more nor less. Leave things as they are, my boy. I wouldn't have a
mischief happen to you." Andre-Louis looked at him, smiling wanly. "I swore an oath to-day which it would damn my soul to break." "You mean that you'll go in spite of anything that I may say?" Impetuous
as he was inconsequent, M. de Kercadiou was bristling again. "Very well,
then, go... Go to the devil!" "I will begin with the King's Lieutenant." "And if you get into the trouble you are seeking, don't come whimpering
to me for assistance," the seigneur stormed. He was very angry now. "Since you choose to disobey me, you can break your empty head against
the windmill, and be damned to you." Andre-Louis bowed with a touch of irony, and reached the door. "If the windmill should prove too formidable," said he, from the
threshold, "I may see what can be done with the wind. Good-bye, monsieur
my godfather." He was gone, and M. de Kercadiou was alone, purple in the face, puzzling
out that last cryptic utterance, and not at all happy in his mind,
either on the score of his godson or of M. de La Tour d'Azyr. He was
disposed to be angry with them both. He found these headstrong, wilful
men who relentlessly followed their own impulses very disturbing and
irritating. Himself he loved his ease, and to be at peace with his
neighbours; and that seemed to him so obviously the supreme good of life
that he was disposed to brand them as fools who troubled to seek other
things. CHAPTER VI. THE WINDMILL

There was between Nantes and Rennes an established service of three
stage-coaches weekly in each direction, which for a sum of twenty-four
livres--roughly, the equivalent of an English guinea--would carry you the
seventy and odd miles of the journey in some fourteen hours. Once a week
one of the diligences going in each direction would swerve aside
from the highroad to call at Gavrillac, to bring and take letters,
newspapers, and sometimes passengers. It was usually by this coach
that Andre-Louis came and went when the occasion offered. At present,
however, he was too much in haste to lose a day awaiting the passing of
that diligence. So it was on a horse hired from the Breton arme that he
set out next morning; and an hour's brisk ride under a grey wintry sky,
by a half-ruined road through ten miles of flat, uninteresting country,
brought him to the city of Rennes. He rode across the main bridge over the Vilaine, and so into the upper
and principal part of that important city of some thirty thousand
souls, most of whom, he opined from the seething, clamant crowds that
everywhere blocked his way, must on this day have taken to the streets. Clearly Philippe had not overstated the excitement prevailing there. He pushed on as best he could, and so came at last to the Place Royale,
where he found the crowd to be most dense. From the plinth of the
equestrian statue of Louis XV, a white-faced young man was excitedly
addressing the multitude. His youth and dress proclaimed the student,
and a group of his fellows, acting as a guard of honour to him, kept the
immediate precincts of the statue. Over the heads of the crowd Andre-Louis caught a few of the phrases
flung forth by that eager voice. "It was the promise of the King... It is the King's authority they
flout... They arrogate to themselves the whole sovereignty in Brittany. The King has dissolved them... These insolent nobles defying their
sovereign and the people..."

Had he not known already, from what Philippe had told him, of the events
which had brought the Third Estate to the point of active revolt, those
few phrases would fully have informed him. This popular display of
temper was most opportune to his need, he thought. And in the hope that
it might serve his turn by disposing to reasonableness the mind of the
King's Lieutenant, he pushed on up the wide and well-paved Rue Royale,
where the concourse of people began to diminish. He put up his hired
horse at the Come de Cerf, and set out again, on foot, to the Palais de
Justice. There was a brawling mob by the framework of poles and scaffoldings
about the building cathedral, upon which work had been commenced a year
ago. But he did not pause to ascertain the particular cause of that
gathering. He strode on, and thus came presently to the handsome
Italianate palace that was one of the few public edifices that had
survived the devastating fire of sixty years ago. He won through with difficulty to the great hall, known as the Salle
des Pas Perdus, where he was left to cool his heels for a full half-hour
after he had found an usher so condescending as to inform the god who
presided over that shrine of Justice that a lawyer from Gavrillac humbly
begged an audience on an affair of gravity. That the god condescended to see him at all was probably due to the
grave complexion of the hour. At long length he was escorted up the
broad stone staircase, and ushered into a spacious, meagrely furnished
anteroom, to make one of a waiting crowd of clients, mostly men. There he spent another half-hour, and employed the time in considering
exactly what he should say. This consideration made him realize the
weakness of the case he proposed to set before a man whose views of law
and morality were coloured by his social rank. At last he was ushered through a narrow but very massive and richly
decorated door into a fine, well-lighted room furnished with enough gilt
and satin to have supplied the boudoir of a lady of fashion. 