



Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer





CAPTAIN BLOOD

By Rafael Sabatini


CAPTAIN BLOOD His Odyssey



CONTENTS

     I. THE MESSENGER
     II. KIRKE'S DRAGOONS
     III. THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
     IV. HUMAN MERCHANDISE
     V.       ARABELLA BISHOP
     VI. PLANS OF ESCAPE
     VII. PIRATES
     VIII. SPANIARDS
     IX. THE REBELS-CONVICT
     X. DON DIEGO
     XI. FILIAL PIETY
     XII. DON PEDRO SANGRE
     XIII. TORTUGA
     XIV. LEVASSEUR'S HEROICS
     XV. THE RANSOM
     XVI. THE TRAP
     XVII. THE DUPES
     XVIII. THE MILAGROSA
     XIX. THE MEETING
     XX. THIEF AND PIRATE
     XXI. THE SERVICE OF KING JAMES
     XXII. HOSTILITIES
     XXIII. HOSTAGES
     XXIV. WAR
     XXV. THE SERVICE OF KING LOUIS
     XXVI. M. DE RIVAROL
     XXVII. CARTAGENA
     XXVIII. THE HONOUR OF M. DE RIVAROL
     XXIX. THE SERVICE OF KING WILLIAM
     XXX. THE LAST FIGHT OF THE ARABELLA
     XXXI. HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR




CHAPTER I. THE MESSENGER


Peter Blood, bachelor of medicine and several other things besides,
smoked a pipe and tended the geraniums boxed on the sill of his window
above Water Lane in the town of Bridgewater. Sternly disapproving eyes considered him from a window opposite, but
went disregarded. Mr. Blood's attention was divided between his task and
the stream of humanity in the narrow street below; a stream which poured
for the second time that day towards Castle Field, where earlier in
the afternoon Ferguson, the Duke's chaplain, had preached a sermon
containing more treason than divinity. These straggling, excited groups were mainly composed of men with green
boughs in their hats and the most ludicrous of weapons in their hands. Some, it is true, shouldered fowling pieces, and here and there a sword
was brandished; but more of them were armed with clubs, and most of them
trailed the mammoth pikes fashioned out of scythes, as formidable to
the eye as they were clumsy to the hand. There were weavers, brewers,
carpenters, smiths, masons, bricklayers, cobblers, and representatives
of every other of the trades of peace among these improvised men of war. Bridgewater, like Taunton, had yielded so generously of its manhood to
the service of the bastard Duke that for any to abstain whose age and
strength admitted of his bearing arms was to brand himself a coward or a
papist. Yet Peter Blood, who was not only able to bear arms, but trained and
skilled in their use, who was certainly no coward, and a papist only
when it suited him, tended his geraniums and smoked his pipe on that
warm July evening as indifferently as if nothing were afoot. One other
thing he did. He flung after those war-fevered enthusiasts a line of
Horace--a poet for whose work he had early conceived an inordinate
affection:

"Quo, quo, scelesti, ruitis?" And now perhaps you guess why the hot, intrepid blood inherited from the
roving sires of his Somersetshire mother remained cool amidst all this
frenzied fanatical heat of rebellion; why the turbulent spirit which had
forced him once from the sedate academical bonds his father would
have imposed upon him, should now remain quiet in the very midst of
turbulence. You realize how he regarded these men who were rallying to
the banners of liberty--the banners woven by the virgins of Taunton, the
girls from the seminaries of Miss Blake and Mrs. Musgrove, who--as the
ballad runs--had ripped open their silk petticoats to make colours for
King Monmouth's army. That Latin line, contemptuously flung after them
as they clattered down the cobbled street, reveals his mind. To him they
were fools rushing in wicked frenzy upon their ruin. You see, he knew too much about this fellow Monmouth and the pretty
brown slut who had borne him, to be deceived by the legend of
legitimacy, on the strength of which this standard of rebellion had
been raised. He had read the absurd proclamation posted at the Cross
at Bridgewater--as it had been posted also at Taunton and
elsewhere--setting forth that "upon the decease of our Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, the right of succession to the Crown of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, with the dominions and territories
thereunto belonging, did legally descend and devolve upon the most
illustrious and high-born Prince James, Duke of Monmouth, son and heir
apparent to the said King Charles the Second." It had moved him to laughter, as had the further announcement that
"James Duke of York did first cause the said late King to be poysoned,
and immediately thereupon did usurp and invade the Crown." He knew not which was the greater lie. For Mr. Blood had spent a third
of his life in the Netherlands, where this same James Scott--who now
proclaimed himself James the Second, by the grace of God, King, et
cetera--first saw the light some six-and-thirty years ago, and he was
acquainted with the story current there of the fellow's real paternity. Far from being legitimate--by virtue of a pretended secret marriage
between Charles Stuart and Lucy Walter--it was possible that this
Monmouth who now proclaimed himself King of England was not even the
illegitimate child of the late sovereign. What but ruin and disaster
could be the end of this grotesque pretension? How could it be hoped
that England would ever swallow such a Perkin? And it was on his behalf,
to uphold his fantastic claim, that these West Country clods, led by a
few armigerous Whigs, had been seduced into rebellion! "Quo, quo, scelesti, ruitis?" He laughed and sighed in one; but the laugh dominated the sigh, for Mr. Blood was unsympathetic, as are most self-sufficient men; and he
was very self-sufficient; adversity had taught him so to be. A more
tender-hearted man, possessing his vision and his knowledge, might have
found cause for tears in the contemplation of these ardent, simple,
Nonconformist sheep going forth to the shambles--escorted to the
rallying ground on Castle Field by wives and daughters, sweethearts and
mothers, sustained by the delusion that they were to take the field
in defence of Right, of Liberty, and of Religion. For he knew, as
all Bridgewater knew and had known now for some hours, that it was
Monmouth's intention to deliver battle that same night. The Duke was to
lead a surprise attack upon the Royalist army under Feversham that was
now encamped on Sedgemoor. Mr. Blood assumed that Lord Feversham would
be equally well-informed, and if in this assumption he was wrong,
at least he was justified of it. He was not to suppose the Royalist
commander so indifferently skilled in the trade he followed. Mr. Blood knocked the ashes from his pipe, and drew back to close his
window. As he did so, his glance travelling straight across the street
met at last the glance of those hostile eyes that watched him. There
were two pairs, and they belonged to the Misses Pitt, two amiable,
sentimental maiden ladies who yielded to none in Bridgewater in their
worship of the handsome Monmouth. Mr. Blood smiled and inclined his head, for he was on friendly terms
with these ladies, one of whom, indeed, had been for a little while his
patient. But there was no response to his greeting. Instead, the eyes
gave him back a stare of cold disdain. The smile on his thin lips grew a
little broader, a little less pleasant. He understood the reason of that
hostility, which had been daily growing in this past week since Monmouth
had come to turn the brains of women of all ages. The Misses Pitt,
he apprehended, contemned him that he, a young and vigorous man, of a
military training which might now be valuable to the Cause, should stand
aloof; that he should placidly smoke his pipe and tend his geraniums on
this evening of all evenings, when men of spirit were rallying to the
Protestant Champion, offering their blood to place him on the throne
where he belonged. If Mr. Blood had condescended to debate the matter with these ladies, he
might have urged that having had his fill of wandering and adventuring,
he was now embarked upon the career for which he had been originally
intended and for which his studies had equipped him; that he was a man
of medicine and not of war; a healer, not a slayer. But they would have
answered him, he knew, that in such a cause it behoved every man who
deemed himself a man to take up arms. They would have pointed out that
their own nephew Jeremiah, who was by trade a sailor, the master of a
ship--which by an ill-chance for that young man had come to anchor at
this season in Bridgewater Bay--had quitted the helm to snatch up a
musket in defence of Right. But Mr. Blood was not of those who argue. As
I have said, he was a self-sufficient man. He closed the window, drew the curtains, and turned to the pleasant,
candle-lighted room, and the table on which Mrs. Barlow, his
housekeeper, was in the very act of spreading supper. To her, however,
he spoke aloud his thought. "It's out of favour I am with the vinegary virgins over the way." He had a pleasant, vibrant voice, whose metallic ring was softened and
muted by the Irish accent which in all his wanderings he had never lost. It was a voice that could woo seductively and caressingly, or command in
such a way as to compel obedience. Indeed, the man's whole nature was in
that voice of his. For the rest of him, he was tall and spare, swarthy
of tint as a gipsy, with eyes that were startlingly blue in that dark
face and under those level black brows. In their glance those eyes,
flanking a high-bridged, intrepid nose, were of singular penetration
and of a steady haughtiness that went well with his firm lips. Though
dressed in black as became his calling, yet it was with an elegance
derived from the love of clothes that is peculiar to the adventurer he
had been, rather than to the staid medicus he now was. His coat was of
fine camlet, and it was laced with silver; there were ruffles of Mechlin
at his wrists and a Mechlin cravat encased his throat. His great black
periwig was as sedulously curled as any at Whitehall. Seeing him thus, and perceiving his real nature, which was plain upon
him, you might have been tempted to speculate how long such a man would
be content to lie by in this little backwater of the world into which
chance had swept him some six months ago; how long he would continue to
pursue the trade for which he had qualified himself before he had begun
to live. Difficult of belief though it may be when you know his history,
previous and subsequent, yet it is possible that but for the trick
that Fate was about to play him, he might have continued this peaceful
existence, settling down completely to the life of a doctor in this
Somersetshire haven. It is possible, but not probable. He was the son of an Irish medicus, by a Somersetshire lady in whose
veins ran the rover blood of the Frobishers, which may account for a
certain wildness that had early manifested itself in his disposition. This wildness had profoundly alarmed his father, who for an Irishman was
of a singularly peace-loving nature. He had early resolved that the
boy should follow his own honourable profession, and Peter Blood, being
quick to learn and oddly greedy of knowledge, had satisfied his parent
by receiving at the age of twenty the degree of baccalaureus medicinae
at Trinity College, Dublin. His father survived that satisfaction by
three months only. His mother had then been dead some years already. Thus Peter Blood came into an inheritance of some few hundred pounds,
with which he had set out to see the world and give for a season a free
rein to that restless spirit by which he was imbued. A set of curious
chances led him to take service with the Dutch, then at war with France;
and a predilection for the sea made him elect that this service should
be upon that element. He had the advantage of a commission under the
famous de Ruyter, and fought in the Mediterranean engagement in which
that great Dutch admiral lost his life. After the Peace of Nimeguen his movements are obscure. But we know that
he spent two years in a Spanish prison, though we do not know how he
contrived to get there. It may be due to this that upon his release
he took his sword to France, and saw service with the French in their
warring upon the Spanish Netherlands. Having reached, at last, the age
of thirty-two, his appetite for adventure surfeited, his health having
grown indifferent as the result of a neglected wound, he was suddenly
overwhelmed by homesickness. He took ship from Nantes with intent to
cross to Ireland. But the vessel being driven by stress of weather
into Bridgewater Bay, and Blood's health having grown worse during the
voyage, he decided to go ashore there, additionally urged to it by the
fact that it was his mother's native soil. Thus in January of that year 1685 he had come to Bridgewater, possessor
of a fortune that was approximately the same as that with which he had
originally set out from Dublin eleven years ago. Because he liked the place, in which his health was rapidly restored
to him, and because he conceived that he had passed through adventures
enough for a man's lifetime, he determined to settle there, and take
up at last the profession of medicine from which he had, with so little
profit, broken away. That is all his story, or so much of it as matters up to that night, six
months later, when the battle of Sedgemoor was fought. Deeming the impending action no affair of his, as indeed it was not, and
indifferent to the activity with which Bridgewater was that night agog,
Mr. Blood closed his ears to the sounds of it, and went early to bed. He
was peacefully asleep long before eleven o'clock, at which hour, as
you know, Monmouth rode but with his rebel host along the Bristol Road,
circuitously to avoid the marshland that lay directly between himself
and the Royal Army. You also know that his numerical advantage--possibly
counter-balanced by the greater steadiness of the regular troops on the
other side--and the advantages he derived from falling by surprise upon
an army that was more or less asleep, were all lost to him by blundering
and bad leadership before ever he was at grips with Feversham. The armies came into collision in the neighbourhood of two o'clock in
the morning. Mr. Blood slept undisturbed through the distant boom of
cannon. Not until four o'clock, when the sun was rising to dispel the
last wisps of mist over that stricken field of battle, did he awaken
from his tranquil slumbers. He sat up in bed, rubbed the sleep from his eyes, and collected himself. Blows were thundering upon the door of his house, and a voice was
calling incoherently. This was the noise that had aroused him. Conceiving that he had to do with some urgent obstetrical case, he
reached for bedgown and slippers, to go below. On the landing he almost
collided with Mrs. Barlow, new-risen and unsightly, in a state of panic. He quieted her cluckings with a word of reassurance, and went himself to
open. There in slanting golden light of the new-risen sun stood a breathless,
wild-eyed man and a steaming horse. Smothered in dust and grime, his
clothes in disarray, the left sleeve of his doublet hanging in rags,
this young man opened his lips to speak, yet for a long moment remained
speechless. In that moment Mr. Blood recognized him for the young shipmaster,
Jeremiah Pitt, the nephew of the maiden ladies opposite, one who had
been drawn by the general enthusiasm into the vortex of that rebellion. The street was rousing, awakened by the sailor's noisy advent; doors
were opening, and lattices were being unlatched for the protrusion of
anxious, inquisitive heads. "Take your time, now," said Mr. Blood. "I never knew speed made by
overhaste." But the wild-eyed lad paid no heed to the admonition. He plunged,
headlong, into speech, gasping, breathless. "It is Lord Gildoy," he panted. "He is sore wounded... at Oglethorpe's
Farm by the river. I bore him thither... and... and he sent me for you. Come away! Come away!" He would have clutched the doctor, and haled him forth by force in
bedgown and slippers as he was. But the doctor eluded that too eager
hand. "To be sure, I'll come," said he. He was distressed. Gildoy had been a
very friendly, generous patron to him since his settling in these parts. And Mr. Blood was eager enough to do what he now could to discharge
the debt, grieved that the occasion should have arisen, and in such a
manner--for he knew quite well that the rash young nobleman had been an
active agent of the Duke's. "To be sure, I'll come. But first give me
leave to get some clothes and other things that I may need." "There's no time to lose." "Be easy now. I'll lose none. I tell ye again, ye'll go quickest by
going leisurely. Come in... take a chair..." He threw open the door of a
parlour. Young Pitt waved aside the invitation. "I'll wait here. Make haste, in God's name." Mr. Blood went off to dress
and to fetch a case of instruments. Questions concerning the precise nature of Lord Gildoy's hurt could wait
until they were on their way. Whilst he pulled on his boots, he gave
Mrs. Barlow instructions for the day, which included the matter of a
dinner he was not destined to eat. When at last he went forth again, Mrs. Barlow clucking after him like
a disgruntled fowl, he found young Pitt smothered in a crowd of scared,
half-dressed townsfolk--mostly women--who had come hastening for news
of how the battle had sped. The news he gave them was to be read in the
lamentations with which they disturbed the morning air. At sight of the doctor, dressed and booted, the case of instruments
tucked under his arm, the messenger disengaged himself from those who
pressed about, shook off his weariness and the two tearful aunts that
clung most closely, and seizing the bridle of his horse, he climbed to
the saddle. "Come along, sir," he cried. "Mount behind me." Mr. Blood, without wasting words, did as he was bidden. Pitt touched
the horse with his spur. The little crowd gave way, and thus, upon
the crupper of that doubly-laden horse, clinging to the belt of his
companion, Peter Blood set out upon his Odyssey. For this Pitt, in whom
he beheld no more than the messenger of a wounded rebel gentleman, was
indeed the very messenger of Fate. CHAPTER II. KIRKE'S DRAGOONS


Oglethorpe's farm stood a mile or so to the south of Bridgewater on the
right bank of the river. It was a straggling Tudor building showing grey
above the ivy that clothed its lower parts. Approaching it now, through
the fragrant orchards amid which it seemed to drowse in Arcadian peace
beside the waters of the Parrett, sparkling in the morning sunlight,
Mr. Blood might have had a difficulty in believing it part of a world
tormented by strife and bloodshed. On the bridge, as they had been riding out of Bridgewater, they had met
a vanguard of fugitives from the field of battle, weary, broken men,
many of them wounded, all of them terror-stricken, staggering in
speedless haste with the last remnants of their strength into the
shelter which it was their vain illusion the town would afford them. Eyes glazed with lassitude and fear looked up piteously out of haggard
faces at Mr. Blood and his companion as they rode forth; hoarse voices
cried a warning that merciless pursuit was not far behind. Undeterred,
however, young Pitt rode amain along the dusty road by which these
poor fugitives from that swift rout on Sedgemoor came flocking in
ever-increasing numbers. Presently he swung aside, and quitting the road
took to a pathway that crossed the dewy meadowlands. Even here they
met odd groups of these human derelicts, who were scattering in all
directions, looking fearfully behind them as they came through the long
grass, expecting at every moment to see the red coats of the dragoons. But as Pitt's direction was a southward one, bringing them ever nearer
to Feversham's headquarters, they were presently clear of that human
flotsam and jetsam of the battle, and riding through the peaceful
orchards heavy with the ripening fruit that was soon to make its annual
yield of cider. At last they alighted on the kidney stones of the courtyard, and Baynes,
the master, of the homestead, grave of countenance and flustered of
manner, gave them welcome. In the spacious, stone-flagged hall, the doctor found Lord
Gildoy--a very tall and dark young gentleman, prominent of chin and
nose--stretched on a cane day-bed under one of the tall mullioned
windows, in the care of Mrs. Baynes and her comely daughter. His cheeks
were leaden-hued, his eyes closed, and from his blue lips came with each
laboured breath a faint, moaning noise. Mr. Blood stood for a moment silently considering his patient. He
deplored that a youth with such bright hopes in life as Lord Gildoy's
should have risked all, perhaps existence itself, to forward the
ambition of a worthless adventurer. Because he had liked and honoured
this brave lad he paid his case the tribute of a sigh. Then he knelt to
his task, ripped away doublet and underwear to lay bare his lordship's
mangled side, and called for water and linen and what else he needed for
his work. He was still intent upon it a half-hour later when the dragoons invaded
the homestead. The clatter of hooves and hoarse shouts that heralded
their approach disturbed him not at all. For one thing, he was not
easily disturbed; for another, his task absorbed him. But his lordship,
who had now recovered consciousness, showed considerable alarm, and the
battle-stained Jeremy Pitt sped to cover in a clothes-press. Baynes was
uneasy, and his wife and daughter trembled. Mr. Blood reassured them. "Why, what's to fear?" he said. "It's a Christian country, this, and
Christian men do not make war upon the wounded, nor upon those who
harbour them." He still had, you see, illusions about Christians. He held a glass of cordial, prepared under his directions, to his
lordship's lips. "Give your mind peace, my lord. The worst is done." And then they came rattling and clanking into the stone-flagged hall--a
round dozen jack-booted, lobster-coated troopers of the Tangiers
Regiment, led by a sturdy, black-browed fellow with a deal of gold lace
about the breast of his coat. Baynes stood his ground, his attitude half-defiant, whilst his wife
and daughter shrank away in renewed fear. Mr. Blood, at the head of the
day-bed, looked over his shoulder to take stock of the invaders. The officer barked an order, which brought his men to an attentive halt,
then swaggered forward, his gloved hand bearing down the pummel of
his sword, his spurs jingling musically as he moved. He announced his
authority to the yeoman. "I am Captain Hobart, of Colonel Kirke's dragoons. What rebels do you
harbour?" The yeoman took alarm at that ferocious truculence. It expressed itself
in his trembling voice. "I... I am no harbourer of rebels, sir. This wounded gentleman...."

"I can see for myself." The Captain stamped forward to the day-bed, and
scowled down upon the grey-faced sufferer. "No need to ask how he came in this state and by his wounds. A damned
rebel, and that's enough for me." He flung a command at his dragoons. "Out with him, my lads." Mr. Blood got between the day-bed and the troopers. "In the name of humanity, sir!" said he, on a note of anger. "This is
England, not Tangiers. The gentleman is in sore case. He may not be
moved without peril to his life." Captain Hobart was amused. "Oh, I am to be tender of the lives of these rebels! Odds blood! Do you
think it's to benefit his health we're taking him? There's gallows being
planted along the road from Weston to Bridgewater, and he'll serve
for one of them as well as another. Colonel Kirke'll learn these
nonconforming oafs something they'll not forget in generations." "You're hanging men without trial? Faith, then, it's mistaken I am. We're in Tangiers, after all, it seems, where your regiment belongs." The Captain considered him with a kindling eye. He looked him over from
the soles of his riding-boots to the crown of his periwig. He noted
the spare, active frame, the arrogant poise of the head, the air of
authority that invested Mr. Blood, and soldier recognized soldier. The
Captain's eyes narrowed. Recognition went further. "Who the hell may you be?" he exploded. "My name is Blood, sir--Peter Blood, at your service." "Aye--aye! Codso! That's the name. You were in French service once, were
you not?" If Mr. Blood was surprised, he did not betray it. "I was." "Then I remember you--five years ago, or more, you were in Tangiers." "That is so. I knew your colonel." "Faith, you may be renewing the acquaintance." The Captain laughed
unpleasantly. "What brings you here, sir?" "This wounded gentleman. I was fetched to attend him. I am a medicus." "A doctor--you?" Scorn of that lie--as he conceived it--rang in the
heavy, hectoring voice. "Medicinae baccalaureus," said Mr. Blood. "Don't fling your French at me, man," snapped Hobart. "Speak English!" Mr. Blood's smile annoyed him. "I am a physician practising my calling in the town of Bridgewater." The Captain sneered. "Which you reached by way of Lyme Regis in the
following of your bastard Duke." It was Mr. Blood's turn to sneer. "If your wit were as big as your
voice, my dear, it's the great man you'd be by this." For a moment the dragoon was speechless. The colour deepened in his
face. "You may find me great enough to hang you." "Faith, yes. Ye've the look and the manners of a hangman. But if you
practise your trade on my patient here, you may be putting a rope round
your own neck. He's not the kind you may string up and no questions
asked. He has the right to trial, and the right to trial by his peers." "By his peers?" The Captain was taken aback by these three words, which Mr. Blood had
stressed. "Sure, now, any but a fool or a savage would have asked his name before
ordering him to the gallows. The gentleman is my Lord Gildoy." And then his lordship spoke for himself, in a weak voice. "I make no concealment of my association with the Duke of Monmouth. I'll take the consequences. But, if you please, I'll take them after
trial--by my peers, as the doctor has said." The feeble voice ceased, and was followed by a moment's silence. As is
common in many blustering men, there was a deal of timidity deep down
in Hobart. The announcement of his lordship's rank had touched those
depths. A servile upstart, he stood in awe of titles. And he stood in
awe of his colonel. Percy Kirke was not lenient with blunderers. By a gesture he checked his men. He must consider. Mr. Blood, observing
his pause, added further matter for his consideration. "Ye'll be remembering, Captain, that Lord Gildoy will have friends and
relatives on the Tory side, who'll have something to say to Colonel
Kirke if his lordship should be handled like a common felon. You'll go
warily, Captain, or, as I've said, it's a halter for your neck ye'll be
weaving this morning." Captain Hobart swept the warning aside with a bluster of contempt, but
he acted upon it none the less. "Take up the day-bed," said he, "and
convey him on that to Bridgewater. Lodge him in the gaol until I take
order about him." "He may not survive the journey," Blood remonstrated. "He's in no case
to be moved." "So much the worse for him. My affair is to round up rebels." He
confirmed his order by a gesture. Two of his men took up the day-bed,
and swung to depart with it. Gildoy made a feeble effort to put forth a hand towards Mr. Blood. "Sir," he said, "you leave me in your debt. If I live I shall study how
to discharge it." Mr. Blood bowed for answer; then to the men: "Bear him steadily," he
commanded. "His life depends on it." As his lordship was carried out, the Captain became brisk. He turned
upon the yeoman. "What other cursed rebels do you harbour?" "None other, sir. His lordship...."

"We've dealt with his lordship for the present. We'll deal with you in
a moment when we've searched your house. And, by God, if you've lied to
me...." He broke off, snarling, to give an order. Four of his dragoons
went out. In a moment they were heard moving noisily in the adjacent
room. Meanwhile, the Captain was questing about the hall, sounding the
wainscoting with the butt of a pistol. Mr. Blood saw no profit to himself in lingering. "By your leave, it's a very good day I'll be wishing you," said he. "By my leave, you'll remain awhile," the Captain ordered him. Mr. Blood shrugged, and sat down. "You're tiresome," he said. "I wonder
your colonel hasn't discovered it yet." But the Captain did not heed him. He was stooping to pick up a soiled
and dusty hat in which there was pinned a little bunch of oak leaves. It
had been lying near the clothes-press in which the unfortunate Pitt had
taken refuge. The Captain smiled malevolently. His eyes raked the room,
resting first sardonically on the yeoman, then on the two women in the
background, and finally on Mr. Blood, who sat with one leg thrown over
the other in an attitude of indifference that was far from reflecting
his mind. Then the Captain stepped to the press, and pulled open one of the wings
of its massive oaken door. He took the huddled inmate by the collar of
his doublet, and lugged him out into the open. "And who the devil's this?" quoth he. "Another nobleman?" Mr. Blood had a vision of those gallows of which Captain Hobart had
spoken, and of this unfortunate young shipmaster going to adorn one of
them, strung up without trial, in the place of the other victim of whom
the Captain had been cheated. On the spot he invented not only a title
but a whole family for the young rebel. "Faith, ye've said it, Captain. This is Viscount Pitt, first cousin to
Sir Thomas Vernon, who's married to that slut Moll Kirke, sister to your
own colonel, and sometime lady in waiting upon King James's queen." Both the Captain and his prisoner gasped. But whereas thereafter young
Pitt discreetly held his peace, the Captain rapped out a nasty oath. He
considered his prisoner again. "He's lying, is he not?" he demanded, seizing the lad by the shoulder,
and glaring into his face. "He's rallying rue, by God!" "If ye believe that," said Blood, "hang him, and see what happens to
you." The dragoon glared at the doctor and then at his prisoner. "Pah!" He thrust the lad into the hands of his men. "Fetch him along to
Bridgewater. And make fast that fellow also," he pointed to Baynes. "We'll show him what it means to harbour and comfort rebels." There was a moment of confusion. Baynes struggled in the grip of the
troopers, protesting vehemently. The terrified women screamed until
silenced by a greater terror. The Captain strode across to them. He took
the girl by the shoulders. She was a pretty, golden-headed creature,
with soft blue eyes that looked up entreatingly, piteously into the face
of the dragoon. He leered upon her, his eyes aglow, took her chin in his
hand, and set her shuddering by his brutal kiss. "It's an earnest," he said, smiling grimly. "Let that quiet you, little
rebel, till I've done with these rogues." And he swung away again, leaving her faint and trembling in the arms of
her anguished mother. His men stood, grinning, awaiting orders, the two
prisoners now fast pinioned. "Take them away. Let Cornet Drake have charge of them." His smouldering
eye again sought the cowering girl. "I'll stay awhile--to search out
this place. There may be other rebels hidden here." As an afterthought,
he added: "And take this fellow with you." He pointed to Mr. Blood. "Bestir!" Mr. Blood started out of his musings. He had been considering that in
his case of instruments there was a lancet with which he might perform
on Captain Hobart a beneficial operation. Beneficial, that is, to
humanity. In any case, the dragoon was obviously plethoric and would
be the better for a blood-letting. The difficulty lay in making the
opportunity. He was beginning to wonder if he could lure the Captain
aside with some tale of hidden treasure, when this untimely interruption
set a term to that interesting speculation. He sought to temporize. "Faith it will suit me very well," said he. "For Bridgewater is my
destination, and but that ye detained me I'd have been on my way thither
now." "Your destination there will be the gaol." "Ah, bah! Ye're surely joking!" "There's a gallows for you if you prefer it. It's merely a question of
now or later." Rude hands seized Mr. Blood, and that precious lancet was in the case on
the table out of reach. He twisted out of the grip of the dragoons, for
he was strong and agile, but they closed with him again immediately, and
bore him down. Pinning him to the ground, they tied his wrists behind
his back, then roughly pulled him to his feet again. "Take him away," said Hobart shortly, and turned to issue his orders to
the other waiting troopers. "Go search the house, from attic to cellar;
then report to me here." The soldiers trailed out by the door leading to the interior. Mr. Blood
was thrust by his guards into the courtyard, where Pitt and Baynes
already waited. From the threshold of the hall, he looked back at
Captain Hobart, and his sapphire eyes were blazing. On his lips trembled
a threat of what he would do to Hobart if he should happen to survive
this business. Betimes he remembered that to utter it were probably to
extinguish his chance of living to execute it. For to-day the King's men
were masters in the West, and the West was regarded as enemy country, to
be subjected to the worst horror of war by the victorious side. Here a
captain of horse was for the moment lord of life and death. Under the apple-trees in the orchard Mr. Blood and his companions in
misfortune were made fast each to a trooper's stirrup leather. Then at
the sharp order of the cornet, the little troop started for Bridgewater. As they set out there was the fullest confirmation of Mr. Blood's
hideous assumption that to the dragoons this was a conquered enemy
country. There were sounds of rending timbers, of furniture smashed and
overthrown, the shouts and laughter of brutal men, to announce that this
hunt for rebels was no more than a pretext for pillage and destruction. Finally above all other sounds came the piercing screams of a woman in
acutest agony. Baynes checked in his stride, and swung round writhing, his face ashen. As a consequence he was jerked from his feet by the rope that attached
him to the stirrup leather, and he was dragged helplessly a yard or two
before the trooper reined in, cursing him foully, and striking him with
the flat of his sword. It came to Mr. Blood, as he trudged forward under the laden apple-trees
on that fragrant, delicious July morning, that man--as he had long
suspected--was the vilest work of God, and that only a fool would set
himself up as a healer of a species that was best exterminated. CHAPTER III. THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE


It was not until two months later--on the 19th of September, if you
must have the actual date--that Peter Blood was brought to trial, upon
a charge of high treason. We know that he was not guilty of this; but
we need not doubt that he was quite capable of it by the time he was
indicted. Those two months of inhuman, unspeakable imprisonment had
moved his mind to a cold and deadly hatred of King James and his
representatives. It says something for his fortitude that in all the
circumstances he should still have had a mind at all. Yet, terrible
as was the position of this entirely innocent man, he had cause for
thankfulness on two counts. The first of these was that he should have
been brought to trial at all; the second, that his trial took place
on the date named, and not a day earlier. In the very delay which
exacerbated him lay--although he did not realize it--his only chance of
avoiding the gallows. Easily, but for the favour of Fortune, he might have been one of those
haled, on the morrow of the battle, more or less haphazard from
the overflowing gaol at Bridgewater to be summarily hanged in the
market-place by the bloodthirsty Colonel Kirke. There was about the
Colonel of the Tangiers Regiment a deadly despatch which might have
disposed in like fashion of all those prisoners, numerous as they were,
but for the vigorous intervention of Bishop Mews, which put an end to
the drumhead courts-martial. Even so, in that first week after Sedgemoor, Kirke and Feversham
contrived between them to put to death over a hundred men after a trial
so summary as to be no trial at all. They required human freights for
the gibbets with which they were planting the countryside, and they
little cared how they procured them or what innocent lives they took. What, after all, was the life of a clod? The executioners were kept busy
with rope and chopper and cauldrons of pitch. I spare you the details of
that nauseating picture. It is, after all, with the fate of Peter Blood
that we are concerned rather than with that of the Monmouth rebels. He survived to be included in one of those melancholy droves of
prisoners who, chained in pairs, were marched from Bridgewater to
Taunton. Those who were too sorely wounded to march were conveyed in
carts, into which they were brutally crowded, their wounds undressed and
festering. Many were fortunate enough to die upon the way. When Blood
insisted upon his right to exercise his art so as to relieve some of
this suffering, he was accounted importunate and threatened with a
flogging. If he had one regret now it was that he had not been out with
Monmouth. That, of course, was illogical; but you can hardly expect
logic from a man in his position. His chain companion on that dreadful march was the same Jeremy Pitt who
had been the agent of his present misfortunes. The young shipmaster
had remained his close companion after their common arrest. Hence,
fortuitously, had they been chained together in the crowded prison,
where they were almost suffocated by the heat and the stench during
those days of July, August, and September. Scraps of news filtered into the gaol from the outside world. Some may
have been deliberately allowed to penetrate. Of these was the tale of
Monmouth's execution. It created profoundest dismay amongst those men
who were suffering for the Duke and for the religious cause he had
professed to champion. Many refused utterly to believe it. A wild story
began to circulate that a man resembling Monmouth had offered himself up
in the Duke's stead, and that Monmouth survived to come again in glory
to deliver Zion and make war upon Babylon. Mr. Blood heard that tale with the same indifference with which he had
received the news of Monmouth's death. But one shameful thing he heard
in connection with this which left him not quite so unmoved, and served
to nourish the contempt he was forming for King James. His Majesty had
consented to see Monmouth. To have done so unless he intended to pardon
him was a thing execrable and damnable beyond belief; for the only other
object in granting that interview could be the evilly mean satisfaction
of spurning the abject penitence of his unfortunate nephew. Later they heard that Lord Grey, who after the Duke--indeed, perhaps,
before him--was the main leader of the rebellion, had purchased his own
pardon for forty thousand pounds. Peter Blood found this of a piece with
the rest. His contempt for King James blazed out at last. "Why, here's a filthy mean creature to sit on a throne. If I had known
as much of him before as I know to-day, I don't doubt I should have
given cause to be where I am now." And then on a sudden thought: "And
where will Lord Gildoy be, do you suppose?" he asked. Young Pitt, whom he addressed, turned towards him a face from which the
ruddy tan of the sea had faded almost completely during those months of
captivity. His grey eyes were round and questioning. Blood answered him. "Sure, now, we've never seen his lordship since that day at
Oglethorpe's. And where are the other gentry that were taken?--the real
leaders of this plaguey rebellion. Grey's case explains their absence,
I think. They are wealthy men that can ransom themselves. Here awaiting
the gallows are none but the unfortunates who followed; those who had
the honour to lead them go free. It's a curious and instructive reversal
of the usual way of these things. Faith, it's an uncertain world
entirely!" He laughed, and settled down into that spirit of scorn, wrapped in
which he stepped later into the great hall of Taunton Castle to take his
trial. With him went Pitt and the yeoman Baynes. The three of them were
to be tried together, and their case was to open the proceedings of that
ghastly day. The hall, even to the galleries--thronged with spectators, most of whom
were ladies--was hung in scarlet; a pleasant conceit, this, of the Lord
Chief Justice's, who naturally enough preferred the colour that should
reflect his own bloody mind. At the upper end, on a raised dais, sat the Lords Commissioners, the
five judges in their scarlet robes and heavy dark periwigs, Baron
Jeffreys of Wem enthroned in the middle place. The prisoners filed in under guard. The crier called for silence under
pain of imprisonment, and as the hum of voices gradually became hushed,
Mr. Blood considered with interest the twelve good men and true that
composed the jury. Neither good nor true did they look. They were
scared, uneasy, and hangdog as any set of thieves caught with their
hands in the pockets of their neighbours. They were twelve shaken men,
each of whom stood between the sword of the Lord Chief Justice's recent
bloodthirsty charge and the wall of his own conscience. From them Mr. Blood's calm, deliberate glance passed on to consider the
Lords Commissioners, and particularly the presiding Judge, that Lord
Jeffreys, whose terrible fame had come ahead of him from Dorchester. He beheld a tall, slight man on the young side of forty, with an oval
face that was delicately beautiful. There were dark stains of suffering
or sleeplessness under the low-lidded eyes, heightening their brilliance
and their gentle melancholy. The face was very pale, save for the vivid
colour of the full lips and the hectic flush on the rather high but
inconspicuous cheek-bones. It was something in those lips that marred
the perfection of that countenance; a fault, elusive but undeniable,
lurked there to belie the fine sensitiveness of those nostrils, the
tenderness of those dark, liquid eyes and the noble calm of that pale
brow. The physician in Mr. Blood regarded the man with peculiar interest
knowing as he did the agonizing malady from which his lordship suffered,
and the amazingly irregular, debauched life that he led in spite of
it--perhaps because of it. "Peter Blood, hold up your hand!" Abruptly he was recalled to his position by the harsh voice of the clerk
of arraigns. His obedience was mechanical, and the clerk droned out the
wordy indictment which pronounced Peter Blood a false traitor against
the Most Illustrious and Most Excellent Prince, James the Second, by
the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, his
supreme and natural lord. It informed him that, having no fear of God in
his heart, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil,
he had failed in the love and true and due natural obedience towards his
said lord the King, and had moved to disturb the peace and tranquillity
of the kingdom and to stir up war and rebellion to depose his said lord
the King from the title, honour, and the regal name of the imperial
crown--and much more of the same kind, at the end of all of which he
was invited to say whether he was guilty or not guilty. He answered more
than was asked. "It's entirely innocent I am." A small, sharp-faced man at a table before and to the right of him
bounced up. It was Mr. Pollexfen, the Judge-Advocate. "Are you guilty or not guilty?" snapped this peppery gentleman. "You
must take the words." "Words, is it?" said Peter Blood. "Oh--not guilty." And he went on,
addressing himself to the bench. "On this same subject of words, may it
please your lordships, I am guilty of nothing to justify any of those
words I have heard used to describe me, unless it be of a want of
patience at having been closely confined for two months and longer in a
foetid gaol with great peril to my health and even life." Being started, he would have added a deal more; but at this point the
Lord Chief Justice interposed in a gentle, rather plaintive voice. "Look you, sir: because we must observe the common and usual methods of
trial, I must interrupt you now. You are no doubt ignorant of the forms
of law?" "Not only ignorant, my lord, but hitherto most happy in that ignorance. I could gladly have forgone this acquaintance with them." A pale smile momentarily lightened the wistful countenance. "I believe you. You shall be fully heard when you come to your defence. But anything you say now is altogether irregular and improper." Enheartened by that apparent sympathy and consideration, Mr. Blood
answered thereafter, as was required of him, that he would be tried by
God and his country. Whereupon, having prayed to God to send him a good
deliverance, the clerk called upon Andrew Baynes to hold up his hand and
plead. From Baynes, who pleaded not guilty, the clerk passed on to Pitt, who
boldly owned his guilt. The Lord Chief Justice stirred at that. "Come; that's better," quoth he, and his four scarlet brethren nodded. "If all were as obstinate as his two fellow-rebels, there would never be
an end." After that ominous interpolation, delivered with an inhuman iciness that
sent a shiver through the court, Mr. Pollexfen got to his feet. With
great prolixity he stated the general case against the three men, and
the particular case against Peter Blood, whose indictment was to be
taken first. The only witness called for the King was Captain Hobart. He testified
briskly to the manner in which he had found and taken the three
prisoners, together with Lord Gildoy. Upon the orders of his colonel he
would have hanged Pitt out of hand, but was restrained by the lies of
the prisoner Blood, who led him to believe that Pitt was a peer of the
realm and a person of consideration. As the Captain's evidence concluded, Lord Jeffreys looked across at
Peter Blood. "Will the prisoner Blood ask the witness any questions?" "None, my lord. He has correctly related what occurred." "I am glad to have your admission of that without any of the
prevarications that are usual in your kind. And I will say this, that
here prevarication would avail you little. For we always have the truth
in the end. Be sure of that." Baynes and Pitt similarly admitted the accuracy of the Captain's
evidence, whereupon the scarlet figure of the Lord Chief Justice heaved
a sigh of relief. "This being so, let us get on, in God's name; for we have much to do." There was now no trace of gentleness in his voice. It was brisk and
rasping, and the lips through which it passed were curved in scorn. "I
take it, Mr. Pollexfen, that the wicked treason of these three rogues
being established--indeed, admitted by them--there is no more to be
said." Peter Blood's voice rang out crisply, on a note that almost seemed to
contain laughter. "May it please your lordship, but there's a deal more to be said." His lordship looked at him, first in blank amazement at his audacity,
then gradually with an expression of dull anger. The scarlet lips fell
into unpleasant, cruel lines that transfigured the whole countenance. "How now, rogue? Would you waste our time with idle subterfuge?" "I would have your lordship and the gentlemen of the jury hear me on my
defence, as your lordship promised that I should be heard." "Why, so you shall, villain; so you shall." His lordship's voice was
harsh as a file. He writhed as he spoke, and for an instant his features
were distorted. A delicate dead-white hand, on which the veins showed
blue, brought forth a handkerchief with which he dabbed his lips and
then his brow. Observing him with his physician's eye, Peter Blood
judged him a prey to the pain of the disease that was destroying him. "So you shall. But after the admission made, what defence remains?" "You shall judge, my lord." "That is the purpose for which I sit here." "And so shall you, gentlemen." Blood looked from judge to jury. The
latter shifted uncomfortably under the confident flash of his blue eyes. Lord Jeffreys's bullying charge had whipped the spirit out of them. Had
they, themselves, been prisoners accused of treason, he could not have
arraigned them more ferociously. Peter Blood stood boldly forward, erect, self-possessed, and saturnine. He was freshly shaven, and his periwig, if out of curl, was at least
carefully combed and dressed. "Captain Hobart has testified to what he knows--that he found me at
Oglethorpe's Farm on the Monday morning after the battle at Weston. But
he has not told you what I did there." Again the Judge broke in. "Why, what should you have been doing there
in the company of rebels, two of whom--Lord Gildoy and your fellow
there--have already admitted their guilt?" "That is what I beg leave to tell your lordship." "I pray you do, and in God's name be brief, man. For if I am to be
troubled with the say of all you traitor dogs, I may sit here until the
Spring Assizes." "I was there, my lord, in my quality as a physician, to dress Lord
Gildoy's wounds." "What's this? Do you tell us that you are a physician?" "A graduate of Trinity College, Dublin." "Good God!" cried Lord Jeffreys, his voice suddenly swelling, his eyes
upon the jury. "What an impudent rogue is this! You heard the witness
say that he had known him in Tangiers some years ago, and that he was
then an officer in the French service. You heard the prisoner admit that
the witness had spoken the truth?" "Why, so he had. Yet what I am telling you is also true, so it is. For
some years I was a soldier; but before that I was a physician, and I
have been one again since January last, established in Bridgewater, as I
can bring a hundred witnesses to prove." "There's not the need to waste our time with that. I will convict you
out of your own rascally mouth. I will ask you only this: How came you,
who represent yourself as a physician peacefully following your
calling in the town of Bridgewater, to be with the army of the Duke of
Monmouth?" "I was never with that army. No witness has sworn to that, and I dare
swear that no witness will. I never was attracted to the late rebellion. I regarded the adventure as a wicked madness. I take leave to ask your
lordship" (his brogue became more marked than ever) "what should I,
who was born and bred a papist, be doing in the army of the Protestant
Champion?" "A papist thou?" The judge gloomed on him a moment. "Art more like
a snivelling, canting Jack Presbyter. I tell you, man, I can smell a
Presbyterian forty miles." "Then I'll take leave to marvel that with so keen a nose your lordship
can't smell a papist at four paces." There was a ripple of laughter in the galleries, instantly quelled by
the fierce glare of the Judge and the voice of the crier. Lord Jeffreys leaned farther forward upon his desk. He raised that
delicate white hand, still clutching its handkerchief, and sprouting
from a froth of lace. "We'll leave your religion out of account for the moment, friend," said
he. "But mark what I say to you." With a minatory forefinger he beat the
time of his words. "Know, friend, that there is no religion a man
can pretend to can give a countenance to lying. Thou hast a precious
immortal soul, and there is nothing in the world equal to it in value. Consider that the great God of Heaven and Earth, before Whose tribunal
thou and we and all persons are to stand at the last day, will take
vengeance on thee for every falsehood, and justly strike thee into
eternal flames, make thee drop into the bottomless pit of fire and
brimstone, if thou offer to deviate the least from the truth and nothing
but the truth. For I tell thee God is not mocked. On that I charge you
to answer truthfully. How came you to be taken with these rebels?" Peter Blood gaped at him a moment in consternation. The man was
incredible, unreal, fantastic, a nightmare judge. Then he collected
himself to answer. "I was summoned that morning to succour Lord Gildoy, and I conceived it
to be the duty imposed upon me by my calling to answer that summons." "Did you so?" The Judge, terrible now of aspect--his face white, his
twisted lips red as the blood for which they thirsted--glared upon
him in evil mockery. Then he controlled himself as if by an effort. He sighed. He resumed his earlier gentle plaintiveness. "Lord! How you
waste our time. But I'll have patience with you. Who summoned you?" "Master Pitt there, as he will testify." "Oh! Master Pitt will testify--he that is himself a traitor
self-confessed. Is that your witness?" "There is also Master Baynes here, who can answer to it." "Good Master Baynes will have to answer for himself; and I doubt not
he'll be greatly exercised to save his own neck from a halter. Come,
come, sir; are these your only witnesses?" "I could bring others from Bridgewater, who saw me set out that morning
upon the crupper of Master Pitt's horse." His lordship smiled. "It will not be necessary. For, mark me, I do not
intend to waste more time on you. Answer me only this: When Master Pitt,
as you pretend, came to summon you, did you know that he had been, as
you have heard him confess, of Monmouth's following?" "I did, My lord." "You did! Ha!" His lordship looked at the cringing jury and uttered a
short, stabbing laugh. "Yet in spite of that you went with him?" "To succour a wounded man, as was my sacred duty." "Thy sacred duty, sayest thou?" Fury blazed out of him again. "Good God! What a generation of vipers do we live in! Thy sacred duty, rogue, is to
thy King and to God. But let it pass. Did he tell you whom it was that
you were desired to succour?" "Lord Gildoy--yes." "And you knew that Lord Gildoy had been wounded in the battle, and on
what side he fought?" "I knew." "And yet, being, as you would have us believe, a true and loyal subject
of our Lord the King, you went to succour him?" Peter Blood lost patience for a moment. "My business, my lord, was with
his wounds, not with his politics." A murmur from the galleries and even from the jury approved him. It
served only to drive his terrible judge into a deeper fury. "Jesus God! Was there ever such an impudent villain in the world as
thou?" He swung, white-faced, to the jury. "I hope, gentlemen of the
jury, you take notice of the horrible carriage of this traitor rogue,
and withal you cannot but observe the spirit of this sort of people,
what a villainous and devilish one it is. Out of his own mouth he has
said enough to hang him a dozen times. Yet is there more. Answer me
this, sir: When you cozened Captain Hobart with your lies concerning the
station of this other traitor Pitt, what was your business then?" "To save him from being hanged without trial, as was threatened." "What concern was it of yours whether or how the wretch was hanged?" "Justice is the concern of every loyal subject, for an injustice
committed by one who holds the King's commission is in some sense a
dishonour to the King's majesty." It was a shrewd, sharp thrust aimed at the jury, and it reveals,
I think, the alertness of the man's mind, his self-possession ever
steadiest in moments of dire peril. With any other jury it must have
made the impression that he hoped to make. It may even have made its
impression upon these poor pusillanimous sheep. But the dread judge was
there to efface it. He gasped aloud, then flung himself violently forward. "Lord of Heaven!" he stormed. "Was there ever such a canting, impudent
rascal? But I have done with you. I see thee, villain, I see thee
already with a halter round thy neck." Having spoken so, gloatingly, evilly, he sank back again, and composed
himself. It was as if a curtain fell. All emotion passed again from his
pale face. Back to invest it again came that gentle melancholy. Speaking
after a moment's pause, his voice was soft, almost tender, yet every
word of it carried sharply through that hushed court. "If I know my own heart it is not in my nature to desire the hurt of
anybody, much less to delight in his eternal perdition. It is out of
compassion for you that I have used all these words--because I would
have you have some regard for your immortal soul, and not ensure its
damnation by obdurately persisting in falsehood and prevarication. But I
see that all the pains in the world, and all compassion and charity are
lost upon you, and therefore I will say no more to you." He turned again
to the jury that countenance of wistful beauty. "Gentlemen, I must tell
you for law, of which we are the judges, and not you, that if any person
be in actual rebellion against the King, and another person--who really
and actually was not in rebellion--does knowingly receive, harbour,
comfort, or succour him, such a person is as much a traitor as he who
indeed bore arms. We are bound by our oaths and consciences to declare
to you what is law; and you are bound by your oaths and your consciences
to deliver and to declare to us by your verdict the truth of the facts." Upon that he proceeded to his summing-up, showing how Baynes and Blood
were both guilty of treason, the first for having harboured a traitor,
the second for having succoured that traitor by dressing his wounds. He
interlarded his address by sycophantic allusions to his natural lord
and lawful sovereign, the King, whom God had set over them, and with
vituperations of Nonconformity and of Monmouth, of whom--in his own
words--he dared boldly affirm that the meanest subject within the
kingdom that was of legitimate birth had a better title to the crown. "Jesus God! That ever we should have such a generation of vipers among
us," he burst out in rhetorical frenzy. And then he sank back as if
exhausted by the violence he had used. A moment he was still, dabbing
his lips again; then he moved uneasily; once more his features were
twisted by pain, and in a few snarling, almost incoherent words he
dismissed the jury to consider the verdict. Peter Blood had listened to the intemperate, the blasphemous, and almost
obscene invective of that tirade with a detachment that afterwards, in
retrospect, surprised him. He was so amazed by the man, by the reactions
taking place in him between mind and body, and by his methods of
bullying and coercing the jury into bloodshed, that he almost forgot
that his own life was at stake. The absence of that dazed jury was a brief one. The verdict found the
three prisoners guilty. Peter Blood looked round the scarlet-hung court. For an instant that foam of white faces seemed to heave before him. Then
he was himself again, and a voice was asking him what he had to say
for himself, why sentence of death should not be passed upon him, being
convicted of high treason. He laughed, and his laugh jarred uncannily upon the deathly stillness
of the court. It was all so grotesque, such a mockery of justice
administered by that wistful-eyed jack-pudding in scarlet, who was
himself a mockery--the venal instrument of a brutally spiteful and
vindictive king. His laughter shocked the austerity of that same
jack-pudding. "Do you laugh, sirrah, with the rope about your neck, upon the very
threshold of that eternity you are so suddenly to enter into?" And then Blood took his revenge. "Faith, it's in better case I am for mirth than your lordship. For I
have this to say before you deliver judgment. Your lordship sees me--an
innocent man whose only offence is that I practised charity--with a
halter round my neck. Your lordship, being the justiciar, speaks with
knowledge of what is to come to me. I, being a physician, may speak with
knowledge of what is to come to your lordship. And I tell you that I
would not now change places with you--that I would not exchange this
halter that you fling about my neck for the stone that you carry in
your body. The death to which you may doom me is a light pleasantry by
contrast with the death to which your lordship has been doomed by that
Great Judge with whose name your lordship makes so free." The Lord Chief Justice sat stiffly upright, his face ashen, his lips
twitching, and whilst you might have counted ten there was no sound in
that paralyzed court after Peter Blood had finished speaking. All those
who knew Lord Jeffreys regarded this as the lull before the storm, and
braced themselves for the explosion. But none came. Slowly, faintly, the colour crept back into that ashen face. The scarlet
figure lost its rigidity, and bent forward. His lordship began to speak. In a muted voice and briefly--much more briefly than his wont on such
occasions and in a manner entirely mechanical, the manner of a man
whose thoughts are elsewhere while his lips are speaking--he delivered
sentence of death in the prescribed form, and without the least
allusion to what Peter Blood had said. Having delivered it, he sank back
exhausted, his eyes half-closed, his brow agleam with sweat. The prisoners filed out. Mr. Pollexfen--a Whig at heart despite the position of Judge-Advocate
which he occupied--was overheard by one of the jurors to mutter in the
ear of a brother counsel:

"On my soul, that swarthy rascal has given his lordship a scare. It's a
pity he must hang. For a man who can frighten Jeffreys should go far." CHAPTER IV. HUMAN MERCHANDISE


Mr. Pollexfen was at one and the same time right and wrong--a condition
much more common than is generally supposed. He was right in his indifferently expressed thought that a man whose
mien and words could daunt such a lord of terror as Jeffreys, should by
the dominance of his nature be able to fashion himself a considerable
destiny. He was wrong--though justifiably so--in his assumption that
Peter Blood must hang. I have said that the tribulations with which he was visited as a result
of his errand of mercy to Oglethorpe's Farm contained--although as yet
he did not perceive it, perhaps--two sources of thankfulness: one that
he was tried at all; the other that his trial took place on the 19th
of September. Until the 18th, the sentences passed by the court of the
Lords Commissioners had been carried out literally and expeditiously. But on the morning of the 19th there arrived at Taunton a courier from
Lord Sunderland, the Secretary of State, with a letter for Lord Jeffreys
wherein he was informed that His Majesty had been graciously pleased
to command that eleven hundred rebels should be furnished for
transportation to some of His Majesty's southern plantations, Jamaica,
Barbados, or any of the Leeward Islands. You are not to suppose that this command was dictated by any sense of
mercy. Lord Churchill was no more than just when he spoke of the King's
heart as being as insensible as marble. It had been realized that in
these wholesale hangings there was taking place a reckless waste of
valuable material. Slaves were urgently required in the plantations,
and a healthy, vigorous man could be reckoned worth at least from ten
to fifteen pounds. Then, there were at court many gentlemen who had some
claim or other upon His Majesty's bounty. Here was a cheap and ready way
to discharge these claims. From amongst the convicted rebels a certain
number might be set aside to be bestowed upon those gentlemen, so that
they might dispose of them to their own profit. My Lord Sunderland's letter gives precise details of the royal
munificence in human flesh. A thousand prisoners were to be distributed
among some eight courtiers and others, whilst a postscriptum to his
lordship's letter asked for a further hundred to be held at the disposal
of the Queen. These prisoners were to be transported at once to His
Majesty's southern plantations, and to be kept there for the space of
ten years before being restored to liberty, the parties to whom they
were assigned entering into security to see that transportation was
immediately effected. We know from Lord Jeffreys's secretary how the Chief Justice inveighed
that night in drunken frenzy against this misplaced clemency to which
His Majesty had been persuaded. We know how he attempted by letter to
induce the King to reconsider his decision. But James adhered to it. It
was--apart from the indirect profit he derived from it--a clemency
full worthy of him. He knew that to spare lives in this fashion was to
convert them into living deaths. Many must succumb in torment to the
horrors of West Indian slavery, and so be the envy of their surviving
companions. Thus it happened that Peter Blood, and with him Jeremy Pitt and Andrew
Baynes, instead of being hanged, drawn, and quartered as their sentences
directed, were conveyed to Bristol and there shipped with some fifty
others aboard the Jamaica Merchant. From close confinement under
hatches, ill-nourishment and foul water, a sickness broke out amongst
them, of which eleven died. Amongst these was the unfortunate yeoman
from Oglethorpe's Farm, brutally torn from his quiet homestead amid
the fragrant cider orchards for no other sin but that he had practised
mercy. The mortality might have been higher than it was but for Peter Blood. At first the master of the Jamaica Merchant had answered with oaths and
threats the doctor's expostulations against permitting men to perish
in this fashion, and his insistence that he should be made free of the
medicine chest and given leave to minister to the sick. But presently
Captain Gardner came to see that he might be brought to task for
these too heavy losses of human merchandise and because of this he was
belatedly glad to avail himself of the skill of Peter Blood. The doctor
went to work zealously and zestfully, and wrought so ably that, by his
ministrations and by improving the condition of his fellow-captives, he
checked the spread of the disease. Towards the middle of December the Jamaica Merchant dropped anchor in
Carlisle Bay, and put ashore the forty-two surviving rebels-convict. If these unfortunates had imagined--as many of them appear to have
done--that they were coming into some wild, savage country, the
prospect, of which they had a glimpse before they were hustled over
the ship's side into the waiting boats, was enough to correct the
impression. They beheld a town of sufficiently imposing proportions
composed of houses built upon European notions of architecture, but
without any of the huddle usual in European cities. The spire of a
church rose dominantly above the red roofs, a fort guarded the entrance
of the wide harbour, with guns thrusting their muzzles between the
crenels, and the wide facade of Government House revealed itself
dominantly placed on a gentle hill above the town. This hill was vividly
green as is an English hill in April, and the day was such a day as
April gives to England, the season of heavy rains being newly ended. On a wide cobbled space on the sea front they found a guard of
red-coated militia drawn up to receive them, and a crowd--attracted by
their arrival--which in dress and manner differed little from a crowd in
a seaport at home save that it contained fewer women and a great number
of negroes. To inspect them, drawn up there on the mole, came Governor Steed,
a short, stout, red-faced gentleman, in blue taffetas burdened by a
prodigious amount of gold lace, who limped a little and leaned heavily
upon a stout ebony cane. After him, in the uniform of a colonel of the
Barbados Militia, rolled a tall, corpulent man who towered head and
shoulders above the Governor, with malevolence plainly written on his
enormous yellowish countenance. At his side, and contrasting oddly with
his grossness, moving with an easy stripling grace, came a slight young
lady in a modish riding-gown. The broad brim of a grey hat with scarlet
sweep of ostrich plume shaded an oval face upon which the climate of
the Tropic of Cancer had made no impression, so delicately fair was its
complexion. Ringlets of red-brown hair hung to her shoulders. Frankness
looked out from her hazel eyes which were set wide; commiseration
repressed now the mischievousness that normally inhabited her fresh
young mouth. Peter Blood caught himself staring in a sort of amazement at that
piquant face, which seemed here so out of place, and finding his stare
returned, he shifted uncomfortably. He grew conscious of the sorry
figure that he cut. Unwashed, with rank and matted hair and a
disfiguring black beard upon his face, and the erstwhile splendid suit
of black camlet in which he had been taken prisoner now reduced to rags
that would have disgraced a scarecrow, he was in no case for inspection
by such dainty eyes as these. Nevertheless, they continued to inspect
him with round-eyed, almost childlike wonder and pity. Their owner put
forth a hand to touch the scarlet sleeve of her companion, whereupon
with an ill-tempered grunt the man swung his great bulk round so that he
directly confronted her. Looking up into his face, she was speaking to him earnestly, but the
Colonel plainly gave her no more than the half of his attention. His
little beady eyes, closely flanking a fleshly, pendulous nose, had
passed from her and were fixed upon fair-haired, sturdy young Pitt, who
was standing beside Blood. The Governor had also come to a halt, and for a moment now that little
group of three stood in conversation. What the lady said, Peter could
not hear at all, for she lowered her voice; the Colonel's reached him
in a confused rumble, but the Governor was neither considerate nor
indistinct; he had a high-pitched voice which carried far, and believing
himself witty, he desired to be heard by all. "But, my dear Colonel Bishop, it is for you to take first choice from
this dainty nosegay, and at your own price. After that we'll send the
rest to auction." Colonel Bishop nodded his acknowledgment. He raised his voice in
answering. "Your excellency is very good. But, faith, they're a weedy
lot, not likely to be of much value in the plantation." His beady eyes
scanned them again, and his contempt of them deepened the malevolence of
his face. It was as if he were annoyed with them for being in no better
condition. Then he beckoned forward Captain Gardner, the master of the
Jamaica Merchant, and for some minutes stood in talk with him over a
list which the latter produced at his request. Presently he waved aside the list and advanced alone towards the
rebels-convict, his eyes considering them, his lips pursed. Before the
young Somersetshire shipmaster he came to a halt, and stood an instant
pondering him. Then he fingered the muscles of the young man's arm,
and bade him open his mouth that he might see his teeth. He pursed his
coarse lips again and nodded. He spoke to Gardner over his shoulder. "Fifteen pounds for this one." The Captain made a face of dismay. "Fifteen pounds! It isn't half what I
meant to ask for him." "It is double what I had meant to give," grunted the Colonel. "But he would be cheap at thirty pounds, your honour." "I can get a negro for that. These white swine don't live. They're not
fit for the labour." Gardner broke into protestations of Pitt's health, youth, and vigour. It was not a man he was discussing; it was a beast of burden. Pitt, a
sensitive lad, stood mute and unmoving. Only the ebb and flow of colour
in his cheeks showed the inward struggle by which he maintained his
self-control. Peter Blood was nauseated by the loathsome haggle. In the background, moving slowly away down the line of prisoners, went
the lady in conversation with the Governor, who smirked and preened
himself as he limped beside her. She was unconscious of the loathly
business the Colonel was transacting. Was she, wondered Blood,
indifferent to it? Colonel Bishop swung on his heel to pass on. "I'll go as far as twenty pounds. Not a penny more, and it's twice as
much as you are like to get from Crabston." Captain Gardner, recognizing the finality of the tone, sighed and
yielded. Already Bishop was moving down the line. For Mr. Blood, as
for a weedy youth on his left, the Colonel had no more than a glance of
contempt. But the next man, a middle-aged Colossus named Wolverstone,
who had lost an eye at Sedgemoor, drew his regard, and the haggling was
recommenced. Peter Blood stood there in the brilliant sunshine and inhaled the
fragrant air, which was unlike any air that he had ever breathed. It
was laden with a strange perfume, blend of logwood flower, pimento, and
aromatic cedars. He lost himself in unprofitable speculations born of
that singular fragrance. He was in no mood for conversation, nor was
Pitt, who stood dumbly at his side, and who was afflicted mainly at the
moment by the thought that he was at last about to be separated from
this man with whom he had stood shoulder to shoulder throughout all
these troublous months, and whom he had come to love and depend upon for
guidance and sustenance. A sense of loneliness and misery pervaded him
by contrast with which all that he had endured seemed as nothing. To
Pitt, this separation was the poignant climax of all his sufferings. Other buyers came and stared at them, and passed on. Blood did not heed
them. And then at the end of the line there was a movement. Gardner was
speaking in a loud voice, making an announcement to the general public
of buyers that had waited until Colonel Bishop had taken his choice of
that human merchandise. As he finished, Blood, looking in his direction,
noticed that the girl was speaking to Bishop, and pointing up the line
with a silver-hilted riding-whip she carried. Bishop shaded his eyes
with his hand to look in the direction in which she was pointing. Then slowly, with his ponderous, rolling gait, he approached again
accompanied by Gardner, and followed by the lady and the Governor. On they came until the Colonel was abreast of Blood. He would have
passed on, but that the lady tapped his arm with her whip. "But this is the man I meant," she said. "This one?" Contempt rang in the voice. Peter Blood found himself
staring into a pair of beady brown eyes sunk into a yellow, fleshly face
like currants into a dumpling. He felt the colour creeping into his face
under the insult of that contemptuous inspection. "Bah! A bag of bones. What should I do with him?" He was turning away when Gardner interposed. "He maybe lean, but he's tough; tough and healthy. When half of them was
sick and the other half sickening, this rogue kept his legs and doctored
his fellows. But for him there'd ha' been more deaths than there was. Say fifteen pounds for him, Colonel. That's cheap enough. He's tough, I
tell your honour--tough and strong, though he be lean. And he's just the
man to bear the heat when it comes. The climate'll never kill him." There came a chuckle from Governor Steed. "You hear, Colonel. Trust
your niece. Her sex knows a man when it sees one." And he laughed, well
pleased with his wit. But he laughed alone. A cloud of annoyance swept across the face of
the Colonel's niece, whilst the Colonel himself was too absorbed in the
consideration of this bargain to heed the Governor's humour. He twisted
his lip a little, stroking his chin with his hand the while. Jeremy Pitt
had almost ceased to breathe. "I'll give you ten pounds for him," said the Colonel at last. Peter Blood prayed that the offer might be rejected. For no reason that
he could have given you, he was taken with repugnance at the thought
of becoming the property of this gross animal, and in some sort the
property of that hazel-eyed young girl. But it would need more than
repugnance to save him from his destiny. A slave is a slave, and has
no power to shape his fate. Peter Blood was sold to Colonel Bishop--a
disdainful buyer--for the ignominious sum of ten pounds. CHAPTER V. ARABELLA BISHOP


One sunny morning in January, about a month after the arrival of the
Jamaica Merchant at Bridgetown, Miss Arabella Bishop rode out from her
uncle's fine house on the heights to the northwest of the city. She was
attended by two negroes who trotted after her at a respectful distance,
and her destination was Government House, whither she went to visit the
Governor's lady, who had lately been ailing. Reaching the summit of
a gentle, grassy slope, she met a tall, lean man dressed in a sober,
gentlemanly fashion, who was walking in the opposite direction. He was
a stranger to her, and strangers were rare enough in the island. And yet
in some vague way he did not seem quite a stranger. Miss Arabella drew rein, affecting to pause that she might admire the
prospect, which was fair enough to warrant it. Yet out of the corner
of those hazel eyes she scanned this fellow very attentively as he came
nearer. She corrected her first impression of his dress. It was
sober enough, but hardly gentlemanly. Coat and breeches were of plain
homespun; and if the former sat so well upon him it was more by virtue
of his natural grace than by that of tailoring. His stockings were of
cotton, harsh and plain, and the broad castor, which he respectfully
doffed as he came up with her, was an old one unadorned by band or
feather. What had seemed to be a periwig at a little distance was now
revealed for the man's own lustrous coiling black hair. Out of a brown, shaven, saturnine face two eyes that were startlingly
blue considered her gravely. The man would have passed on but that she
detained him. "I think I know you, sir," said she. Her voice was crisp and boyish, and there was something of boyishness
in her manner--if one can apply the term to so dainty a lady. It arose
perhaps from an ease, a directness, which disdained the artifices of her
sex, and set her on good terms with all the world. To this it may be
due that Miss Arabella had reached the age of five and twenty not merely
unmarried but unwooed. She used with all men a sisterly frankness which
in itself contains a quality of aloofness, rendering it difficult for
any man to become her lover. Her negroes had halted at some distance in the rear, and they squatted
now upon the short grass until it should be her pleasure to proceed upon
her way. The stranger came to a standstill upon being addressed. "A lady should know her own property," said he. "My property?" "Your uncle's, leastways. Let me present myself. I am called Peter
Blood, and I am worth precisely ten pounds. I know it because that
is the sum your uncle paid for me. It is not every man has the same
opportunities of ascertaining his real value." She recognized him then. She had not seen him since that day upon the
mole a month ago, and that she should not instantly have known him
again despite the interest he had then aroused in her is not surprising,
considering the change he had wrought in his appearance, which now was
hardly that of a slave. "My God!" said she. "And you can laugh!" "It's an achievement," he admitted. "But then, I have not fared as ill
as I might." "I have heard of that," said she. What she had heard was that this rebel-convict had been discovered to
be a physician. The thing had come to the ears of Governor Steed, who
suffered damnably from the gout, and Governor Steed had borrowed the
fellow from his purchaser. Whether by skill or good fortune, Peter Blood
had afforded the Governor that relief which his excellency had failed to
obtain from the ministrations of either of the two physicians practising
in Bridgetown. Then the Governor's lady had desired him to attend her
for the megrims. Mr. Blood had found her suffering from nothing worse
than peevishness--the result of a natural petulance aggravated by the
dulness of life in Barbados to a lady of her social aspirations. But he
had prescribed for her none the less, and she had conceived herself the
better for his prescription. After that the fame of him had gone through
Bridgetown, and Colonel Bishop had found that there was more profit to
be made out of this new slave by leaving him to pursue his profession
than by setting him to work on the plantations, for which purpose he had
been originally acquired. "It is yourself, madam, I have to thank for my comparatively easy
and clean condition," said Mr. Blood, "and I am glad to take this
opportunity of doing so." The gratitude was in his words rather than in his tone. Was he mocking,
she wondered, and looked at him with the searching frankness that
another might have found disconcerting. He took the glance for a
question, and answered it. "If some other planter had bought me," he explained, "it is odds that
the facts of my shining abilities might never have been brought to
light, and I should be hewing and hoeing at this moment like the poor
wretches who were landed with me." "And why do you thank me for that? It was my uncle who bought you." "But he would not have done so had you not urged him. I perceived your
interest. At the time I resented it." "You resented it?" There was a challenge in her boyish voice. "I have had no lack of experiences of this mortal life; but to be
bought and sold was a new one, and I was hardly in the mood to love my
purchaser." "If I urged you upon my uncle, sir, it was that I commiserated you." There was a slight severity in her tone, as if to reprove the mixture of
mockery and flippancy in which he seemed to be speaking. She proceeded to explain herself. "My uncle may appear to you a hard
man. No doubt he is. They are all hard men, these planters. It is the
life, I suppose. But there are others here who are worse. There is Mr.
Crabston, for instance, up at Speightstown. He was there on the mole,
waiting to buy my uncle's leavings, and if you had fallen into his
hands... A dreadful man. That is why." He was a little bewildered. "This interest in a stranger..." he began. Then changed the direction of
his probe. "But there were others as deserving of commiseration." "You did not seem quite like the others." "I am not," said he. "Oh!" She stared at him, bridling a little. "You have a good opinion of
yourself." "On the contrary. The others are all worthy rebels. I am not. That
is the difference. I was one who had not the wit to see that England
requires purifying. I was content to pursue a doctor's trade in
Bridgewater whilst my betters were shedding their blood to drive out an
unclean tyrant and his rascally crew." "Sir!" she checked him. "I think you are talking treason." "I hope I am not obscure," said he. "There are those here who would have you flogged if they heard you." "The Governor would never allow it. He has the gout, and his lady has
the megrims." "Do you depend upon that?" She was frankly scornful. "You have certainly never had the gout; probably not even the megrims,"
said he. She made a little impatient movement with her hand, and looked away from
him a moment, out to sea. Quite suddenly she looked at him again; and
now her brows were knit. "But if you are not a rebel, how come you here?" He saw the thing she apprehended, and he laughed. "Faith, now, it's a
long story," said he. "And one perhaps that you would prefer not to tell?" Briefly on that he told it her. "My God! What an infamy!" she cried, when he had done. "Oh, it's a sweet country England under King James! There's no need to
commiserate me further. All things considered I prefer Barbados. Here at
least one can believe in God." He looked first to right, then to left as he spoke, from the distant
shadowy bulk of Mount Hillbay to the limitless ocean ruffled by the
winds of heaven. Then, as if the fair prospect rendered him conscious
of his own littleness and the insignificance of his woes, he fell
thoughtful. "Is that so difficult elsewhere?" she asked him, and she was very grave. "Men make it so." "I see." She laughed a little, on a note of sadness, it seemed to
him. "I have never deemed Barbados the earthly mirror of heaven," she
confessed. "But no doubt you know your world better than I." She touched
her horse with her little silver-hilted whip. "I congratulate you on
this easing of your misfortunes." He bowed, and she moved on. Her negroes sprang up, and went trotting
after her. Awhile Peter Blood remained standing there, where she left him, conning
the sunlit waters of Carlisle Bay below, and the shipping in that
spacious haven about which the gulls were fluttering noisily. It was a fair enough prospect, he reflected, but it was a prison, and in
announcing that he preferred it to England, he had indulged that almost
laudable form of boasting which lies in belittling our misadventures. He turned, and resuming his way, went off in long, swinging strides
towards the little huddle of huts built of mud and wattles--a miniature
village enclosed in a stockade which the plantation slaves inhabited,
and where he, himself, was lodged with them. Through his mind sang the line of Lovelace:

  "Stone walls do not a prison make,
   Nor iron bars a cage." But he gave it a fresh meaning, the very converse of that which its
author had intended. A prison, he reflected, was a prison, though it had
neither walls nor bars, however spacious it might be. 