



Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Snarley-yow, or The Dog Fiend, by Captain Marryat. ________________________________________________________________________

"Snarley-yow", or "The Dog Fiend" was published in 1837, the eleventh
book to flow from Marryat's pen. You could say that this book is a chronicle of the doings of various
hopeless people, who are constantly being unkind to one another, and in
particular, except for his owner, to the rather horrible dog. But no
matter what is put in hand to do the dog in, he always somehow seems to
survive, and to re-appear just as unattractive and nasty as ever. That might be enough for the story, but in addition it is set in a
period of British history when the King was of Dutch origin, and so many
of his courtiers, and officials in general, also hailed from the
Netherlands. This meant that the naval vessel at the centre of the
story was travelling to and from the Netherlands a lot of the time,
which gave scope for various activities on the side, as it were. Created as an eBook in 1998 by Nick Hodson, and reformatted in 2005. ________________________________________________________________________

SNARLEY-YOW, OR THE DOG FIEND, BY CAPTAIN FREDERICK MARRYAT. CHAPTER ONE. INTRODUCTION OF DIVERS PARTIES AND A RED-HERRING. It was in the month of January, 1699, that a one-masted vessel, with
black sides, was running along the coast near Beachy Head, at the rate
of about five miles per hour. The wind was from the northward and blew
keenly, the vessel was under easy sail, and the water was smooth. It
was now broad daylight, and the sun rose clear of clouds and vapour; but
he threw out light without heat. The upper parts of the spars, the
hammock rails, and the small iron guns which were mounted on the
vessel's decks, were covered with a white frost. The man at the helm
stood muffled up in a thick pea-jacket and mittens, which made his hands
appear as large as his feet. His nose was a pug of an intense bluish
red, one tint arising from the present cold, and the other from the
preventive checks which he had been so long accustomed to take to drive
out such an unpleasant intruder. His grizzled hair waved its locks
gently to the wind, and his face was distorted with an immoderate quid
of tobacco which protruded his right cheek. This personage was second
officer and steersman on board of the vessel, and his name was Obadiah
Coble. He had been baptised Obadiah about sixty years before; that is
to say, if he had been baptised at all. He stood so motionless at the
helm, that you might have imagined him to have been frozen there as he
stood, were it not that his eyes occasionally wandered from the compass
on the binnacle to the bows of the vessel, and that the breath from his
mouth, when it was thrown out into the clear frosty air, formed a smoke
like to that from the spout of a half-boiling tea-kettle. The crew belonging to the cutter, for she was a vessel in the service of
his Majesty, King William the Third, at this time employed in protecting
his Majesty's revenue against the importation of alamodes and
lutestrings, were all down below at their breakfasts, with the exception
of the steersman and lieutenant-commandant, who now walked the
quarter-deck, if so small an extent of plank could be dignified with
such a name. He was a Mr Cornelius Vanslyperken, a tall meagre-looking
personage, with very narrow shoulders and very small head. Perfectly
straight up and down, protruding in no part, he reminded you of some
tall parish pump, with a great knob at its top. His face was gaunt,
cheeks hollow, nose and chin showing an affection for each other, and
evidently lamenting the gulf between them which prevented their meeting. Both appear to have fretted themselves to the utmost degree of tenuity
from disappointment in love: as for the nose it had a pearly round tear
hanging at its tip, as if it wept. The dress of Mr Vanslyperken was
hidden in a great coat, which was very long, and buttoned straight down. This great coat had two pockets on each side, into which its owner's
hands were deeply inserted, and so close did his arms lie to his sides,
that they appeared nothing more than as would battens nailed to a
topsail yard. The only deviation from the perpendicular was from the
insertion of a speaking-trumpet under his left arm, at right angles with
his body. It had evidently seen much service, was battered, and the
black Japan worn off in most parts of it. As we have said before, Mr
Vanslyperken walked his quarter-deck. He was in a brown study, yet
looked blue. Six strides brought him to the taffrail of the vessel, six
more to the bows, such was the length of his tether--and he turned and
turned again. But there was another personage on the deck, a personage of no small
importance, as he was all in all to Mr Vanslyperken; and Mr
Vanslyperken was all in all to him; moreover, we may say, that he is the
hero of the TAIL. This was one of the ugliest and most ill-conditioned
curs which had ever been produced: ugly in colour; for he was of a dirty
yellow, like the paint served out to decorate our men-of-war by his
Majesty's dockyards;--ugly in face; for he had one wall-eye, and was so
far under-jawed as to prove that a bull-dog had had something to do with
his creation;--ugly in shape; for although larger than a pointer, and
strongly built, he was coarse and shambling in his make, with his fore
legs bowed out. His ears and tail had never been docked which was a
pity as the more you curtailed his proportions the better looking the
cur would have been. But his ears, although not cut, were torn to
ribbons by the various encounters with dogs on shore, arising from the
acidity of his temper. His tail had lost its hair from an inveterate
mange, and reminded you of the same appendage to a rat. Many parts of
his body were bared from the same disease. He carried his head and tail
low, and had a villainous sour look. To the eye of a casual observer,
there was not one redeeming quality that would warrant his keep; to
those who knew him well, there were a thousand reasons why he should be
hanged. He followed his master with the greatest precision and
exactitude, walking aft as he walked aft, and walking forward with the
same regular motion, turning when his master turned, and, moreover,
turning in the same direction; and, like his master, he appeared to be
not a little nipped with the cold, and, as well as he, in a state of
profound meditation. The name of this uncouth animal was very
appropriate to his appearance, and to his temper. It was Snarleyyow. At last, Mr Vanslyperken gave vent to his pent-up feelings. "I can't,
I won't stand this any longer," muttered the lieutenant, as he took his
six strides forward. At this first sound of his master's voice the dog
pricked up the remnants of his ears, and they both turned aft. "She has
been now fooling me for six years;" and as he concluded this sentence,
Mr Vanslyperken and Snarleyyow had reached the taffrail, and the dog
raised his tail to the half cock. They turned, and Mr Vanslyperken paused a moment or two, and compressed
his thin lips; the dog did the same. "I will have an answer, by all
that's blue!" was the ejaculation of the next six strides. The
lieutenant stopped again, and the dog looked up in his master's face;
but it appeared as if the current of his master's thoughts was changed,
for the current of keen air reminded Mr Vanslyperken that he had not
yet had his breakfast. The lieutenant leant over the hatchway, took his battered
speaking-trumpet from under his arm, and putting it to his mouth, the
deck reverberated with, "Pass the word for Smallbones forward." The dog
put himself in a baying attitude, with his fore feet on the coamings of
the hatchway, and enforced his master's orders with a deep-toned and
measured bow, wow, wow. Smallbones soon made his appearance, rising from the hatchway like a
ghost; a thin, shambling personage, apparently about twenty years old; a
pale, cadaverous face, high cheekbones, goggle eyes, with lank hair very
thinly sown upon a head which, like bad soil, would return but a scanty
harvest. He looked like Famine's eldest son just arriving to years of
discretion. His long lanky legs were pulled so far through his
trousers, that his bare feet, and half way up to his knees, were exposed
to the chilling blast. The sleeves of his jacket were so short, that
four inches of bone above his wrist were bared to view; hat he had none;
his ears were very large, and the rims of them red with cold, and his
neck was so immeasurably long and thin, that his head appeared to topple
for want of support. When he had come on deck, he stood with one hand
raised to his forehead, touching his hair instead of his hat, and the
other occupied with a half-roasted red-herring. "Yes, sir," said
Smallbones, standing before his master. "Be quick!" commenced the lieutenant; but here his attention was
directed to the red-herring by Snarleyyow, who raised his head and
snuffed at its fumes. Among other disqualifications of the animal, be
it observed that he had no nose except for a red-herring, or a post by
the way-side. Mr Vanslyperken discontinued his orders, took his hand
out of his great-coat pocket, wiped the drop from off his nose, and then
roared out, "How dare you appear on the quarter-deck of a king's ship,
sir, with a red-herring in your fist?" "If you please, sir," replied Smallbones, "if I were to come for to go
to leave it in the galley I shouldn't find it when I went back." "What do I care for that, sir? It's contrary to all the rules and
regulations of the service. Now, sir, hear me--"

"O Lord, sir! let me off this time, it's only a _soldier_," replied
Smallbones, deprecatingly; but Snarleyyow's appetite had been very much
sharpened by his morning's walk; it rose with the smell of the herring,
so he rose on his hind legs, snapped the herring out of Smallbones'
hand, bolted forward by the lee gangway, and would soon have bolted the
herring, had not Smallbones bolted after him and overtaken him just as
he had laid it down on the deck preparatory to commencing his meal. A
fight ensued: Smallbones received a severe bite in the leg, which
induced him to seize a handspike, and make a blow with it at the dog's
head, which, if it had been well aimed, would have probably put an end
to all further pilfering. As it was, the handspike descended upon one
of the dog's fore toes, and Snarleyyow retreated, yelling, to the other
side of the forecastle, and as soon as he was out of reach, like all
curs, bayed in defiance. Smallbones picked up the herring, pulled up his trousers to examine the
bite, poured down an anathema upon the dog, which was, "May you be
starved, as I am, you beast!" and then turned round to go aft, when he
struck against the spare form of Mr Vanslyperken, who, with his hands
in his pocket and his trumpet under his arm, looked unutterably savage. "How dare you beat _my_ dog, you villain?" said the lieutenant at last,
choking with passion. "He's a-bitten my leg through and through, sir," replied Smallbones,
with a face of alarm. "Well, sir, why have you such thin legs, then?" "'Cause I gets nothing to fill 'em up with." "Have you not a herring there, you herring-gutted scoundrel? which, in
defiance of all the rules of the service, you have brought on his
Majesty's quarter-deck, you greedy rascal, and for which I intend--"

"It ar'n't my herring, sir, it be yours, for your breakfast; the only
one that is left out of the half-dozen." This last remark appeared somewhat to pacify Mr Vanslyperken. "Go down below, sir," said he, after a pause "and let me know when my
breakfast is ready." Smallbones obeyed immediately, too glad to escape so easily. "Snarleyyow," said his master, looking at the dog, who remained on the
other side of the forecastle; "O Snarleyyow, for shame! Come here, sir. Come here, sir, directly." But Snarleyyow, who was very sulky at the loss of his anticipated
breakfast, was contumacious, and would not come. He stood at the other
side of the forecastle, while his master apostrophised him, looking him
in the face. Then, after a pause of indecision, he gave a howling sort
of bark, trotted away to the main hatchway, and disappeared below. Mr
Vanslyperken returned to the quarter-deck, and turned, and turned as
before. CHAPTER TWO. SHOWING WHAT BECAME OF THE RED-HERRING. Smallbones soon made his re-appearance, informing Mr Vanslyperken that
his breakfast was ready for him, and Mr Vanslyperken, feeling himself
quite ready for his breakfast, went down below. A minute after he had
disappeared another man came up to relieve the one at the wheel, who, as
soon as he had surrendered up the spokes, commenced warming himself
after the most approved method, by flapping his arms round his body. "The skipper's out o' sorts again this morning," said Obadiah after a
time. "I heard him muttering about the woman at the Lust Haus." "Then, by Got, we will have de breeze," replied Jansen, who was a Dutch
seaman of huge proportions, rendered still more preposterous by the
multiplicity of his nether clothing. "Yes, as sure as Mother Carey's chickens raise the gale, so does the
name of the Frau Vandersloosh. I'll be down and get my breakfast, there
may be keel-hauling before noon." "Mein Got--dat is de tyfel." "Keep her nor-east, Jansen, and keep a sharp look out for the boats." "Got for dam--how must I steer the chip and look for de boats at de same
time? not possible." "That's no consarn o' mine. Those are the orders, and I passes them--
you must get over the unpossibility how you can." So saying, Obadiah
Coble walked below. We must do the same, and introduce the reader to the cabin of Lieutenant
Vanslyperken, which was not very splendid in its furniture. One small
table, one chair, a mattress in a standing bed-place, with curtains made
of bunting, an open cupboard, containing three plates, one tea-cup and
saucer, two drinking glasses, and two knives. More was not required, as
Mr Vanslyperken never indulged in company. There was another cupboard,
but it was carefully locked. On the table before the lieutenant was a
white wash-hand basin, nearly half full of burgoo, a composition of
boiled oatmeal and water, very wholesome, and very hot. It was the
allowance, from the ship's coppers, of Mr Vanslyperken and his servant
Smallbones. Mr Vanslyperken was busy stirring it about to cool it a
little, with a leaden spoon. Snarleyyow sat close to him, waiting for
his share, and Smallbones stood by, waiting for orders. "Smallbones," said the lieutenant, after trying, the hot mess before
him, and finding that he was still in danger of burning his mouth,
"bring me the red-herring." "Red-herring, sir?" stammered Smallbones. "Yes," replied his master, fixing his little grey eye sternly on him,
"the red-herring." "It's gone, sir!" replied Smallbones, with alarm. "Gone! gone where?" "If you please, sir, I didn't a-think that you would have touched it
after the dog had had it in his nasty mouth; and so, sir--if you please,
sir--"

"And so what?" said Vanslyperken, compressing his thin lips. "I ate it myself--if you please--O dear, O dear!" "You did, did you--you gluttonous scarecrow--you did, did you? Are you
aware that you have committed a theft--and are you aware of the
punishment attending it?" "O sir, it was a mistake, dear sir," cried Smallbones, whimpering. "In the first place, I will cut you to ribbons with the cat." "Mercy, sir, O sir!" cried the lad, the tears streaming from his eyes. "The thief's cat, with three knots in each tail." Smallbones raised up his thin arms, and clasped his hands, pleading for
mercy. "And after the flogging you shall be keel-hauled." "O God!" screamed Smallbones, falling down on his knees, "mercy--mercy!" But there was none. Snarleyyow, when he saw the lad go down on his
knees, flew at him, and threw him on his back, growling over him, and
occasionally looking at his master. "Come here, Snarleyyow," said Mr Vanslyperken. "Come here, sir, and
lie down." But Snarleyyow had not forgotten the red-herring; so in
revenge he first bit Smallbones in the thigh, and then obeyed his
master. "Get up, sir," cried the lieutenant. Smallbones rose, but his temper now rose also; he forgot all that he was
to suffer, from indignation against the dog: with flashing eyes, and
whimpering with rage, he cried out, as the tears fell, and his arms
swung round, "I'll not stand this--I'll jump overboard--that I will:
fourteen times has that ere dog a-bitten me this week. I'd sooner die
at once than be made dog's meat of in this here way." "Silence, you mutinous rascal, or I'll put you in irons." "I wish you would--irons don't bite, if they hold fast. I'll run away--
I don't mind being hung--that I don't--starved to death, bitten to death
in this here way--"

"Silence, sir. It's over-feeding that makes you saucy." "The Lord forgive you!" cried Smallbones, with surprise; "I've not had a
full meal--"

"A full meal, you rascal! there's no filling a thing like you--hollow
from top to bottom, like a bamboo." "And what I does get," continued Smallbones, with energy, "I pays dear
for; that ere dog flies at me, if I takes a bit o' biscuit. I never has
a bite without getting a bite, and it's all my own allowance." "A proof of his fidelity, and an example to you, you wretch," replied
the lieutenant, fondly patting the dog on the head. "Well, I wish you'd discharge me, or hang me, I don't care which. You
eats so hearty, and the dog eats so hearty, that I gets nothing. We are
only victualled for two." "You insolent fellow! recollect the thief's cat." "It's very hard," continued Smallbones, unmindful of the threat "that
that ere beast is to eat my allowance, and be allowed to half eat me
too." "You forget the keel-hauling, you scarecrow." "Well, I hope I may never come up again, that's all." "Leave the cabin, sir." This order Smallbones obeyed. "Snarleyyow," said the lieutenant, "you are hungry, my poor beast." Snarleyyow put his forepaw up on his master's knee. "You shall have
your breakfast soon," continued his master, eating the burgoo between
his addresses to the animal. "Yes, Snarleyyow, you have done wrong this
morning; you ought to have no breakfast." Snarleyyow growled, "We are
only four years acquainted, and how many scrapes you have got me into,
Snarleyyow!" Snarleyyow here put both his paws upon his master's knee. "Well, you are sorry, my poor dog, and you shall have some breakfast;"
and Mr Vanslyperken put the basin of burgoo on the floor, which the dog
tumbled down his throat most rapidly. "Nay, my dog, not so fast; you
must leave some for Smallbones; he will require some breakfast before
his punishment. There, that will do;" and Mr Vanslyperken wished to
remove the basin with a little of the burgoo remaining in it. Snarleyyow growled, would have snapped at his master, but Mr
Vanslyperken shoved him away with the bell-mouth of his
speaking-trumpet, and recovering a portion of the mess, put it on the
table for the use of poor Smallbones. "Now, then, my dog, we will go on
deck." Mr Vanslyperken left the cabin, followed by Snarleyyow; but as
soon as his master was half way up the ladder, Snarleyyow turned back,
leaped on the chair, from the chair to the table, and then finished the
whole of the breakfast appropriated for Smallbones. Having effected
this, the dog followed his master. CHAPTER THREE. A RETROSPECT, AND SHORT DESCRIPTION OF A NEW CHARACTER. But we must leave poor Smallbones to lament his hard fate in the fore
peak of the vessel, and Mr Vanslyperken and his dog to walk the
quarter-deck, while we make our readers a little better acquainted with
the times in which the scenes passed which we are now describing, as
well as with the history of Mr Vanslyperken. The date in our first chapter, that of the year 1699, will, if the refer
back to history, show them that William of Nassau had been a few years
on the English throne, and that peace had just been concluded between
England with its allies and France. The king occasionally passed his
time in Holland, among his Dutch countrymen, and the English and Dutch
fleets, which but a few years before were engaging with such an
obstinacy of courage, had lately sailed together, and turned their guns
against the French. William, like all those continental princes who
have been called to the English throne, showed much favour to his own
countrymen, and England was overrun with Dutch favourites, Dutch
courtiers, and peers of Dutch extraction. He would not even part with
his Dutch guards, and was at issue with the Commons of England on that
very account. But the war was now over, and most of the English and
Dutch navy lay dismantled in port, a few small vessels only being in
commission to intercept the smuggling from France that was carrying on,
much to the detriment of English manufacture, of certain articles then
denominated alamodes and lutestrings. The cutter we have described was
on this service, and was named the Yungfrau, although built in England,
and forming a part of the English naval force. It may really be supposed that Dutch interest, during this period, was
in the ascendant. Such was the case; and the Dutch officers and seamen
who could not be employed in their own marine were appointed in the
English vessels, to the prejudice of our own countrymen, Mr
Vanslyperken was of Dutch extraction, but born in England long before
the Prince of Orange had ever dreamt of being called to the English
throne. He was a near relation of King William's own nurse, and even in
these days that would cause powerful interest. Previous to the
revolution he had been laid on the shelf for cowardice in one of the
engagements between the Dutch and the English, he being then a
lieutenant on board of a two-decked ship, and of long, standing in the
service; but before he had been appointed to this vessel, he had served
invariably in small craft, and his want of this necessary qualification
had never been discovered. The interest used for him on the accession
of the Dutch king was sufficient for his again obtaining the command of
a small vessel. In those days, the service was very different from what
it is now. The commanders of vessels were also the pursers, and could
save a great deal of money by defrauding the crew: and further, the
discipline of the service was such as would astonish the modern
philanthropist; there was no appeal for subordinates and tyranny and
oppression, even amounting to the destruction of life, were practised
with impunity. Smollett has given his readers some idea of the state of
the service a few years after the time of which we are now writing, when
it was infinitely worse, for the system of the Dutch, notorious for
their cruelty, had been grafted upon that of the English. The
consequence was, a combination of all that was revolting to humanity was
practised, without any notice being taken of it by the superior powers,
provided that the commanders of the vessels did their duty when called
upon, and showed the necessary talent and courage. Lieutenant Vanslyperken's character may be summed up in the three vices
of avarice, cowardice, and cruelty. A miser in the extreme, he had
saved up much money by his having had the command of a vessel for so
many years, during which he had defrauded and pilfered both from the men
and the government. Friends and connections he had none on this side of
the water, and, when on shore, he had lived in a state of abject misery,
although he had the means of comfortable support. He was now fifty-five
years of age. Since he had been appointed to the Yungfrau, he had been
employed in carrying despatches to the States-General from King William,
and had, during his repeated visits to the Hague, made acquaintance with
the widow Vandersloosh, who kept a Lust Haus, [_Pleasure house_] a place
of resort for sailors, where they drank and danced. Discovering that
the comfortably fat lady was also very comfortably rich, Mr
Vanslyperken had made advances, with the hope of obtaining her hand and
handling her money. The widow had, however, no idea of accepting the
offer, but was too wise to give him a decided refusal, as she knew it
would be attended with his preventing the crew of the cutter from
frequenting her house, and thereby losing much custom. Thus did she, at
every return, receive him kindly and give him hopes, but nothing more. Since the peace, as we before observed, the cutter had been ordered for
the prevention of smuggling. When and how Mr Vanslyperken had picked up his favourite Snarleyyow
cannot be discovered, and must remain a secret. The men said that the
dog had appeared on the deck of the cutter in a supernatural way, and
most of them looked upon him with as much awe as ill-will. This is certain, that the cutter had been a little while before in a
state of mutiny, and a forcible entry attempted at night into the
lieutenant's cabin. It is therefore not unreasonable to suppose that
Vanslyperken felt that a good watch-dog might be a very useful appendage
to his establishment, and had procured one accordingly. All the
affection he ever showed to anything living was certainly concentrated
on this one animal, and, next to his money, Snarleyyow had possession of
his master's heart. Poor Smallbones, cast on the world without father or mother, had become
starved before he was on board the cutter, and had been starved ever
since. As the reader will perceive, his allowance was mostly eaten up
by the dog, and he was left to beg a precarious support from the
good-will and charity of his shipmates, all of whom were equally
disgusted with the commander's cruelty and the ungain temper of his
brute companion. Having entered into this retrospect for the benefit of the reader, we
will now proceed. Mr Vanslyperken walked the deck for nearly a quarter of an hour without
speaking: the men had finished their breakfasts, and were lounging about
the deck, for there was nothing for them to do, except to look out for
the return of the two boats which had been sent away the night before. The lieutenant's thoughts were at one minute, upon Mrs Vandersloosh
thinking how he could persuade her, and, at another, upon Smallbones,
thinking how he could render the punishment adequate, in his opinion, to
the magnitude of the offence. While discussing these two important
matters, one of the men reported the boats ahead, and broke up the
commander's reverie. "How far off?" demanded Mr Vanslyperken. "About two miles." "Pulling or sailing?" "Pulling, sir; we stand right for them." But Mr Vanslyperken was in no pleasant humour, and ordered the cutter
to be hove-to. "I tink de men have pull enough all night," said Jansen, who had just
been relieved at the wheel, to Obadiah Coble, who was standing by him on
the forecastle. "I think so too: but there'll be a breeze, depend upon it--never mind,
the devil will have his own all in good time." "Got for dam," said Jansen, looking at Beachy Head, and shaking his own. "Why, what's the matter now, old Schnapps?" said Coble. "Schnapps--yes--the tyfel--Schnapps, I think how the French schnapped us
Dutchmen here when you Englishment wouldn't fight." "Mind what you say, old twenty breeches--wouldn't fight--when wouldn't
we fight?" "Here, where we were now, by Got, you leave us all in the lurch, and not
come down." "Why, we couldn't come down." "Bah!" replied Jansen, who referred to the defeat of the combined Dutch
and English fleet by the French off Beachy Head in 1690. "We wouldn't fight, eh?" exclaimed Obadiah in scorn--"what do you say to
the Hogue?" "Yes, den you fought well--dat was good." "And shall I tell you why we fought well at the Hogue, you Dutch
porpoise--just because we had no Dutchmen to help us." "And shall I tell you why the Dutch were beat off this Head?--because
the English wouldn't come down to help us." Here Obadiah put his tongue into his right cheek. Jansen in return
threw his into his left, and thus the argument was finished. These
disputes were constant at the time, but seldom proceeded further than
words--certainly not between Coble and Jansen, who were great friends. The boats were soon on board; from the time that the cutter had been
hove-to, every stroke of their oars having been accompanied with a
nautical anathema from the crews upon the head of their commander. The
steersman and first officer, who had charge of the boats, came over the
gangway and went up to Vanslyperken. He was a thick-set, stout man,
about five feet four inches high, and, wrapped up in Flushing garments,
looked very much like a bear in shape as well as in skin. His name was
Dick Short, and in every respect he answered to his name, for he was
short in stature, short in speech, and short in decision and action. Now when Short came up to the lieutenant, he did not consider it at all
necessary to say as usual, "Come on board, sir," for it was self-evident
that he had come on board. He therefore said nothing. So abrupt was he
in his speech, that he never even said "Sir" when he spoke to his
superior, which it may be imagined was very offensive to Mr
Vanslyperken; so it was, but Mr Vanslyperken was afraid of Short, and
Short was not the least afraid of Vanslyperken. "Well, what have you done, Short?" "Nothing." "Did you see anything of the boat?" "No." "Did you gain any information?" "No." "What have you been doing all night?" "Pulling." "Did you land to obtain information?" "Yes." "And you got none?" "No." Here Short hitched up the waistband of his second pair of trousers,
turned short round, and was going below, when Snarleyyow smelt at his
heels. The man gave him a back kick with the heel of his heavy boot,
which sent the dog off yelping and barking, and put Mr Vanslyperken in
a great rage. Not venturing to resent this affront upon his first
officer, he was reminded of Smallbones, and immediately sent for
Corporal Van Spitter to appear on deck. CHAPTER FOUR. IN WHICH THERE IS A DESPERATE COMBAT. Even at this period of the English history, it was the custom to put a
few soldiers on board of the vessels of war, and the Yungfrau cutter had
been supplied with a corporal and six men, all of whom were belonging to
the Dutch marine. To a person who was so unpopular as Mr Vanslyperken,
this little force was a great protection, and both corporal Van Spitter
and his corps were well treated by him. The corporal was his purser and
purveyor, and had a very good berth of it, for he could cheat as well as
his commandant. He was, moreover, his prime minister, and an obedient
executer of all his tyranny, for Corporal Van Spitter was without a
shadow of feeling--on the contrary, he had pleasure in administering
punishment; and if Vanslyperken had told him to blow any man's brains
out belonging to the vessel, Van Spitter would have immediately obeyed
the order without the change of a muscle in his fat, florid countenance. The corporal was an enormous man; tall, and so corpulent, that he
weighed nearly twenty stone. Jansen was the only one who could rival
him; he was quite as tall as the corporal, and as powerful, but he had
not the extra weight of his carcase. About five minutes after the summons, the huge form of Corporal Van
Spitter was seen to emerge slowly from the hatchway, which appeared
barely wide enough to admit the egress of his broad shoulders. He had a
flat foraging cap on his head, which was as large as a buffalo's and his
person was clothed in blue pantaloons, tight at the ankle, rapidly
increasing in width as they ascended, until they diverged at the hips to
an expanse which was something between the sublime and the ridiculous. The upper part of his body was cased in a blue jacket, with leaden
buttons, stamped with the rampant lion, with a little tail behind, which
was shoved up in the air by the protuberance of the parts. Having
gained the deck, he walked to Vanslyperken, and raised the back of his
right hand to his forehead. "Corporal Van Spitter, get your cats up for punishment, and when you are
ready fetch up Smallbones." Whereupon, without reply, Corporal Van Spitter put his left foot behind
the heel of his right, and by this manoeuvre turned his body round like
a capstan, so as to bring his face forward and then walked off in that
direction. He soon re-appeared with all the necessary implements of
torture, laid them down on one of the lee guns, and again departed to
seek out his victim. After a short time, a scuffle was heard below, but it was soon over, and
once more appeared the corporal with the spare, tall body of Smallbones
under his arm. He held him, grasped by the middle part, about where
Smallbones' stomach ought to have been, and the head and heels of the
poor wretch both hung down perpendicularly, and knocked together as the
corporal proceeded aft. As soon as Van Spitter had arrived at the gun, he laid down his charge,
who neither moved nor spoke. He appeared to have resigned himself to
the fate which awaited him, and made no resistance when he was stripped
by one of the marines, and stretched over the gun. The men, who were on
deck, said nothing; they looked at each other expressively as the
preparations were made. Flogging a lad like Smallbones was too usual an
occurrence to excite surprise, and to show their disgust would have been
dangerous. Smallbones' back was now bared, and miserable was the
spectacle; the shoulder-blades protruded, so that you might put your
hand sideways under the scapula, and every bone of the vertebrae and
every process was clearly defined through the skin of the poor skeleton. The punishment commenced, and the lad received his three dozen without
a murmur, the measured sound of the lash only being broken in upon by
the baying of Snarleyyow, who occasionally would have flown at the
victim, had he not been kept off by one of the marines. During the
punishment, Mr Vanslyperken walked the deck, and turned and turned
again as before. Smallbones was then cast loose by the corporal, who was twirling up his
cat, when Snarleyyow, whom the marine had not watched, ran up to the
lad, and inflicted a severe bite. Smallbones, who appeared, at the
moment, to be faint and lifeless--not having risen from his knees after
the marine had thrown his shirt over him, roused by this new attack,
appeared to spring into life and energy; he jumped up, uttered a savage
yell, and to the astonishment of everybody, threw himself upon the dog
as he retreated, and holding him fast with his naked arms, met the
animal with his own weapons, attacking him with a frenzied resolution
with his teeth. Everybody started back at this unusual conflict, and no
one interfered. Long was the struggle; and such was the savage energy of the lad, that
he bit and held on with the tenacity of a bulldog, tearing the lips of
the animal, his ears, and burying his face in the dog's throat, as his
teeth were firmly fixed on his windpipe. The dog could not escape, for
Smallbones held him like a vice. At last, the dog appeared to have the
advantage, for as they rolled over and over, he caught the lad by the
side of the neck; but Smallbones recovered himself, and getting the foot
of Snarleyyow between his teeth, the dog threw up his head and howled
for succour. Mr Vanslyperken rushed to his assistance, and struck
Smallbones a heavy blow on the head with his speaking trumpet, which
stunned him, and he let go his hold. Short, who had come on deck, perceiving this, and that the dog was about
to resume the attack, saluted Snarleyyow with a kick on his side, which
threw him down the hatchway, which was about three yards off from where
the dog was at the time. "How dare you strike my dog, Mr Short?" cried Vanslyperken. Short did not condescend to answer, but went to Smallbones and raised
his head. The lad revived. He was terribly bitten about the face and
neck, and what with the wounds in front, and the lashing from the cat,
presented a melancholy spectacle. Short called some of the men to take Smallbones below, in which act they
readily assisted; they washed him all over with salt water, and the
smarting from his various wounds brought him to his senses. He was then
put in his hammock. Vanslyperken and the corporal looked at each other during the time that
Short was giving his directions--neither interfered. The lieutenant was
afraid, and the corporal waited for orders. So soon as the men had
carried the lad below, Corporal Van Spitter put his hand up to his
foraging cap, and, with his cat and seizings under his arm, went down
below. As for Vanslyperken, his wrath was even greater than before, and
with hands thrust even further down in his pockets than ever, and the
speaking-trumpet now battered flat with the blow which he had
administered to Smallbones, he walked up and down, muttering every two
minutes, "I'll keel-haul the scoundrel, by heavens! I'll teach him to
bite my dog." Snarleyyow did not re-appear on deck; he had received such punishment as
he did not expect. He licked the wounds where he could get at them, and
then remained in the cabin in a sort of perturbed slumber, growling
every minute, as if he were fighting the battle over again in his sleep. CHAPTER FIVE. A CONSULTATION IN WHICH THERE IS MUCH MUTINY. This consultation was held upon the forecastle of his Majesty's cutter
Yungfrau, on the evening after the punishment of Smallbones. The major
part of the crew attended; all but the Corporal Van Spitter, who, on
these points, was known to split with the crew, and his six marines, who
formed the corporal's tail, at which they were always to be found. The
principal personage was not the most eloquent speaker, for it was Dick
Short, who was supported by Obadiah Coble, Yack Jansen, and another
personage, whom we must introduce--the boatswain or boatswain's mate of
the cutter; for although he received the title of the former, he only
received the pay of the latter. This person's real name was James
Salisbury, but for reasons which will be explained, he was invariably
addressed or spoken of as Jemmy Ducks. He was indeed a very singular
variety of human discrepancy as to form: he was handsome in face, with a
manly countenance, fierce whiskers and long pigtail, which on him
appeared more than unusually long, as it descended to within a foot of
the deck. His shoulders were square, chest expanded, and, as far as
half-way down, that is, to where the legs are inserted into the human
frame, he was a fine, well-made, handsome, well-proportioned man. But
what a falling off was there!--for some reason, some accident it is
supposed, in his infancy, his legs had never grown in length since he
was three years old: they were stout as well as his body, but not more
than eighteen inches from the hip to the heel; and he consequently
waddled about a very ridiculous figure, for he was like a man _razeed_
or cut down. Put him on an eminence of a couple of feet, and not see
his legs, and you would say at a distance, "What a fine-looking sailor!" but let him get down and walk up to you, and you would find that Nature
had not finished what she had so well begun, and that you are exactly
half mistaken. This malconformation below did not, however, affect his
strength--it rather added to it; and there were but few men in the ship
who would venture a wrestle with the boatswain, who was very
appropriately distinguished by the cognomen of Jemmy Ducks. Jemmy was a
sensible, merry fellow, and a good seaman: you could not affront him by
any jokes on his figure, for he would joke with you. He was indeed the
fiddle of the ship's company, and he always played the fiddle to them
when the danced, on which instrument he was no mean performer; and,
moreover, accompanied his voice with his instrument when he sang to them
after they were tired of dancing. We shall only observe that Jemmy was
a married man, and he had selected one of the tallest of the other sex:
of her beauty, the less that is said the better--Jemmy did not look to
that, or perhaps, at such a height, her face did not appear so plain to
him as it did to those who were more on a level with it. The effect of
perspective is well known, and even children now have as playthings,
castles, etcetera, laid down on card, which, when looked at in a proper
direction, appear just as correct as they do preposterous when lying
flat before you. Now it happened that from the level that Jemmy looked up from to his
wife's face, her inharmonious features were all in harmony, and thus did
she appear--what is very advantageous in the marriage state--perfection
to her husband, without sufficient charms in the eyes of others to
induce them to seduce her from her liege lord. Moreover, let it be
recollected, that what Jemmy _wanted_ was _height_, and he had gained
what he required in his wife, if not in his own person: his wife was
passionately fond of him, and very jealous, which was not to be wondered
at, for, as she said, "There never was such a husband before or since." We must now return to the conference, observing, that all these parties
were sitting down on the deck, and that Jemmy Ducks had his fiddle in
his hand, holding it with the body downwards like a base viol, for he
always played it in that way, and that he occasionally fingered the
strings, pinching them as you do a guitar, so as to send the sound of it
aft, that Mr Vanslyperken might suppose that they were all met for
mirth. Two or three had their eyes directed aft, that the appearance of
Corporal Van Spitter or the marines might be immediately perceived; for,
although the corporal was not a figure to slide into a conference
unperceived, it was well known that he was an eavesdropper. "One thing's sartin," observed Coble, "that a dog's not an officer." "No," replied Dick Short. "He's not on the ship's books, so I can't see how it can be mutiny." "No," rejoined Short. "Mein Got--he is not a tog, he is te tyfel," observed Jansen. "Who knows how he came into the cutter?" "There's a queer story about that," said one of the men. Tum tum, tumty tum--said the fiddle of Jemmy Ducks, as if it took part
in the conference. "That poor boy will be killed if things go on this way: the skipper will
never be content till he has driven his soul out of his body--poor
creature; only look at him as he lies in his hammock." "I never seed a Christian such an object," said one of the sailors. "If the dog ain't killed, Bones will be, that's sartain," observed
Coble: "and I don't see why the preference should be given to a human
individual, although the dog is the skipper's dog--now then, what d'ye
say, my lads?" Tum tum, tum tum, tumty tumty tum, replied the fiddle. "Let's hang him at once." "No," replied Short. Jansen took out his snickerree, looked at Short, and made a motion with
the knife, as if passing it across the dog's throat. "No," replied Short. "Let's launch him overboard at night," said one of the men. "But how is one to get the brute out of the cabin?" said Cobb; "if it's
done at all it must be done by day." Short nodded his head. "I will give him a launch the first opportunity," observed Jemmy Ducks,
"only--(continued he in a measured and lower tone)--I should first like
to know whether he really is a dog or _not_." "A tog is a tog," observed Jansen. "Yes," replied one of the forecastle men, "we all know dog is a dog, but
the question is--is _this_ dog a dog?" Here there was a pause, which Jemmy Ducks filled up by again touching
the strings of his fiddle. The fact was, that, although every one of the sailors wished the dog was
overboard, there was not one who wished to commit the deed, not on
account of the fear of its being discovered who was the party by Mr
Vanslyperken, but because there was a great deal of superstition among
them. It was considered unlucky to throw any dog or animal overboard;
but the strange stories told about the way in which Snarleyyow first
made his appearance in the vessel, added to the peculiarly diabolical
temper of the animal, had often been the theme of midnight conversation,
and many of them were convinced that it was an imp of Satan lent to
Vanslyperken, and that to injure or to attempt to destroy it would
infallibly be followed up with terrible consequences to the party, if
not to the vessel and all the crew. Even Short, Coble, and Jansen, who
were the boldest and leading men, although when their sympathies were
roused by the suffering of poor Smallbones they were anxious to revenge
him, had their own misgivings, and, on consideration, did not like to
have anything to do with the business. But each of them kept their
reflections to themselves, for, if they could not combat, they were too
proud to acknowledge them. The reader will observe that all their plans were immediately put an end
to until this important question, and not a little difficult one, was
decided--Was the dog a dog? Now, although the story had often been told, yet, as the crew of the
cutter had been paid off since the animal had been brought on board,
there was no man in the ship who could positively detail, from his own
knowledge, the facts connected with his first appearance--there was only
tradition, and to solve this question, to tradition they were obliged to
repair. "Now, Bill Spurey," said Coble, "you know more about this matter than
any one, so just spin us the yarn, and then we shall be able to talk the
matter over soberly." "Well," replied Bill Spurey, "you shall have it just as I got it word
for word, as near as I can recollect. You know I wasn't in the craft
when the thing came on board, but Joe Geary was, and it was one night
when we were boozing over a stiff glass at the new shop there, the
Orange Boven, as they call it, at the Pint of Portsmouth--and so, you
see, falling in with him, I wished to learn something about my new
skipper, and what sort of a chap I should have to deal with. When I
learnt all about _him_, I'd half-a-dozen minds to shove off again, but
then I was adrift, and so I thought better of it. It won't do to be so
nice in peace times, you know, my lads, when all the big ships are
rotting in Southampton and Cinque Port muds. Well, then, what he told
me I recollect as well--ay, every word of it--as it he had whispered it
into my ear but this minute. It was a blustering night, with a dirty
south-wester, and the chafing of the harbour waves was thrown up in
foams, which the winds swept up the street, they chasing one another as
if they were boys at play. It was about two bells in the middle watch,
and after our fifth glass, that Joe Geary said as this:--

"It was one dark winter's night when we were off the Texel, blowing
terribly, with the coast under our lee, clawing off under storm canvas,
and fighting with the elements for every inch of ground, a hand in the
chains, for we had nothing but the lead to trust to, and the vessel so
flogged by the waves, that he was lashed to the rigging, that he might
not be washed away; all of a sudden the wind came with a blast loud
enough for the last frump, and the waves roared till they were hoarser
than ever; away went the vessel's mast, although there was no more
canvas on it than a jib pocket-handkerchief, and the craft rolled and
tossed in the deep troughs for all the world like a wicked man dying in
despair; and then she was a wreck, with nothing to help us but God
Almighty, fast borne down upon the sands which the waters had disturbed,
and were dashing about until they themselves were weary of the load; and
all the seamen cried unto the Lord, as well they might. "Now they say, that _he_ did not cry as they did, like men and
Christians, to Him who made them and the waters which surrounded and
threatened them; for Death was then in all his glory, and the foaming
crests of the waves were as plumes of feathers to his skeleton head
beneath them; but he cried like a child--and swore terribly as well as
cried--talking about his money, his dear money, and not caring about his
more precious soul. "And the cutter was borne down, every wave pushing her with giant force
nearer and nearer to destruction, when the man at the chains shrieked
out--`Mark three, and the Lord have mercy on our souls!' and all the
crew, when they heard this, cried out--`Lord save us, or we perish!' But still they thought that their time was come, for the breaking waves
were under their lee, and the yellow waters told them that, in a few
minutes, the vessel, and all who were on board, would be shivered in
fragments; and some wept and some prayed as they clung to the bulwarks
of the unguided vessel, and others in a few minutes thought over their
whole life, and waited for death in silence. But _he_, he did all; he
cried, and he prayed, and he swore, and he was silent, and at last he
became furious and frantic; and when the man said again and again, `The
Lord save us!' he roared out at last, `Will the _devil_ help us, for--'
In a moment, before these first words were out of his mouth, there was a
flash of lightning, that appeared to strike the vessel, but it harmed
her not, neither did any thunder follow the flash; but a ball of blue
flame pitched upon the knight heads, and then came bounding and dancing
aft to the taffrail, where _he_ stood alone, for the men had left him to
blaspheme by himself. Some say he was heard to speak, as if in
conversation, but no one knows what passed. Be it as it may, on a
sudden he walked forward as brave as he could be, and was followed by
this creature, who carried his head and tail slouching as he does now. "And the dog looked up and gave one deep bark, and as soon as he had
barked the wind appeared to lull--he barked again twice, and there was a
dead calm--he barked again thrice, and the seas went down--and he patted
the dog on the head, and the animal then bayed loud for a minute or two,
and then, to the astonishment and fear of all, instead of the vessel
being within a cable's length of the Texel sands in a heavy gale, and
without hope, the Foreland lights were but two miles on our beam with a
clear sky and smooth water." The seaman finished his legend, and there was a dead silence for a
minute or two, broken first by Jansen, who in a low voice said, "Then te
tog is not a tog." "No," replied Cobb, "an imp sent by the devil to his follower in
distress." "Yes," said. Short. "Well, but," said Jemmy Ducks, who for some time had left off touching
the strings of his fiddle, "it would be the work of a good Christian to
kill the brute." "It's not a mortal animal, Jemmy." "True, I forgot that." "Gifen by de tyfel," observed Jansen. "Ay, and christened by him too," continued Coble. "Who ever heard any
Christian brute with such a damnable name?" "Well, what's to be done?" "Why," replied Jemmy Ducks, "at all events, imp o' Satan or not, that
here Smallbones fought him to-day with his own weapons." "And beat him too," said. Coble. "Yes," said Short. "Now, it's my opinion, that Smallbones ar'nt afraid of him," continued
Jemmy Ducks, "and devil or no devil, he'll kill him, if he can." "He's the proper person to do it," replied Coble; "the more so, as you
may say that he's his _natural_ enemy." "Yes, mein Got, de poy is de man," said Jansen. "We'll put him up to it at all events, as soon as he is out of his
hammock," rejoined Jemmy Ducks. A little more conversation took place, and then it was carried
unanimously that Smallbones should destroy the animal, if it was
possible to destroy it. The only party who was not consulted was Smallbones himself, who lay
fast asleep in his hammock. The consultation then broke _up_, and they
all went below. CHAPTER SIX. IN WHICH AS OFTEN HAPPENS AT SEA WHEN SIGNALS ARE NOT MADE OUT, FRIENDS
EXCHANGE BROADSIDES. Notwithstanding all the precautions of the party on the forecastle, this
consultation had been heard by no less a person than the huge Corporal
Van Spitter, who had an idea that there was some mystery going on
forward, and had contrived to crawl up under the bulwark, and throw
himself down on the fore-staysail, which lay between two of the guns. Having so done without being perceived, for it was the very moment that
the party were all listening to Bill Spurey's legend of the dog's first
appearance on board, he threw a part of the sail over his fat carouse,
and thus remained undiscovered during the remainder of the colloquy. He
heard them all descending below, and remained still quiet, till he
imagined that the forecastle was clear. In the meantime, Mr
Vanslyperken who had been walking the deck abaft, unaccompanied by his
faithful attendant (for Snarleyyow remained coiled up on his master's
bed), was meditating deeply how to gratify the two most powerful
passions in our nature, love and revenge: at one moment thinking of the
fat fair Vandersloosh, and of hauling in her guilders, at another
reverting to the starved Smallbones and the comfort of a keel-hauling. The long conference on the forecastle had not been unperceived by the
hawk's eye of the lieutenant, and as they descended he walked forward to
ascertain if he could not pick up some straggler who, unsupported by his
comrades, might be induced by fear to acquaint him with the subject of
the discussion. Now, just as Mr Vanslyperken came forward, Corporal
Van Spitter had removed the canvas from his body, and was about to rise
from his bed, when he perceived somebody coming forward. Not making it
out to be the lieutenant, he immediately dropped down again and drew the
canvas over him. Mr Vanslyperken perceived this manoeuvre, and thought
he had now caught one of the conspirators, and, moreover, one who showed
such fear as to warrant the supposition that he should be able to
extract from him the results of the night's unusually long conference. Mr Vanslyperken walked up to where the corporal lay as quiet but not
quite so small as a mouse. It occurred to Mr Vanslyperken that a
little taste of punishment _in esse_ would very much assist the threats
of what might be received _in posse_; so he laid aside his
speaking-trumpet, looked round, picked up a handspike, and raising it
above his head, down it came, with all the force of the lieutenant's
arm, upon Corporal Van Spitter, whose carcase resounded like a huge
kettle-drum. "Tunder and flame!" roared the corporal under the canvas, thinking that
one of the seamen, having discovered him eavesdropping, had thus wreaked
his revenge, taking advantage of his being covered up, and pretending
not to know him. "Tunder and flame!" roared the corporal, muffled up in
the canvas, and trying to extricate himself; but his voice was not
recognised by the lieutenant, and, before he could get clear of his
envelope, the handspike had again descended; when up rose the corporal,
like a buffalo out of his muddy lair, half blinded by the last blow,
which had fallen on his head, ran full butt at the lieutenant, and
precipitated his senior officer and commander headlong down the
fore-hatchway. Vanslyperken fell with great force, was stunned, and lay without motion
at the foot of the ladder, while the corporal, whose wrath was always
excessive when his blood was up, but whose phlegmatic blood could not be
raised without some such decided stimulus as a handspike, now turned
round and round the forecastle, like a bull looking for his assailants;
but the corporal had the forecastle all to himself, and, as he gradually
cooled down, he saw lying close to him the speaking-trumpet of his
senior officer. "Tousand tyfels," murmured Corporal Van Spitter, "but it must have been
the skipper. Got for dam, dis is hanging matter!" Corporal Van Spitter
was as cool as a cucumber as soon as he observed what a mistake he had
made; in fact he quivered and trembled in his fat. "But then," thought
he, "perhaps he did not know me--no, he could not, or he never would
have handspiked _me_." So Corporal Van Spitter walked down the
hatchway, where he ascertained that his commandant lay insensible. "Dat
is good," thought he; and he went aft, lighted his lantern, and, as a
_ruse_, knocked at the cabin-door. Receiving no answer but the growl of
Snarleyyow, he went in, and then ascended to the quarter-deck, looked
round him, and inquired of the man at the wheel where Mr Vanslyperken
might be. The man replied that he had gone forward a few minutes
before, and thither the corporal proceeded. Of course, not finding him,
he returned, telling the man that the skipper was not in the cabin or
the forecastle, and wondering where he could be. He then descended to
the next officer in command, Dick Short, and called him. "Well," said Short. "Can't find Mr Vanslyperken anywhere," said the corporal. "Look," replied Dick, turning round in his hammock. "Mein Got, I have looked de forecastle, de quarter-deck, and de cabin--
he not anywhere." "Overboard," replied Dick. "I come to you, sir, to make inquiry," said the corporal. "Turn out," said Dick, suiting the action to the words, and lighting
with his feet on the deck in his shirt. While Short was dressing himself, the corporal summoned up all his
marines; and the noise occasioned by this turn out, and the conversation
overheard by those who were awake, soon gave the crew of the cutter to
understand that some accident had happened to their commander. Even
Smallbones had it whispered in his ear that Mr Vanslyperken had fallen
overboard, and he smiled as he lay in the dark, smarting with his
wounds, muttering to himself that Snarleyyow should soon follow his
master. By the time that Short was on the quarterdeck, Corporal Van
Spitter, who knew very well where to look for it, had, very much to the
disappointment of the crew found the body of Mr Vanslyperken, and the
marines had brought it aft to the cabin, and would have laid it on the
bed, had not Snarleyyow, who had no feeling in his composition,
positively denied its being put there. Short came down and examined his superior officer. "Is he dead," inquired the corporal with alarm. "No," replied Short. "Vat can it be then?" said the corporal. "Stunned," replied Short. "Mein Got! how could it happen?" "Tumbled," replied Short. "What shall we do, sir?" rejoined the corporal. "Bed," replied Short, turning on his heel, and a minute after turning
into his hammock. "Mein Got, the dog will not let him go to bed," exclaimed the corporal. "Let's put him in," said one of the marines; "the dog won't bite his
master." So the marines lifted up the still insensible Mr Vanslyperken, and
almost tossed him into his standing bed-place, right on the body of the
snarling dog, who, as soon as he could disengage himself from the
weight, revenged himself by making his teeth meet more than once through
the lantern cheek of his master, and then leaping off the bed, retreated
growling under the table. "Well, you _are_ a nice dog," exclaimed one of the marines, looking
after Snarleyyow in his retreat. Now, there was no medical assistance on board so small a vessel. Mr
Vanslyperken was allowed a small quantity of medicine, unguents,
etcetera; but these he always sold to an apothecary as soon as he had
procured them from the authorities. The teeth of the dog had, however,
their effect, and Mr Vanslyperken opened his eyes, and in a faint voice
cried, "Snarleyyow." Oh, if the dog had any spark of feeling, how must
he then have been stung with remorse at his ingratitude to so kind a
master! But he apparently showed none, at least report does not say
that any symptoms were manifest. After a little burnt oakum had excoriated his nose, and a certain
quantity of the cold salt-water from alongside had wetted through his
bed-clothes, Mr Vanslyperken was completely recovered, and was able to
speak and look about him. Corporal Van Spitter trembled a little as his
commandant fixed his eyes upon him, and he redoubled his attention. "Mein Got, Mynheer Vanslyperken, how was this happen?" exclaimed the
corporal in a pathetic tone. Whereupon Mr Vanslyperken ordered every
one to leave the cabin but Corporal Van Spitter. Mr Vanslyperken then communicated to the corporal that he had been
knocked down the hatchway by one of the men when he went forward; that
he could not distinguish who it was, but thought it must have been
Jansen from his size. Corporal Van Spitter, delighted to find that his
skipper was on a wrong scent, expressed his opinion in corroboration of
the lieutenant's; after which a long consultation took place relative to
mutiny, disaffection, and the proper measures to be taken. Vanslyperken
mentioned the consultation of the men during the first watch, and the
corporal, to win his favour, was very glad to be able to communicate the
particulars of what he had overheard, stating that he had concealed
himself for that purpose. "And where did you conceal yourself?" said Vanslyperken, with a keen
inquiring look: for it immediately occurred to him that, unless it was
under the sail, there could be no concealment for such a huge body as
that of the corporal; and he had his misgivings. But the corporal very
adroitly observed, that he stood at the lower step of the fore-ladder,
with his head level with the coamings; and had, by this means, overheard
the conversation unperceived, and had only walked away when the party
broke up. This restored the confidence of Mr Vanslyperken, and a long
discussion took place, in which it was agreed between them, that the
only way to prevent Snarleyyow from being destroyed, was to try some
means to make away quietly with poor Smallbones. But this part of the
conversation was not carried to any length: for Mr Vanslyperken,
indignant at having received such injury in his face from his ungrateful
cur, did not, at that moment, feel the current of his affection run so
strong as usual in that direction. After this, the corporal touched his
hat, swung round to the rightabout in military style, and left the
cabin. CHAPTER SEVEN. IN WHICH MR. VANSLYPERKEN GOES ON SHORE TO WOO THE WIDOW VANDERSLOOSH. Three weeks of comparative calm now passed away, during which Mr
Vanslyperken recovered of his wounds and accident, and meditated how he
should make away with Smallbones. The latter also recovered of his
bites, and meditated how he should make away with Snarleyyow. Smallbones had returned to his avocations, and Mr Vanslyperken,
intending mischief, treated him more kindly as a blind. Snarleyyow
also, not forgetting his defeat on the quarter-deck, did not renew his
attacks, even when the poor lad helped himself to biscuit. The Yungfrau anchored in the Downs, and Mr Vanslyperken received
despatches for the Hague; King William having written some letters to
his friends, and sent over to them a little English money, which he knew
would be acceptable; for continental kings on the English throne have
never appeared to have a clear sense of the honour conferred upon them. England, in their ideas, has always been a _parvenue_ kingdom; her
nobles not able to trace further back than the Conquest; while, in their
country, the lowest baron will prove his sixteen quarters, and his
descent from the darkest ages. But, nevertheless, upon the same
principle that the poor aristocracy will condescend to unite themselves
occasionally to city wealth, so have these potentates condescended to
reign over us. Mr Vanslyperken received his despatches, and made the best of his way
to Amsterdam, where he anchored delivered his credentials, and there
waited for the letters of thanks from his Majesty's cousins. But what a hurry and bustle there appears to be on board of the
Yungfrau--Smallbones here, Smallbones there--Corporal Van Spitter
pushing to and fro with the dog-trot of an elephant; and even Snarleyyow
appears to be unusually often up and down the hatchway. What can it all
be about? Oh! Mr Vanslyperken is going on shore to pay his respects
and continue his addresses to the widow Vandersloosh. His boat is
manned alongside, and he now appears on the cutter's quarter-deck. Is it possible that this can be Mr Vanslyperken? Heavens, how gay! An
uniform certainly does wonders with some people: that is to say, those
who do not look well in plain clothes are invariably improved by it;
while those who look most like gentlemen in plain clothes, lose in the
same proportion. At all events Mr Vanslyperken is wonderfully un
proved. He has a loose pair of blue pantaloons, with boots rising above his
knees pulled over them: his lower parts remind you of Charles the
Twelfth. He has a long scarlet waistcoat, with large gilt buttons and
flap pockets, and his uniform coat over all, of blue turned up with red,
has a very commanding appearance. To a broad black belt over his
shoulder hangs his cutlass, the sheath of which is mounted with silver,
and the hilt of ivory and gold threads; and, above all, his small head
is almost dignified by being surmounted with a three-cornered turned-up
and gold-banded cocked hat, with one corner of the triangle in front
parallel with his sharp nose. Surely, the widow must strike her colours
to scarlet, and blue, and gold. But although women are said, like
mackerel, to take such baits, still widows are not fond of a man who is
as thin as a herring; they are too knowing, they prefer stamina, and
will not be persuaded to take the shadow for the substance. Mr Vanslyperken was, nevertheless, very well pleased with himself,
which was something, but still not quite enough on the present occasion;
and he strutted the deck with great complacency, gave his final orders
to Dick Short, who, as usual, gave a short answer; also to Corporal Van
Spitter, who, as usual, received them with all military honour; and,
lastly, to Smallbones, who received them with all humility. The
lieutenant was about to step into the boat when a doubt arose, and he
stopped in his advance, perplexed. It was one of no small importance--
was Snarleyyow to accompany him or not? That was the knotty question,
and it really was a case which required some deliberation. If he left
him on board after the conspiracy which had been formed against him, the
dog would probably be overboard before he returned; that is, if
Smallbones were also left on board; for Mr Vanslyperken knew that it
had been decided that Smallbones alone could and should destroy the dog. He could not, therefore, leave the dog on board with safety; and, as
for taking him on shore with him, in that there was much danger, for the
widow Vandersloosh had set her face against the dog. No wonder: he had
behaved in her parlour as bad as the dog Crab in the Two Gentlemen of
Verona; and the Frau was a very clean person, and had no fancy for dogs
comparing their legs with those of her polished mahogany chairs and
tables. If Mr Vanslyperken's suit was to be decided according to the
old adage, "love me, love my dog," he certainly had but a poor chance;
for the widow detested the cur, and had insisted that it should never be
brought into her house. Take the dog on shore, therefore, he could not;
but, thought Mr Vanslyperken, I can take Smallbones on shore, that will
do as well. I have some biscuit to dispose of, and he shall go with it
and wait till I come off again. Smallbones was, therefore, ordered to
put on his hat and step into the boat with two halt bags of biscuit to
carry up to the widow's house, for she did a little business with Mr
Vanslyperken, as well as allowing him to make love to her; and was never
so sweet or so gracious as when closing a bargain. So Mr Vanslyperken
waited for Smallbones, who was soon ready, for his best consisted only
in a pair of shoes to his usually naked feet, and a hat for his
generally uncovered head. And Mr Vanslyperken, and Smallbones, and the
biscuit, were in the boat, when Snarleyyow intimated his intention to
join the party; but this was refused, and the boat shoved off without
him. As soon as Mr Vanslyperken had shoved off, Dick Short, being in
command, thought he might as well give himself leave and go on shore
also. So he went down, put on his best, and ordered the other boat to
be manned, and leaving Obadiah Coble on board as the next officer, he
took with him Jansen, Jemmy Ducks, and four or five others, to have a
cruise. Now, as Snarleyyow had this time made up his mind that he would
go on shore, and Short was willing to indulge him, for he knew that
Smallbones, if he fell in with him would do his best to launch him into
one of the canals, so convenient in every street, the cur was permitted
to get into the boat, and was landed with the rest of the party, who, as
usual, repaired to the Lust Haus of the widow Vandersloosh; where we
must leave them for the present, and return to our friend, Mr
Vanslyperken. CHAPTER EIGHT. IN WHICH THE WIDOW LAYS A TRAP FOR MR. VANSLYPERKEN, AND SMALLBONES LAYS
A TRAP FOR SNARLEYYOW, AND BOTH BAG THEIR GAME. The widow Vandersloosh, as we have informed the reader, was the owner of
a Lust Haus, or pleasure-house for sailors: we will describe that
portion of her tenements more particularly by-and-bye: at present, we
must advert to her own private house, which stood adjoining, and had a
communication with the Lust Haus by a private door through the party
wall. This was a very small, snug little habitation, wit one window in
each front, and two stories high; containing a front parlour and kitchen
on the basement, two small rooms on the first and two on the second
floor. Nothing could be better arranged for a widow's residence. Moreover, she had a back-yard running the whole length of the wall of
the Lust Haus in the rear, with convenient offices, and a back-door into
the street behind. Mr Vanslyperken had arrived, paid his humble devoirs to the widow, more
humble, because he was evidently pleased with his own person, and had
been followed by Smallbones, who laid the biscuit by the scraper at the
door, watching it as in duty bound. The lieutenant imagined that he was
more graciously received than usual. Perhaps he was, for the widow had
not had so much custom lately, and was glad the crew of the cutter were
arrived to spend their money. Already had Vanslyperken removed his
sword and belt, and laid them with his three-cornered laced hat on the
side-table; he was already cosily, as of wont, seated upon the widow's
little fubsy sofa, with the lady by his side, and he had just taken her
hand and was about to renew his suit, to pour forth the impromptu
effusions of his heart, concocted on the quarter-deck of the Yungfrau,
when who should bolt into the parlour but the unwelcome Snarleyyow. "O that nasty brute! Mynheer Vanslyperken, how dare you bring him into
my house?" cried the widow, jumping up from the sofa, with her
full-moon-face red with anger. "Indeed, widow," replied Vanslyperken, "I left him on board, knowing
that you were not fond of animals; but some one has brought him on
shore. However, I'll find out who it was, and keel-haul him in honour
of your charms." "I am fond of animals, Mr Vanslyperken, but I am not fond of such
animals as that--such a filthy, ugly, disagreeable, snarling brute; nor
can I think how you can keep him after what I have said about it. It
don't prove much regard, Mr Vanslyperken, when such a dog as that is
kept on purpose to annoy me." "I assure you, widow--"

"Don't assure me. Mr Vanslyperken, there's no occasion--your dog is
your own--but I'll thank you to take him out of this house; and,
perhaps, as he won't go without you, you had better go with him." Now the widow had never spoken so indignantly before: if the reader
wishes to know why she did so now we will acquaint him; the widow
Vandersloosh had perceived Smallbones, who sat like Patience on a
monument, upon the two half bags of biscuit before her porch. It was a
query to the widow whether they were to be a present, or an article to
be bargained for: it was, therefore, very advisable to pick a quarrel
that the matter might be cleared up. The widow's _ruse_ met with all
the success which it deserved. In the first place Mr Vanslyperken did
what he never would have believed himself capable of, but the wrath of
the widow had worked him also up to wrath, and he saluted Snarleyyow
with such a kick on the side, as to send him howling into the backyard,
followed him out, and, notwithstanding an attempt at defence on the part
of the dog, which the lieutenant's high boots rendered harmless,
Snarleyyow was fairly or unfairly, as you may please to think it, kicked
into an outhouse, the door shut, and the key turned upon him; after
which Mr Vanslyperken returned to the parlour, where he found the
widow, erect, with her back turned to the stove, blowing and bristling,
her bosom heaving, reminding you of seas mountains high, as if she were
still under the effect of a just resentment for the affront offered to
her. There she stood waiting in all dignity for Mr Vanslyperken to
repair the injury done, whether unintentional or not. In few words,
there she waited for the _biscuit_ to be presented to her. And it was
presented, for Vanslyperken knew no other way of appeasing her wrath. Gradually the storm was allayed--the flush of anger disappeared, the
corners of the scornfully-turned-down mouth were turned up again--
Cupid's bow was no longer bent in anger, and the widow's bosom slept as
when the ocean sleeps, like "an unweaned child." The biscuit bags were
brought in by Smallbones, their contents stored, and harmony restored. Once more was Mr Vanslyperken upon the little sofa by the side of the
fat widow, and once more did he take her melting hand. Alas! that her
heart was not made of the same soft materials. But we must not only leave Short and his companions in the Lust Haus,
but the widow and the lieutenant in their soft dalliance, and now occupy
ourselves with the two principal personages of this our drama,
Smallbones and Snarleyyow. When Smallbones had retired, with the empty bread-bags under his arm, he
remained some time reflecting at the porch, and then having apparently
made up his mind, he walked to a chandler's shop just over the bridge of
the canal opposite, and purchased a needle, some strong twine, and a
red-herring. He also procured, "without purchase," as they say in our
War Office Gazettes, a few pieces of stick. Having obtained all these,
he went round to the door of the yard behind the widow's house, and let
himself in. Little did Mr Vanslyperken imagine what mischief was
brewing, while he was praising and drinking the beer of the widow's own
brewing. Smallbones had no difficulty in finding out where Snarleyyow was
confined, for the dog was very busy gnawing his way through the door,
which, however, was a work of time, and not yet a quarter accomplished. The place had been a fowl-house, and, at the bottom of the door, there
was a small hatch for the ingress and egress of these bipeds, the
original invention of some thrifty spinster, to prevent the maids from
stealing eggs. But this hatch was closed, or Snarleyyow would have
escaped through it. Smallbones took up his quarters in another
outhouse, that he might not be observed, and commenced his operations. He first took out the bottom of one bread-bag, and then sewed that on
the other to make it longer; he then ran a string through the mouth, so
as to draw it close when necessary, and cut his sticks so as to support
it and keep it open. All this being arranged, he went to where
Snarleyyow was busy gnawing wood with great pertinacity, and allowed him
not only to smell, but to tear off the tail of the red-herring, under
the door; and then gradually drew the herring along until he had brought
it right under the hatch in the middle, which left it at the precise
distance that the dog could snuff it but not reach it, which Snarleyyow
now did, in preference to gnawing wood. When you lay a trap, much
depends upon the bait; Smallbones knew his enemy's partiality for
savoury comestibles. He then brought out his bag, set up his
supporters, fixed it close to the hatch, and put the red-herring inside
of it. With the string in one hand, he lifted up the hatch with the
other. Snarleyyow rushed out and rushed in, and in a moment the strings
were drawn, and as soon as drawn were tied tight round the mouth of the
bag. Snarleyyow was caught; he tumbled over and over, rolling now to
the right and now to the left, while Smallbones grinned with delight. After amusing himself a short time with the evolutions of his prisoner,
he dragged him in his bag into the outhouse where he had made his trap,
shut the door, and left him. The next object was to remove any
suspicion on the part of Mr Vanslyperken; and to effect this,
Smallbones tore off the hatch, and broke it in two or three pieces, bit
parts of it with his own teeth, and laid them down before the door,
making it appear as if the dog had gnawed his own way out. The reason
for allowing the dog still to remain in prison, was that Smallbones
dared not attempt anything further until it was dark, and there was yet
an hour or more to wait for the close of the day. Smallbones had but just finished his work in time; for the widow having
been summoned to her guests in the Lust Haus, had left Vanslyperken
alone, and the lieutenant thought this a good opportunity to look after
his four-footed favourite, he came out into the yard, where he found
Smallbones, and he had his misgivings. "What are you doing here, sir?" "Waiting for you, sir," replied Smallbones, humbly. "And the dog?" said Vanslyperken, observing the strewed fragments of the
door hatch. "He's a-bitten himself out, sir, I believe." "And where is he then?" "I don't know, sir; I suppose he's gone down to the boat." Snarleyyow hearing his master's voice, had commenced a whine, and
Smallbones trembled: fortunately, at that moment, the widow's ample form
appeared at the back-door of the house, and she called to Mr
Vanslyperken. The widow's voice drowned the whine of the dog, and his
master did not hear it. At the summons, Vanslyperken but half
convinced, but not daring to show any interest about the animal in the
presence of his mistress, returned to the parlour, and very soon the dog
was forgotten. But as the orgies in the Lust Haus increased, so did it become more
necessary for the widow to make frequent visits there; not only to
supply her customers, but to restrain them by her presence: and as the
evening wore away, so did the absences of the widow become more
frequent. This Vanslyperken well knew, and he therefore always pressed
his suit in the afternoon, and as soon as it was dark returned on board. Smallbones, who watched at the back door the movements of his master,
perceived that he was refixing his sword-belt over his shoulder, and he
knew this to be the signal for departure. It was now quite dark; he
therefore hastened to the outhouse, and dragged out Snarleyyow in the
bag, swung him over his shoulder, and walked out of the yard-door,
proceeded to the canal in front of the widow's house, looked round him,
could perceive nobody, and then dragged the bag with its contents into
the stagnant water below, just as Mr Vanslyperken, who had bidden adieu
to the widow, came out of the house. There was a heavy splash--and
silence. Had such been heard on the shores of the Bosphorus on such a
night, it would have told some tale of unhappy love and a husband's
vengeance; but, at Amsterdam, it was nothing more than the drowning of a
cur. "Who's there--is it Smallbones?" said Mr Vanslyperken. "Yes, sir," said Smallbones, with alarm. "What was that noise I heard?" "Noise, sir? Oh, I kicked a paving-stone into the canal." "And don't you know there is a heavy fine for that, you scoundrel? And
pray where are the bread-bags?" "The bread-bags, sir? Oh, Mr Short took them to tie up some vegetables
in them." "Mr Short! O, very well. Come along, sir, and no more throwing stones
into the canal; why you might have killed somebody--there is a boat down
there now, I hear the people talking." And Mr Vanslyperken hastened to
his boat, which was waiting for him; anxious to ascertain if Snarleyyow,
as he fully expected, was in it. But to his grief and disappointment he
was not there, and Mr Vanslyperken sat in the stern sheets, in no
pleasant humour, thinking whether it was or was not a paving-stone which
Smallbones had thrown into the canal, and resolving that if the dog did
not appear, Smallbones should be keel-hauled. There was, however, one
more chance, the dog might have been taken on board. CHAPTER NINE. A LONG CHAPTER, IN WHICH THERE IS LAMENTATION, SINGING, BIBBLING, AND
DANCING. It may readily be supposed, that the first question asked by Mr
Vanslyperken, on his gaining the quarter-deck, was, if Snarleyyow were
on board. He was received with the military salute of Corporal Van
Spitter, for Obadiah Coble, having been left commanding officer, had
given himself leave, and, with a few men, had joined Bob Short and the
first party at the Lust Haus, leaving the corporal as the next senior
officer in charge. The answer in the negative was a great mortification
to Mr Vanslyperken, and he descended to his cabin in no very good
humour, and summoned Smallbones. But before Smallbones was summoned, he
had time to whisper to one or two of the conspirators--"_He's gone_." It was enough; in less than a minute the whisper was passed throughout
the cutter. "He's gone," was siffilated above and below, until it met
the ears of even Corporal Van Spitter, who had it from a marine, who had
it from another marine, who had it from a seaman, who--but it was,
however, soon traced up to Smallbones by the indefatigable corporal--who
considered it his duty to report the report to Mr Vanslyperken. Accordingly he descended to the cabin and knocked for admission. In the meantime Vanslyperken had been venting his ill-humour upon
Smallbones, having, as he took off from his person, and replaced in his
drawers, his unusual finery, administered an unusual quantity of kicks,
as well as a severe blow on the head with his sheathed cutlass to the
unfortunate lad, who repeated to himself, by way of consolation, the
magic words--"_He's gone_." "If you please, sir," said Corporal Van Spitter, "I've discovered from
the ship's company that the dog _is gone_." "I know that, corporal," replied Vanslyperken. "And, sir, the report has been traced to Smallbones." "Indeed! Then it was you that said that the dog is gone--now, you
villain, where is he?" "If you please, I did say that the dog was gone, and so he is: but I
didn't say that I knew where he was--no more I don't. He's runned away,
and he'll be back to-morrow; I'm sure he will." "Corporal Van Spitter, if the dog is not on board again by eight o'clock
to-morrow morning, you will get all ready for keel-hauling this
scoundrel." "Yes, mynheer," replied the corporal, delighted at having something to
do in the way of punishment. Smallbones made up a lachrymal face. "It's very hard," said he; "suppose the dog has fallen into the canal,
is that my fault? If he's a-gone to the bottom of the canal, that's no
reason why I'm to be dragged under the bottom of the cutter." "Yes, yes," replied Vanslyperken, "I'll teach you to throw paving-stones
off the wharf. Leave the cabin, sir." Smallbones, whose guilty conscience flew into his pallid face at the
mention of the paving-stones, immediately made a hasty retreat; and
Vanslyperken turned into his bed and dreamt of vengeance. We must now return to the Lust Haus, and the party on shore; and our
first task must be, to give the reader an idea of what a Lust Haus may
be. It is, as its name imports, a resort for pleasure and amusement;
and in this respect the Dutch are certainly very much in advance of the
English, who have, in the pot-houses and low inns resorted to by seamen,
no accommodation of the kind. There is barely room for Jack to foot it
in a reel, the tap-room is so small; and as Jack is soon reeling after
he is once on shore, it is a very great defect. Now, the Lust Haus is a
room as large as an assembly-room in a country town, well lighted up
with lamps and chandeliers, well warmed with stoves, where you have room
to dance fifty reels at once, and still have plenty of accommodation at
the chairs and tables ranged round on each side. At the end of the room
is a raised chair, with a protecting railing, on which the musicians, to
the number of seven or eight, are posted, and they continue during the
evening to play when requested. The people of the Lust Haus furnish
wine and spirits of every description, while cakes, nuts, walnuts,
oranges, etcetera, are supplied from the baskets of numerous young
women, who hand them round, and press their customers to purchase. Police-officers superintend these resorts, to remove those who are
violent and interfere with the amusements of others. On the whole, it
is a very gay scene, and is resorted to by seamen of all nations, with a
sprinkling of those who are not sailors, but who like amusement, and
there are plenty of females who are ready to dance with them, and to
share their beer or grog. Be it further known, that there is a great
deal of decorum in a Lust Haus, particularly among the latter sex; and
altogether it is infinitely more rational and less debasing than the low
pot-houses of Portsmouth or Plymouth. Such was the place of amusement kept by the Frau Vandersloosh, and in
this large room had been seated, for some hours, Dick Short, Coble,
Jansen, Jemmy Ducks, and some others of the crew of his Majesty's cutter
Yungfrau. The room was now full, but not crowded; it was too spacious well to be
so. Some sixteen couples were dancing a quadrille to a lively tune
played by the band, and among the dancers were to be seen old women, and
children of tea or twelve; for it was not considered improper to be seen
dancing at this humble assembly, and the neighbours frequently came in. The small tables and numerous chairs round the room were nearly all
filled, beer was foaming from the mouths of the opened bottles, and
there was the ringing of the glasses as they pledged each other. At
several tables were assemblages of Dutch seamen, who smoked with all the
phlegm of their nation, as they gravely looked upon the dancers. At
another were to be seen some American seamen, scrupulously neat in their
attire, and with an air _distinguee_, from the superiority of their
education, and all of them quiet and sober. The basket-women flitted
about displaying, their stores, and invited every one to purchase fruit,
and particularly hard-boiled eggs, which they had brought in at this
hour, when those who dined at one might be expected to be hungry. Sailors' wives were also there, and perhaps some who could not produce
the marriage certificates; but as these were not asked for at the door,
it was of no consequence. About the centre of the room, at two small
tables joined together, were to be seen the party from the Yungfrau;
some were drinking beer, some grog, and Jemmy Ducks was perched on the
table, with his fiddle as usual held like a bass viol. He was known by
those who frequented the house by the name of the Mannikin, and was a
universal object of admiration and good-will. The quadrille was ended,
and the music stopped playing. "Come now," said Coble, tossing off his glass, "spell oh!--let's have a
song while they take their breath. Jemmy, strike up." "Hurrah, for a song!" cries Jemmy. "Here goes." Jemmy then tuned one string of his fiddle, which was a little out, and
accompanying his voice, sang as follows: all those who were present
immediately keeping silence, for they were used to Jemmy's melody. 'Twas on the twenty-fourth of June I sail'd away to sea,
  I turn'd my pockets in the lap of Susan on my knee;
  Says I, my dear, 'tis all I have, I wish that it was more. It can't be help'd, says Susan then, you know we've spent galore. You know we've spent galore, my Bill,
  And merry have been we,
  Again you must your pockets fill,
  For Susan on your knee. "Chorus, my boys--!" For Susan on my knee, my boys,
  With Susan on my knee. The gale came on in thunder, lads, in lightning, and in foam,
  Before that we had sail'd away three hundred miles from home;
  And on the Sunday morning, lads, the coast was on our lee,
  Oh, then I thought of Portsmouth, and of Susan on my knee. For howling winds and waves to boot,
  With black rocks on the lee,
  Did not so well my fancy suit,
  As Susan on my knee. _Chorus_.--With Susan on my knee, my boys,
  With Susan on my knee. Next morning we were cast away upon the Frenchman's shore,
  We saved our lives, but not our all, for we could save no more;
  They march'd us to a prison, so we lost our liberty,
  I peep'd between the bars, and sigh'd for Susan on my knee. For bread so black, and wine so sour,
  And a sou a-day to me,
  Made me long ten times an hour,
  For Susan on my knee. _Chorus_.--For Susan on my knee, my boys,
  For Susan on my knee. One night we smash'd our jailer's skull, and off our boat did steer,
  And in the offing were pick'd up by a jolly privateer;
  We sail'd in her the cruise, my boys, and prizes did take we,
  I'll be at Portsmouth soon, thinks I, with Susan on my knee. We shared three hundred pounds a man,
  I made all sail with glee,
  Again I danced and toss'd my can,
  With Susan on my knee. _Chorus_--With Susan on my knee, my boys,
  With Susan on my knee. "That's prime, Jemmy. Now, my boys, all together," cried Obadiah Coble. _Chorus_.--Very good song, and very well sung,
  Jolly companions every one;
  We are all here for mirth and glee,
  We are all here for jollity. Very good song, and very well sung,
  Jolly companions every one;
  Put your hats on to keep your beads warm,
  A little more grog will do us no harm. "Hurrah! Now, Bill Spurey, suppose you tip us a stave. But I say,
Babette, you Dutch-built galliot, tell old Frank Slush to send us
another dose of the stuff; and, d'ye hear, a short pipe for me, and a
paper o' baccy." The short, fat Babette, whose proportions all the exercise of waiting
upon the customers could not reduce, knew quite enough English to
require no further explanation. "Come, Jemmy, my hearty, take your fingers off your fiddle, and hand in
your pot," continued Coble; "and then, if they are not going to dance,
we'll have another song. Bill Spurey, wet your whistle, and just clear
the cobwebs out of your throat. Here's more 'baccy, Short." Short made no reply, but he shook out the ashes, and filled his pipe. The music did not strike up again, so Bill Spurey sang as follows:--

  Says the parson one day, as I cursed a Jew,
  Do you know, my lad, that we call it a sin! I fear of you sailors there are but few,
  St. Peter, to heaven, will ever let in. Says I, Mr Parson, to tell you my mind,
  No sailors to knock were ever yet seen,
  Those who travel by land may steer 'gainst wind,
  But we shape a course for Fiddler's Green. For Fiddler's Green, where seamen true,
  When here they've done their duty,
  The bowl of grog shall still renew
  And pledge to love and beauty. Says the parson, I hear you've married three wives,
  Now do you not know that that is a sin? You sailors, you lead such very bad lives,
  St. Peter, to heaven, will ne'er let you in. Parson, says I, in each port I've but _one_,
  And never had more, wherever I've been;
  Below I'm obliged to be chaste as a nun,
  But I'm promised a dozen at Fiddler's Green. At Fiddler's Green, where seamen true,
  When here they've done their duty,
  The bowl of grog shall still renew,
  And pledge to love and beauty. Says the parson, says he, you're drunk, my man,
  And do you not know that that is a sin? If you sailors will ever be swinging your can,
  To heaven you surely will never get in. (_Hiccup_.) Parson, you may as well be mum,
  'Tis only on shore I'm this way seen;
  But oceans of punch, and rivers of rum,
  Await the sailor at Fiddler's Green. At Fiddler's Green, where seamen true,
  When here they've done their duty,
  The bowl of grog shall still renew
  And pledge to love and beauty. "Well reeled off, Billy," cried Jemmy Ducks finishing with a flourish on
his fiddle and a refrain of the air. "I don't think we shall meet him
and his dog at Fiddler's Green--heh!" "No," replied Short, taking his pipe from his lip. "No, no, Jemmy, a seaman true means one true in heart as well as in
knowledge; but, like a blind fiddler, he'll be led by his dog somewhere
else." "From vere de dog did come from," observed Jansen. The band now struck up again, and played a waltz--a dance new to our
country, but older than the Heptarchy. Jansen, with his pipe in his
mouth, took one of the women by the waist, and steered round the room
about as leisurely as a capstan heaving up. Dick Short also took
another made four turns, reeled up against a Dutchman who was doing it
with _sang froid_, and then suddenly left his partner, and dropped into
his chair. "I say, Jemmy," said Obadiah Coble, "why don't you give a girl a twist
round?" "Because I can't, Oby; my compasses ain't long enough to describe a
circle. You and I are better here, old boy. I, because I've very
little legs, and you, because you havn't a leg to stand upon." "Very true--not quite so young as I was forty years ago. Howsomever I
mean this to be my last vessel. I shall bear up for one of the London
dockyards as a rigger." "Yes, that'll do; only keep clear of the girt-lines, you're too stiff
for that." "No, that would not exactly tell; I shall pick my own work, and that's
where I can bring my tarry trousers to an anchor--mousing the mainstay,
or puddening the anchor, with the best of any. Dick, lend us a bit of
'baccy." Short pulled out his box without saying a word. Coble took a quid, and
Short thrust the box again into his pocket. In the meantime the waltz continued, and being a favourite dance, there
were about fifty couple going round and round the room. Such was the
variety in the dress, country, language, and appearance of the parties
collected, that you might have imagined it a masquerade. It was,
however, getting late, and Frau Vandersloosh had received the intimation
of the people of the police who superintend these resorts, that it was
the time for shutting up; so that, although the widow was sorry on her
own account to disperse so merry and so thirsty a party as they were now
becoming, so soon as the waltz was ended the musicians packed up their
instruments and departed. This was a signal for many, but by no means for all, to depart; for
music being over, and the house doors closed, a few who remained,
provided they made no disturbance, were not interfered with by the
police. Among those who stayed were the party from the Yungfrau, one or
two American, and some Prussian sailors. Having closed up
together,--"Come," cried Jemmy, "now that we are quiet again, let's have
another song; and who is it to be--Dick Short?" "Short, my boy, come, you must sing." "No," replied Short. "Yes, yes--one verse," said Spurey. "He never sings more," replied Jemmy Ducks, "so he must give us that. Come, Short." "Yes," replied Short, taking the pipe out of his mouth, and wetting his
lips with the grog. _Short_ stay apeak was the anchor,
  We had but a _short_ minute more,
  In _short_, I no longer could hanker,
  For _short_ was the cash in my store. I gave one _short_ look,
  As Poll heaved a _short_ sigh,
  One _short_ hug I took,
  _Short_ the matter cut I,
  And off I went to sea. "Go on, Bob." "No," replied Short, resuming his pipe. "Well, then, chorus, my boys." Very good song, and very well sung,
  Jolly companions every one;
  We all are here for mirth and glee,
  We all are here for jollity. Very good song, and very well sung,
  Jolly companions every one;
  Put your hats on, and keep your heads warm,
  A little more liquor will do us no harm. "Now then, Jemmy Ducks, it's round to you again. Strike up, fiddle and
all." "Well, here goes," said Jemmy Ducks. The captain stood on the carronade--first lieutenant, says he,
  Send all my merry men aft here, for they must list to me:
  I haven't the gift of the gab, my sons--because I'm bred to the sea;
  That ship there is a Frenchman, who means to fight with we. Odds blood, hammer and tongs, long as I've been to sea,
  I've fought 'gainst every odds--but I've gain'd the victory. That ship there is a Frenchman, and if we don't take _she_,
  'Tis a thousand bullets to one, that she will capture _we_;
  I havn't the gift of the gab, my boys; so each man to his gun;
  If she's not mine in half an hour, I'll flog each mother's son. Odds bobs, hammer and tongs, long as I've been to sea,
  I've fought 'gainst every odds--and I've gain'd the victory. We fought for twenty minutes, when the Frenchman had enough;
  I little thought, said he, that your men were of such stuff;
  The captain took the Frenchman's sword, a low bow made to he;
  I havn't the gift of the gab, monsieur, but polite I wish to be. Odds bobs, hammer and tongs, long as I've been to sea,
  I've fought 'gainst every odds--and I've gain'd the victory. Our captain sent for all of us; my merry men, said he,
  I haven't the gift of the gab, my lads, but yet I thankful be:
  You've done your duty handsomely, each man stood to his gun;
  If you hadn't, you villains, as sure as day, I'd have flogg'd each
  mother's son. Odds bobs, hammer and tongs, as long as I'm at sea,
  I'll fight 'gainst every odds--and I'll gain the victory. _Chorus_.--Very good song, and very well sung,
  Jolly companions every one;
  We all are here for mirth and glee,
  We all are here for jollity. Very good song, and very well sung,
  Jolly companions every one;
  Put your hats on to keep your heads warm,
  A little more grog will do us no harm. "Now, Coble, we must have yours," said Jemmy Ducks. "Mine! well, if you please; but half my notes are stranded. You'll
think that Snarleyyow is baying the moon. Howsomever, take it as it
is." Oh, what's the use of piping, boys, I never yet could larn,
  The good of water from the eyes I never could disarn;
  Salt water we have sure enough without our pumping more;
  So let us leave all crying to the girls we leave on shore. They may pump,
  As in we jump
  To the boat, and say, "Good bye;"
  But as for men,
  Why, I say again,
  That crying's all my eye. I went to school when quite a boy, and never larnt to read,
  The master tried both head and tail--at last it was agreed
  No larning he could force in me, so they sent me off to sea;
  My mother wept and wrung her hands, and cried most bitterly. So she did pump,
  As I did jump
  In the boat, and said, "Good bye;"
  But as for me,
  Who was sent to sea,
  To cry was all my eye. I courted Poll, a buxom lass; when I return'd A.B.,
  I bought her ear-rings, hat, and shawl, a sixpence did break we;
  At last 'twas time to be on board, so, Poll, says I, farewell;
  She roar'd and said, that leaving her was like a funeral knell. So she did pump,
  As I did jump
  In the boat, and said, "Good bye;"
  But as for me,
  With the rate A B,
  To cry was all my eye. I soon went back, I shoved on shore, and Polly I did meet,
  For she was watching on the shore, her sweetheart for to greet;
  She threw her arms around me then, and much to my surprise,
  She vow'd she was so happy that she pump'd with both her eyes. So she did pump,
  As I did jump
  To kiss her lovingly;
  But, I say again,
  That as for men,
  Crying is all my eye. Then push the can around, my boys, and let us merry be;
  We'll rig the pumps if a leak we spring, and work most merrily;
  Salt water we have sure enough, we'll add not to its store,
  But drink, and laugh, and sing, and chat, and call again for more. The girls may pump,
  As in we jump
  To the boat, and say, "Good bye;"
  But as for we,
  Who sailors be,
  Crying is all my eye. "Bravo, Obadiah! now one more song, and then we'll aboard. It won't do
to bowse your jib up too tight here," said Jemmy; "for it's rather
dangerous navigation among all these canals--no room for yawing." "No," replied Dick Short. "Then," said Jemmy, jumping off the table with his fiddle in his hand. "Let's have the roarer by way of a finish--what d'ye say, my hearties?" Up they all rose, and gathered together in the centre of the room, save
Jemmy Ducks, who, flourishing with his fiddle, commenced--

  Jack's alive, and a merry dog,
  When he gets on shore
  He calls for his glass of grog,
  He drinks, and he calls for more. So drink, and call for what you please,
  Until you've had your whack, boys;
  We think no more of raging seas,
  Now that we've come back, boys. "Chorus, now--"

  With a _whip, snip_, high cum diddledy,
  The cog-wheels of life have need of much oiling;
  _Smack, crack_,--this is our jubilee:
  Huzza, my lads! we'll keep the pot boiling. All the seamen joined in the chorus, which they accompanied both with
their hands and feet, snapping their fingers at _whip_ and _snip_, and
smacking their hands at _smack_ and _crack_, while they danced round in
the most grotesque manner, to Jemmy's fiddle and voice; the chorus ended
in loud laughter, for they had now proved the words of the song to be
true, and were all alive and merry. According to the rules of the song,
Jemmy now called out for the next singer, Coble. Jack's alive and merry, my boys,
  When he's on blue water,
  In the battle's rage and noise,
  And the main-deck slaughter. So drink and call for what you please,
  Until you've had your whack, boys;
  We'll think no more of angry seas,
  Until that we go back, boys. _Chorus_--With a _whip, snip_, high cum diddledy,
  The cog-wheels of life have need of much oiling;
  _Smack, crack_,--this is our jubilee:
  Huzza, my lads! we'll keep the pot boiling. Jansen and Jemmy Ducks, after the dancing chorus had finished--

  Yack alive and merry my boys,
  Ven he get him _frau_
  And he vid her ringlet toys,
  As he take her paw. So drink, and call for vat you please,
  Until you hab your vack, boys;
  Ve'll think no more of angry seas,
  Till ve standen back, boys. Chorus and laughter. With a _whip, snip_, high cum diddledy,
  The cog-wheels of life have need of much oiling;
  _Smack, crack_--this is our jubilee
  Huzza, my lads, we'll keep the pot boiling. Bill Spurey--

  Jack's alive and merry, boys,
  When he's got the shiners;
  Heh! for rattle, fun, and noise,
  Hang all grumbling whiners. Then drink, and call for what you please
  Until you've had your whack, boys;
  We think no more of raging seas,
  Now that we've come back, boys. _Chorus_.--With a _whip, snip_, high cum diddledy,
  The cog-wheels of life have need of much oiling;
  _Smack, crack--this_ is our jubilee;
  Huzza, my lads we'll keep the pot boiling. "Dick Short must sing." "Yes," replied Dick. Jack's alive and full of fun,
  When his hulk is crazy,
  As he basks in Greenwich sun
  Jolly still, though lazy. So drink, and call for what you please,
  Until you've had your whack, boys;
  We'll think no more of raging seas,
  Now that we've come back, boys. _Chorus_--With a _whip, snip_, high cum diddledy. The cog-wheels of life have need of much oiling;
  _Smack, crack_--this is our jubilee;
  Huzza, my lads! we'll keep the pot boiling. As this was the last chorus, it was repeated three or four times, and
with hallooing, screaming, and dancing in mad gesticulation. "Hurrah, my lads," cried Jemmy, "three cheers and a bravo." It was high time that they went on board; so thought Frau Vandersloosh,
who trembled for her chandeliers; so thought Babette, who had begun to
yawn before the last song, and who had tired herself more with laughing
at it; so thought they all, and they sallied forth out of the Lust Haus,
with Jemmy Ducks having the advance, and fiddling to them the whole way
down to the boat. Fortunately, not one of them fell into the canal, and
in ten minutes they were all on board; they were not, however, permitted
to turn into their hammocks without the important information being
imparted to them, that Snarleyyow had disappeared. CHAPTER TEN. IN WHICH IS EXPLAINED THE SUBLIME MYSTERY OF KEELHAULING--SNARLEYYOW
SAVES SMALLBONES FROM BEING DROWNED, ALTHOUGH SMALLBONES WOULD HAVE
DROWNED HIM. It is a dark morning; the wind is fresh from the north-west; flakes of
snow are seen wafting here and there by the wind, the avant-couriers of
a heavy fall; the whole sky is of one murky grey, and the sun is hidden
behind a dense bank. The deck of the cutter is wet and slippery, and
Dick Short has the morning watch. He is wrapt up in a Flushing
pea-jacket, with thick mittens on his hands; he looks about him, and now
and then a fragment of snow whirls into his eye; he winks it out, it
melts and runs like a tear down his cheek. If it were not that it is
contrary to man-of-war custom he would warm himself with the
_double-shuffle_, but such a step would be unheard of on the
quarter-deck of even the cutter Yungfrau. The tarpaulin over the hatchway is pushed on one side, and the space
between the coamings is filled with the bull head and broad shoulders of
Corporal Van Spitter, who, at last, gains the deck; he looks round him,
and apparently is not much pleased with the weather. Before he proceeds
to business, he examines the sleeves and front of his jacket, and having
brushed off with the palm of his hand a variety of blanket-hairs,
adhering to the cloth, he is satisfied, and now turns to the right and
to the left, and forward and aft--in less than a minute he goes right
round the compass. What can Corporal Van Spitter want at so early an
hour? He has not come up on deck for nothing, and yet he appears to be
strangely puzzled: the fact is, by the arrangements of last night, it
was decided, that this morning, if Snarleyyow did not make his
appearance in the boat sent on shore for fresh beef for the ship's
company, the unfortunate Smallbones was to be _keel-hauled_. What a delightful morning for a keel-hauling! This ingenious process, which, however, like many other good old
customs, has fallen into disuse, must be explained to the non-nautical
reader. It is nothing more nor less than sending a poor navigator on a
voyage of discovery under the bottom of the vessel, lowering him [The
author has here explained keel-hauling as practised in those times in
small _fore-and-aft_ vessels. In large and square-rigged vessels, the
man was hauled up to one main-yard arm, and dropped into the sea, and
hauled under the bottom of the vessel to the other; but this in small
fore-and-aft vessels was not so easily effected, nor was it considered
sufficient punishment] down over the bows, and with ropes retaining him
exactly in his position under the kelsom [keelson], while he is drawn
aft by a hauling line until he makes his appearance at the
rudder-chains, generally speaking quite out of breath, not at the
rapidity of his motion, but because, when so long under the water, he
has expended all the breath in his body, and is induced to take in salt
water _en lieu_. There is much merit in this invention; people are very
apt to be content with walking the deck of a man-of-war, and complain of
it as a hardship, but when once they have learnt, by experience, the
difference between being comfortable above board, and the number of
deprivations which they have to submit to when under board and overboard
at the same time, they find that there are worse situations than being
on the deck of a vessel--we say privations when under board, for they
really are very important:--you are deprived of the air to breathe,
which is not borne with patience even by a philosopher, and you are
obliged to drink salt water instead of fresh. In the days of
keel-hauling, the bottoms of vessels were not coppered, and in
consequence were well studded with a species of shell-fish which
attached themselves, called barnacles, and as these shells were all
open-mouthed and with sharp cutting points, those who underwent this
punishment (for they were made by the ropes at each side, fastened to
their arms, to hug the kelsom of the vessel) were cut and scored all
over their body, as if with so many lancets, generally coming up
bleeding in every part, and with their faces, especially their noses, as
if they had been gnawed by the rats; but this was considered rather
advantageous than otherwise, as the loss of blood restored the patient
if he was not quite drowned, and the consequence was, that one out of
three, it is said, have been known to recover after their submarine
excursion. The Dutch have the credit, and we will not attempt to take
from them their undoubted right, of having invented this very agreeable
description of punishment. They are considered a heavy, phlegmatic sort
of people, but on every point in which the art of ingeniously tormenting
is in request, it must be admitted that they have taken the lead of much
more vivacious and otherwise more inventive nations. And now the reader will perceive why Corporal Van Spitter was in a
dilemma. With all the good-will in the world, with every anxiety to
fulfil his duty and to obey his superior officer, he was not a seaman,
and did not know how to commence operations. He knew nothing about
foddering a vessel's bottom, much less how to fodder it with the carcase
of one of his fellow-creatures. The corporal, as we said before, turned
round and round the compass to ascertain if he could compass his wishes;
at last, he commenced by dragging one rope's-end from one side and
another from the other; those would do for the side ropes, but he wanted
a long one from forward and another from aft, and how to get the one
from aft under the cutter's bottom was a puzzle; and then there was the
mast and the rigging in his way;--the corporal reflected--the more he
considered the matter, the more his brain became confused; he was at a
nonplus, and he gave it up in despair: he stood still, took out a blue
cotton handkerchief from the breast of his jacket and wiped his
forehead, for the intensity of thought had made him perspire--anything
like reflection was very hard work for Corporal Van Spitter. "Tousand tyfels!" at last exclaimed the corporal, and he paused and
knocked his big head with his fist. "Hundred tousand tyfels!" repeated the corporal after five minutes' more
thought. "Twenty hundred tousand tyfels!" muttered the corporal, once more
knocking his head: but he knocked in vain; like an empty house, there
was no one within to answer the appeal. The corporal could no more; so
he returned his pocket-handkerchief to the breast of his jacket, and a
heavy sigh escaped from his own breast. All the devils in hell were
mentally conjured and summoned to his aid, but they were, it is to be
presumed, better employed, for although the work in hand was diabolical
enough, still Smallbones was such a poor devil, that probably he might
have been considered as remotely allied to the fraternity. It may be inquired why, as this was on _service_, Corporal Van Spitter
did not apply for the assistance of the seamen belonging to the vessel,
particularly to the officer in charge of the deck; but the fact was,
that he was unwilling to do this, knowing that his application would be
in vain, for he was aware that the whole crew sided with Smallbones; it
was only as a last resource that he intended to do this, and being now
at his _wit's_ end, he walked up to Dick Short, who had been watching
the corporal's motions in silence, and accosted him. "If you please, Mynheer Short, Mynheer Vanslyperken give orders dat de
boy be keel-hauled dis morning;--I want haben de rope and de way." Short looked at the corporal, and made no reply. "Mynheer Short, I haben tell de order of Mynheer Vanslyperken." Dick Short made no reply, but leaning over the hatchway, called out,
"Jemmy." "Ay, ay," replied Jemmy Ducks, turning out of his hammock and dropping
on the lower deck. Corporal Van Spitter, who imagined that Mr Short was about to comply
with his request after his own Harpocratic fashion, remained quietly on
the deck until Jemmy Ducks made his appearance. "Hands," quoth Short. Jemmy piped the hands up. "Boat," quoth Short, turning his head to the small boat hoisted up
astern. Now as all this was apparently preparatory to the work required, the
corporal was satisfied. The men soon came up with their hammocks on
their shoulders, which they put into the nettings, and then Jemmy
proceeded to lower down the boat. As soon as it was down and hauled up
alongside, Short turned round to Coble, and waving his hand towards the
shore, said--

"Beef." Coble, who perfectly understood him, put a new quid into his cheek, went
down the side, and pulled on shore to bring off the fresh beef and
vegetables for the ship's company; after which Dick Short walked the
deck and gave no further orders. Corporal Van Spitter perceiving this, went up to him again. "Mynheer Short, you please get ready." "No!" thundered Short, turning away. "Got for dam, dat is mutiny," muttered the corporal, who immediately
backed stern foremost down the hatchway, to report to his commandant the
state of affairs on deck. Mr Vanslyperken had already risen; he had
slept but one hour during the whole night, and that one hour was so
occupied with wild and fearful dreams that he awoke from his sleep
un-refreshed. He had dreamed that he was making every attempt to drown
Smallbones, but without effect, for, so soon as the lad was dead he came
to life again; he thought that Smallbones soul was incorporated in a
small animal something like a mouse, and that he had to dislodge it from
its tenement of clay; but as soon as he drove it from one part of the
body it would force its way back again into another; if he forced it out
by the mouth after incredible exertions, which made him perspire at
every pore, it would run back again into the ear; if forced from thence,
through the nostril, then in at the toe, or any other part; in short, he
laboured apparently in his dream for years, but without success. And
then the "change came o'er the spirit of his dream;" but still there was
analogy, for he was now trying to press his suit, which was now a liquid
in a phial, into the widow Vandersloosh, but in vain. He administered
it again and again, but it acted as an emetic, and she could not stomach
it, and then he found himself rejected by all--the widow kicked him,
Smallbones stamped upon him, even Snarleyyow flew at him and bit him; at
last, he fell with an enormous paving-stone round his neck, descending
into a horrible abyss head foremost, and, as he increased his velocity,
he awoke trembling and confused, and could sleep no more. This dream
was not one to put Mr Vanslyperken into good humour, and two severe
cuts on his cheek with the razor as he attempted to shave, for his hand
still trembled, had added to his discontent, when it was raised to its
climax by the entrance of Corporal Van Spitter, who made his report of
the mutinous conduct of the first officer. Never was Mr Vanslyperken
in such a tumult of rage; he pulled off some beaver from his hat to
staunch the blood, and wiping off the remainder of the lather, for he
put aside the operation of shaving till his hand was more steady, he
threw on his coat, and followed the corporal on deck, looked round with
a savage air, spied out the diminutive form of Jemmy Ducks, and desired
him to pipe "all hands to keel-haul." Whereupon Jemmy put his pipe to his mouth, and after a long flourish,
bawled out what appeared to Mr Vanslyperken to be--all hands to be
_keel-hauled_; but Jemmy slurred over quickly the little change made in
the order, and, although the men tittered, Mr Vanslyperken thought it
better to say nothing. But there is an old saying, that you may bring a
horse to the pond, but you cannot make him drink. Mr Vanslyperken had
given the order, but no one attempted to commence the arrangements. The
only person who showed any activity was Smallbones himself, who, not
aware that he was to be punished, and hearing all hands piped for
something or another, came shambling, a an wings, up the hatchway, and
looked round to ascertain what was to be done. He was met by the bulky
form of Corporal Van Spitter, who, thinking that Smallbones' making his
appearance in such haste was with the intention of jumping overboard to
avoid his punishment, immediately seized him by the collar with the left
hand, turned round on a pivot towards Mr Vanslyperken, and raising his
right hand to his foraging cap, reported, "The prisoner on deck, Mynheer
Vanslyperken." This roused the lieutenant to action for he had been
walking the deck for a half minute in deep thought. "Is all ready there, forward?" cried Mr Vanslyperken. No one replied. "I say, boatswain, is all ready?" "No, sir," replied Jemmy; "nobody knows how to set about it. I don't,
any how--I never seed anything of the like since I've been in the
service--the whole of the ship's company say the same." But even the
flakes of snow, which now fell thick, and whitened the blue jacket of
Mr Vanslyperken, could not assuage his wrath; he perceived that the men
were refractory, so he summoned the six marines, who were completely
under the control of their corporal. Poor Smallbones had, in the meantime, discovered what was going on, and
thought that he might as well urge something in his own defence. "If you please, what are you going for to do with me?" said the lad,
with a terrified look. "Lead him forward," said Mr Vanslyperken; "follow me, marines;" and the
whole party, headed by the lieutenant, went before the mast. "Strip him," cried Mr Vanslyperken. "Strip me, with the snow flying like this! Ar'n't I cold enough
already?" "You'll be colder when you're under the bottom of the cutter," replied
his master. "O Lord, then it is keel-hauling a'ter all; why, what have I done?" cried Smallbones, as the marines divested him of his shirt, and exposed
his emaciated body to the pitiless storm. "Where's Snarleyyow, sir?--confess." "Snarleyyow--how should I know, sir? it's very hard because your dog is
not to be found, that I'm to be dragged under the bottom of a vessel." "I'll teach you to throw paving-stones in the canal." "Paving stones, sir!" and Smallbones' guilty conscience flew in his
face. "Well, sir, do as you please, I'm sure I don't care; if I am to
be killed, be quick about it--I'm sure I shan't come up alive." Here Mr Vanslyperken remembered his dream, and the difficulty which he
had in driving Smallbones' soul out of his body, and he was fearful that
even keel-hauling would not settle Smallbones. By the direction of Mr Vanslyperken, the hauling ropes and other tackle
were collected by the marines, for the seamen stood by, and appeared
resolved, to a man, to do nothing, and, in about half an hour, all was
ready. Four marines manned the hauling line, one was placed at each
side-rope fastened to the lad's arms, and the corporal, as soon as he
had lifted the body of Smallbones over the larboard gunwale, had
directions to attend the bow-line, and not allow him to be dragged on
too fast: a better selection for this purpose could not have been made
than Corporal Van Spitter. Smallbones had been laid without his clothes
on the deck, now covered with snow, during the time that the lines were
making fast to him; he remained silent, and, as usual when punished,
with his eyes shut, and as Vanslyperken watched him with feelings of
hatred, he perceived an occasional smile to cross the lad's haggard
features. He knows where the dog is, thought Vanslyperken, and his
desire to know what had become of Snarleyyow overcame his vengeance. He
addressed the shivering Smallbones:--

"Now, sir, if you wish to escape the punishment, tell me what has become
of the dog, for I perceive that you know." Smallbones grinned as his teeth chattered--he would have undergone a
dozen keel-haulings rather than have satisfied Vanslyperken. "I give you ten minutes to think of it," continued the lieutenant; "hold
all fast at present." The snow-storm now came on so thick that it was difficult to distinguish
the length of the vessel. Smallbones' naked limbs were gradually
covered, and, before the ten minutes were expired, he was wrapped up in
snow as in a garment; he shook his head occasionally to clear his face,
but remained silent. "Now, sir," cried Vanslyperken, "will you tell me? or overboard you go
at once. Will you tell me?" "No," replied Smallbones. "Do you know, you scoundrel?" "Yes," replied Smallbones, whose indignation was roused. "And you won't tell?" "No," shrieked the lad--"no, never, never, never!" "Corporal Van Spitter, over with him," cried Vanslyperken in a rage,
when a sudden stir was heard amongst the men aft, and as the corporal
raised up the light frame of the culprit, to carry it to the gunwale, to
the astonishment of Vanslyperken, of the corporal, and of Smallbones,
Snarleyyow appeared on the forecastle, and made a rush at Smallbones, as
he lay in the corporal's arms, snapped at his leg, and then set up his
usual deep baying, "bow, bow, bow!" The re-appearance of the dog created no small sensation--Vanslyperken
felt that he had now no reason for keel-hauling Smallbones, which
annoyed him as much as the sight of the dog gave him pleasure. The
corporal, who had dropped Smallbones on the snow, was also disappointed. As for Smallbones, at the baying of the dog, he started up on his
knees, and looked at it as if it were an apparition, with every
demonstration of terror in his countenance; his eyes glared upon the
animal with horror and astonishment, and he fell down in a swoon. The
whole of the ship's company were taken aback--they looked at one another
and shook their heads--one only remark was made by Jansen, who muttered,
"De tog is no tog a'ter all." Mr Vanslyperken ordered Smallbones to be taken below, and then walked
aft; perceiving Obadiah Coble, he inquired whence the dog had come, and
was answered that he had come off in the boat which he had taken on
shore for fresh beef and vegetables. Mr Vanslyperken made no reply,
but, with Snarleyyow at his heels, went down into the cabin. CHAPTER ELEVEN. IN WHICH SNARLEYYOW DOES NOT AT ALL ASSIST HIS MASTER'S CAUSE WITH THE
WIDOW VANDERSLOOSH. It will be necessary to explain to the reader by what means the life of
our celebrated cur was preserved. When Smallbones had thrown him into
the canal, tied up, as he supposed, in his winding-sheet, what Mr
Vanslyperken observed was true, that there were people below, and the
supposed paving-stone might have fallen upon them: the voices which he
heard were those of a father and son, who were in a small boat going
from a galliot to the steps where they intended to land; for this canal
was not like most others, with the water in it sufficiently high to
enable people to step from the vessel's gunwale to the jetty. Snarleyyow fell in his bag a few yards ahead of the boat, and the splash
naturally attracted their attention; he did not sink immediately, but
floundered and struggled so as to keep himself partly above water. "What is that?" exclaimed the father to his son, in Dutch. "Mein Gott! who is to know?--but we will see;" and the boy took the
boat-hook, and with it dragged the bread-bags towards the boat, just as
they were sinking, for Snarleyyow was exhausted with his efforts. The
two together dragged the bags with their contents into the boat. "It is a dog or something," observed the son. "Very well, but the bread-bags will be useful," replied the father, and
they pulled on to the landing-stairs. When they arrived there they
lifted out the bags, laid them on the stone steps, and proceeded to
unrip them, when they found Snarleyyow, who was just giving signs of
returning animation. They took the bags with them, after having rolled
his carcase out, and left it on the steps, for there was a fine for
throwing anything into the canal. The cur soon after recovered, and was
able to stand on his legs; so soon as he could walk he made his way to
the door of the widow Vandersloosh, and howled for admittance. The
widow had retired: she had been reading her book of _prieres_, as every
one should do who has been cheating people all day long. She was about
to extinguish her light, when this serenade saluted her ears; it became
intolerable as the dog gained strength. Babette had long been fast asleep, and was with difficulty roused up and
directed to beat the cur away. She attempted to perform the duty,
arming herself with the broom; but the moment she opened the door
Snarleyyow dashed in between her legs, upsetting her on the brick
pavement. Babette screamed, and her mistress came out in the passage to
ascertain the cause; the dog not being able to run into the parlour,
bolted up the stairs, and snapping at the widow as he passed, secured a
berth underneath her bed. "Oh, mein Gott! it is the dog of the lieutenant," exclaimed Babette,
coming up the stairs in greater dishabille than her mistress, and with
the broom in her hand. "What shall we do--how shall we get rid of him?" "A thousand devils may take the lieutenant, and his nasty dog, too,"
exclaimed the widow, in great wrath; "this is the last time that either
of them enter my house; try, Babette, with your broom--shove at him
hard." "Yes, ma'am," replied Babette, pushing with all her strength at the dog
beneath the bed, who seized the broom with his teeth, and pulled it away
from Babette. It was a struggle of strength between the girl and
Snarleyyow--pull, Babette--pull, dog--one moment the broom, with
two-thirds of the handle, disappeared under the bed, the next the maid
recovered her lost ground. Snarleyyow was first tired of this
contention, and to prove that he had no thoughts of abandoning his
position, he let go the broom, flew at Babette's naked legs, and having
inserted his teeth half through her ankle, he returned growling to his
former retreat. "O dear, mein Gott!" exclaimed Babette, dropping her
broom, and holding her ankle with both hands. "What shall we do?" cried the widow, wringing her hands. It was indeed a case of difficulty. Mynheer Vandersloosh, before he had
quitted this transitory scene, had become a personage as bulky as the
widow herself, and the bed had been made unusually wide; the widow still
retained the bed for her own use, for there was no knowing whether she
might not again be induced to enter the hymeneal state. It occupied
more than one half of the room, and the dog had gained a position from
which it was not easy for two women to dislodge him; and, as the dog
snarled and growled under the bed, so; did the widow's wrath rise as she
stood shivering--and it was directed against the master. She vowed
mentally, that so sure as the dog was under the bed, so sure should his
master never get into it. And Babette's wrath was also kindled, now that the first pain of the
bite had worn off; she seized the broom again, and made some furious
lunges at Snarleyyow, so furious, that he could not regain possession
with his teeth. The door of the room had been left open that the dog
might escape--so had the street-door; and the widow stood at the foot of
the bed, waiting for some such effect being produced by Babette's
vigorous attacks; but the effects were not such as she anticipated; the
dog became more enraged, and at last sprang out at the foot of the bed,
flew at the widow, tore her only garment, and bit her in the leg. Frau
Vandersloosh screamed and reeled--reeled against the door left half open
and falling against it, slammed it to with her weight, and fell down
shrieking. Snarleyyow, who probably had intended to make off, seeing
that his escape was prevented, again retreated under the bed, and as
soon as he was there he recommenced an attack upon Babette's legs. Now, it appears, that what the united courage of the two females could
not accomplish, was at last effected by their united fears. The widow
Vandersloosh gained her legs as soon as she could, and at first opened
the door to run out, but her night dress was torn to ribbons in front. She looked at her situation--modesty conquered every other feeling--she
burst into tears, and exclaiming, "Mr Vanslyperken! Mr Vanslyperken!" she threw herself in an ecstasy of grief and rage on the centre of the
bed. At the same moment the teeth of the dog were again fixed upon the
ankles of Babette, who also shrieked, and threw herself on the bed, and
upon her mistress. The bed was a good bed, and had for years done its
duty; but you may even overload a bed, and so it proved in this
instance. The united weights of the mistress and the maid coming down
upon it with such emphasis, was more than the bed could bear--the
sacking gave way altogether, and the mattress which they lay upon was
now supported by the floor. But this misfortune was their preservation--for when the mattress came
down, it came down upon Snarleyyow. The animal contrived to clear his
loins, or he would have perished; but he could not clear his long mangy
tail, which was now caught and firmly fixed in a new species of trap,
the widow's broadest proportions having firmly secured him by it. Snarleyyow pulled, and pulled, but he pulled in vain--he was fixed--he
could not bite, for the mattress was between them--he pulled, and he
howled, and barked, and turned himself every way, and yelped; and had
not his tail been of coarse and thick dimensions, he might have left it
behind him, so great were his exertions; but no, it was impossible. The
widow was a widow of substance, as Vanslyperken had imagined, and as she
now proved to the dog--the only difference was, that the master wished
to be in the very situation the dog was now so anxious to escape from--
to wit, tailed on to the widow. Babette, who soon perceived that the
dog was so, now got out of the bed, and begging her mistress not to move
an inch, and seizing the broom, she hammered Snarleyyow most
unmercifully, without any fear of retaliation. The dog redoubled his
exertions, and the extra weight of Babette being now removed, he was at
last able to withdraw his appendage, and probably feeling that there was
now no chance of a quiet night's rest in his present quarters, he made a
bolt out of the room down the stairs, and into the street. Babette
chased him down, threw the broom at his head as he cleared the
threshold, and then bolted the door. "O the beast!" exclaimed Babette, going up stairs again out of breath;
"he's gone at last, ma'am." "Yes," replied the widow, rising up with difficulty from the hole made
with her own centre of gravity; "and--and his master shall go too. Make
love, indeed--the atomy--the shrimp--the dried up stock-fish. Love,
quotha--and refuse to hang a cur like that. O dear! O dear! get me
something to put on. One of my best chemises all in rags--and his nasty
teeth in my leg in two places, Babette. Well, well, Mr Vanslyperken,
we shall see--I don't care for their custom. Mr Vanslyperken, you'll
not sit on my sofa again, I can tell you;--hug your nasty cur--quite
good enough for you. Yes, yes, Mr Vanslyperken." By this time the widow had received a fresh supply of linen from
Babette; and as soon as she had put it on she rose from the bed, the
fractured state of which again called forth her indignation. "Thirty-two years have I had this bed, wedded and single, Babette!" exclaimed the widow. "For sixteen years did I sleep on that bed with
the lamented Mr Vandersloosh--for sixteen years have I slept in it, a
lone widow--but never till now did it break down. How am I to sleep
to-night? What am I to do, Babette?" "'Twas well it did break down, ma'am," replied Babette, who was
smoothing down the jagged skin at her ankles; "or we should never have
got the nasty biting brute out of the house." "Very well--very well. Yes, yes, Mr Vanslyperken--marriage, indeed,
I'd as soon marry his cur." "Mein Gott!" exclaimed Babette. "I think, madam, if you did marry, you
would soon find the master as cross as the dog; but I must make this
bed." Babette proceeded to examine the mischief, and found that it was only
the cords which tied the sacking which had given way, and considering
that they had done their office for thirty-two years and the strain
which had been put upon them after so long a period, there was not munch
to complain of. A new cord was procured, and, in a quarter of an hour,
all was right again; and the widow, who had sat in the chair fuming and
blowing off her steam, as soon as Babette had turned down the bed turned
in again, muttering, "Yes, yes, Mr Vanslyperken--marriage indeed. Well, well, we shall see. Stop till to-morrow, Mr Vanslyperken;" and
as Babette has closed the curtains, so will we close this chapter. CHAPTER TWELVE. IN WHICH RESOLUTIONS ARE ENTERED INTO IN ALL QUARTERS, AND JEMMY DUCKS
IS ACCUSED OF MUTINY FOR SINGING A SONG IN A SNOW-STORM. What were the adventures of Snarleyyow after this awkward interference
with his master's speculations upon the widow, until he jumped into the
beef boat to go on board of the cutter, are lost for ever; but it is to
be supposed that he could not have remained the whole night without
making himself disagreeable in some quarter or another. But, as we
before observed, we know nothing about it; and, therefore, may be
excused if we do not tell. The widow Vandersloosh slept but little that night: her soul was full of
vengeance; but although smarting with the imprints of the our's teeth,
still she had an eye to business; the Custom of the crew of the cutter
was not to be despised, and, as she thought of this, she gradually
cooled down. It was not till four o'clock in the morning that she came
to her decision; and it was a very prudent one, which was to demand the
dead body of the dog to be laid at her door before Mr Vanslyperken
should be allowed admittance. This was her right, and if he was
sincere, he would not refuse; if he did refuse, it was not at all clear
that she should lose the custom of the seamen, over the major part of
whom Vanslyperken then appeared to have very little control; and all of
whom, she knew, detested him most cordially, as well as his dog. After
which resolution the widow Vandersloosh fell fast asleep. But we must return on board, where there was almost as much confusion as
there had been on shore. The reappearance of Snarleyyow was considered
supernatural, for Smallbones had distinctly told in what manner he had
tied him up in the bread-bags, and thrown him into the canal. Whisperings and murmurings were heard all round the cutter's decks. Obadiah Coble shrugged up his shoulders, as he took an extra quid.--Dick
Short walked about with lips compressed, more taciturn than ever--Jansen
shook his head, muttering, "Te tog is no tog." --Bill Spurey had to
repeat to the ship's company the legend of his coming on board over and
over again. The only persons who appeared not to have lost their
courage were Jemmy Ducks and poor Smallbones, who had been put in his
hammock to recover him from his refrigeration. The former said, "that
if they were to sail with the devil, it could not be helped, pay and
prize-money would still go on;" and the latter, who had quite recovered
his self-possession, "vowed that dog or devil, he would never cease his
attempts to destroy him--if he was the devil, or one of his imps, it was
his duty as a Christian to oppose him, and he had no chance of better
treatment if he were to remain quiet." The snow-storm continued, and
the men remained below, all but Jemmy Ducks, who leaned against the lee
side of the cutter's mast, and as the snow fell, sang, to a slow air,
the following ditty, it probably being called to his recollection by the
state of the weather. 'Twas at the landing-place that's just below Mount Wyse,
  Poll lean'd against the sentry's box, a tear in both her eyes;
  Her apron twisted round her arms, all for to keep them warm,
  Being a windy Christmas-day, and also a snow-storm. And Bet and Sue
  Both stood there too,
  A shivering by her side,
  They both were dumb,
  And both look'd glum,
  As they watch'd the ebbing tide. Poll put her arms a-kimbo,
  At the admiral's house look'd she,
  To thoughts before in limbo,
  She now a vent gave free. You have sent the ship in a gale to work,
  On a lee shore to be jamm'd,
  I'll give you a piece of my mind, old Turk,
  Port Admiral, you be damned. _Chorus_.--We'll give you a piece of our mind, old Turk,
  Port Admiral, you be damned. Who ever heard in the sarvice of a frigate made to sail
  On Christmas-day, it blowing hard, with sleet, and snow, and hail? I wish I had the fishing of your back that is so bent,
  I'd use the galley poker hot unto your heart's content. Here Bet and Sue
  Are with me too,
  A shivering by my side,
  They both are dumb,
  And both look glum,
  And watch the ebbing tide. Poll put her arms a-kimbo,
  At the admiral's house look'd she,
  To thoughts that were in limbo,
  She now a vent gave free. 