



Produced by J.C. Byers and L.M. Shaf





THE ELUSIVE PIMPERNEL

By Baroness Orczy




Contents


     I.       Paris: 1793
     II. A Retrospect
     III. Ex-Ambassador Chauvelin
     IV. The Richmond Gala
     V.       Sir Percy and His Lady
     VI. For the Poor of Paris
     VII. Premonition
     VIII. The Invitation
     IX. Demoiselle Candeille
     X. Lady Blakeney's Rout
     XI. The Challenge
     XII. Time -- Place -- Conditions
     XIII. Reflections
     XIV. The Ruling Passion
     XV. Farewell
     XVI. The Passport
     XVII. Boulogne
     XVIII. No. 6
     XIX. The Strength of the Weak
     XX. Triumph
     XXI. Suspense
     XXII. Not Death
     XXIII. The Hostage
     XXIV. Colleagues
     XXV. The Unexpected
     XXVI. The Terms of the Bargain
     XXVII. The Decision
     XXVIII. The Midnight Watch
     XXIX. The National Fete
     XXX. The Procession
     XXXI. Final Dispositions
     XXXII. The Letter
     XXXIII. The English Spy
     XXXIV. The Angelus
     XXXV. Marguerite





Chapter I: Paris: 1793

There was not even a reaction. On! ever on! in that wild, surging torrent; sowing the wind of anarchy,
of terrorism, of lust of blood and hate, and reaping a hurricane of
destruction and of horror. On! ever on! France, with Paris and all her children still rushes
blindly, madly on; defies the powerful coalition,--Austria, England,
Spain, Prussia, all joined together to stem the flow of carnage,--defies
the Universe and defies God! Paris this September 1793!--or shall we call it Vendemiaire, Year I.
of the Republic?--call it what we will! Paris! a city of bloodshed, of
humanity in its lowest, most degraded aspect. France herself a gigantic
self-devouring monster, her fairest cities destroyed, Lyons razed to the
ground, Toulon, Marseilles, masses of blackened ruins, her bravest sons
turned to lustful brutes or to abject cowards seeking safety at the cost
of any humiliation. That is thy reward, oh mighty, holy Revolution! apotheosis of equality
and fraternity! grand rival of decadent Christianity. Five weeks now since Marat, the bloodthirsty Friend of the People,
succumbed beneath the sheath-knife of a virgin patriot, a month since
his murderess walked proudly, even enthusiastically, to the guillotine! There has been no reaction--only a great sigh!... Not of content or
satisfied lust, but a sigh such as the man-eating tiger might heave
after his first taste of long-coveted blood. A sigh for more! A king on the scaffold; a queen degraded and abased, awaiting death,
which lingers on the threshold of her infamous prison; eight hundred
scions of ancient houses that have made the history of France; brave
generals, Custine, Blanchelande, Houchard, Beauharnais; worthy patriots,
noble-hearted women, misguided enthusiasts, all by the score and by the
hundred, up the few wooden steps which lead to the guillotine. An achievement of truth! And still that sigh for more! But for the moment,--a few seconds only,--Paris looked round her mighty
self, and thought things over! The man-eating tiger for the space of a sigh licked his powerful jaws
and pondered! Something new!--something wonderful! We have had a new Constitution, a new Justice, new Laws, a new Almanack! What next? Why, obviously!--How comes it that great, intellectual, aesthetic Paris
never thought of such a wonderful thing before? A new religion! Christianity is old and obsolete, priests are aristocrats, wealthy
oppressors of the People, the Church but another form of wanton tyranny. Let us by all means have a new religion. Already something has been done to destroy the old! To destroy! always
to destroy! Churches have been ransacked, altars spoliated, tombs
desecrated, priests and curates murdered; but that is not enough. There must be a new religion; and to attain that there must be a new
God. "Man is a born idol-worshipper." Very well then! let the People have a new religion and a new God. Stay!--Not a God this time!--for God means Majesty, Power, Kingship! everything in fact which the mighty hand of the people of France has
struggled and fought to destroy. Not a God, but a goddess. A goddess! an idol! a toy! since even the man-eating tiger must play
sometimes. Paris wanted a new religion, and a new toy, and grave men, ardent
patriots, mad enthusiasts, sat in the Assembly of the Convention and
seriously discussed the means of providing her with both these things
which she asked for. Chaumette, I think it was, who first solved the difficulty:--Procureur
Chaumette, head of the Paris Municipality, he who had ordered that
the cart which bore the dethroned queen to the squalid prison of the
Conciergerie should be led slowly past her own late palace of the
Tuileries, and should be stopped there just long enough for her to see
and to feel in one grand mental vision all that she had been when she
dwelt there, and all that she now was by the will of the People. Chaumette, as you see, was refined, artistic;--the torture of the fallen
Queen's heart meant more to him than a blow of the guillotine on her
neck. No wonder, therefore, that it was Procureur Chaumette who first
discovered exactly what type of new religion Paris wanted just now. "Let us have a Goddess of Reason," he said, "typified if you will by
the most beautiful woman in Paris. Let us have a feast of the Goddess of
Reason, let there be a pyre of all the gew-gaws which for centuries
have been flaunted by overbearing priests before the eyes of starving
multitudes, let the People rejoice and dance around that funeral pile,
and above it all let the new Goddess tower smiling and triumphant. The
Goddess of Reason! the only deity our new and regenerate France shall
acknowledge throughout the centuries which are to come!" Loud applause greeted the impassioned speech. "A new goddess, by all means!" shouted the grave gentlemen of the
National Assembly, "the Goddess of Reason!" They were all eager that the People should have this toy; something to
play with and to tease, round which to dance the mad Carmagnole and sing
the ever-recurring "Ca ira." Something to distract the minds of the populace from the consequences of
its own deeds, and the helplessness of its legislators. Procureur Chaumette enlarged upon his original idea; like a true artist
who sees the broad effect of a picture at a glance and then fills in the
minute details, he was already busy elaborating his scheme. "The goddess must be beautiful... not too young... Reason can only go
hand in hand with the riper age of second youth... she must be decked
out in classical draperies, severe yet suggestive... she must be rouged
and painted... for she is a mere idol... easily to be appeased with
incense, music and laughter." He was getting deeply interested in his subject, seeking minutiae of
detail, with which to render his theme more and more attractive. But patience was never the characteristic of the Revolutionary
Government of France. The National Assembly soon tired of Chaumette's
dithyrambic utterances. Up aloft on the Mountain, Danton was yawning
like a gigantic leopard. Soon Henriot was on his feet. He had a far finer scheme than that of
the Procureur to place before his colleagues. A grand National fete,
semi-religious in character, but of the new religion which destroyed and
desecrated and never knelt in worship. Citizen Chaumette's Goddess of Reason by all means--Henriot conceded
that the idea was a good one--but the goddess merely as a figure-head:
around her a procession of unfrocked and apostate priests, typifying
the destruction of ancient hierarchy, mules carrying loads of sacred
vessels, the spoils of ten thousand churches of France, and ballet girls
in bacchanalian robes, dancing the Carmagnole around the new deity. Public Prosecutor Foucquier Tinville thought all these schemes very
tame. Why should the People of France be led to think that the era of
a new religion would mean an era of milk and water, of pageants and of
fireworks? Let every man, woman, and child know that this was an era of
blood and again of blood. "Oh!" he exclaimed in passionate accents, "would that all the traitors
in France had but one head, that it might be cut off with one blow of
the guillotine!" He approved of the National fete, but he desired an apotheosis of the
guillotine; he undertook to find ten thousand traitors to be beheaded on
one grand and glorious day: ten thousand heads to adorn the Place de
la Revolution on a great, never-to-be-forgotten evening, after the
guillotine had accomplished this record work. But Collot d'Herbois would also have his say. Collot lately hailed from
the South, with a reputation for ferocity unparalleled throughout the
whole of this horrible decade. He would not be outdone by Tinville's
bloodthirsty schemes. He was the inventor of the "Noyades," which had been so successful at
Lyons and Marseilles. "Why not give the inhabitants of Paris one of
these exhilarating spectacles?" he asked with a coarse, brutal laugh. Then he explained his invention, of which he was inordinately proud. Some two or three hundred traitors, men, women, and children, tied
securely together with ropes in great, human bundles and thrown upon a
barge in the middle of the river: the barge with a hole in her bottom! not too large! only sufficient to cause her to sink slowly, very slowly,
in sight of the crowd of delighted spectators. The cries of the women and children, and even of the men, as they felt
the waters rising and gradually enveloping them, as they felt themselves
powerless even for a fruitless struggle, had proved most exhilarating,
so Citizen Collot declared, to the hearts of the true patriots of Lyons. Thus the discussion continued. This was the era when every man had but one desire, that of outdoing
others in ferocity and brutality, and but one care, that of saving his
own head by threatening that of his neighbour. The great duel between the Titanic leaders of these turbulent parties,
the conflict between hot-headed Danton on the one side and cold-blooded
Robespierre on the other, had only just begun; the great, all-devouring
monsters had dug their claws into one another, but the issue of the
combat was still at stake. Neither of these two giants had taken part in these deliberations anent
the new religion and the new goddess. Danton gave signs now and then
of the greatest impatience, and muttered something about a new form of
tyranny, a new kind of oppression. On the left, Robespierre in immaculate sea-green coat and carefully
gauffered linen was quietly polishing the nails of his right hand
against the palm of his left. But nothing escaped him of what was going on. His ferocious egoism, his
unbounded ambition was even now calculating what advantages to himself
might accrue from this idea of the new religion and of the National
fete, what personal aggrandisement he could derive therefrom. The matter outwardly seemed trivial enough, but already his keen and
calculating mind had seen various side issues which might tend to place
him--Robespierre--on a yet higher and more unassailable pinnacle. Surrounded by those who hated him, those who envied and those who feared
him, he ruled over them all by the strength of his own cold-blooded
savagery, by the resistless power of his merciless cruelty. He cared about nobody but himself, about nothing but his own exaltation:
every action of his career, since he gave up his small practice in a
quiet provincial town in order to throw himself into the wild vortex
of revolutionary politics, every word he ever uttered had but one
aim--Himself. He saw his colleagues and comrades of the old Jacobin Clubs ruthlessly
destroyed around him: friends he had none, and all left him indifferent;
and now he had hundreds of enemies in every assembly and club in Paris,
and these too one by one were being swept up in that wild whirlpool
which they themselves had created. Impassive, serene, always ready with a calm answer, when passion
raged most hotly around him, Robespierre, the most ambitious, most
self-seeking demagogue of his time, had acquired the reputation of being
incorruptible and selfless, an enthusiastic servant of the Republic. The sea-green Incorruptible! And thus whilst others talked and argued, waxed hot over schemes for
processions and pageantry, or loudly denounced the whole matter as the
work of a traitor, he, of the sea-green coat, sat quietly polishing his
nails. But he had already weighed all these discussions in the balance of his
mind, placed them in the crucible of his ambition, and turned them into
something that would benefit him and strengthen his position. Aye! the feast should be brilliant enough! gay or horrible, mad or
fearful, but through it all the people of France must be made to feel
that there was a guiding hand which ruled the destinies of all, a head
which framed the new laws, which consolidated the new religion and
established its new goddess: the Goddess of Reason. Robespierre, her prophet! Chapter II: A Retrospect



The room was close and dark, filled with the smoke from a defective
chimney. A tiny boudoir, once the dainty sanctum of imperious Marie Antoinette; a
faint and ghostly odour, like unto the perfume of spectres, seemed still
to cling to the stained walls, and to the torn Gobelin tapestries. Everywhere lay the impress of a heavy and destroying hand: that of the
great and glorious Revolution. In the mud-soiled corners of the room a few chairs, with brocaded
cushions rudely torn, leant broken and desolate against the walls. A
small footstool, once gilt-legged and satin-covered, had been overturned
and roughly kicked to one side, and there it lay on its back, like some
little animal that had been hurt, stretching its broken limbs upwards,
pathetic to behold. From the delicately wrought Buhl table the silver inlay had been harshly
stripped out of its bed of shell. Across the Lunette, painted by Boucher and representing a chaste
Diana surrounded by a bevy of nymphs, an uncouth hand had scribbled in
charcoal the device of the Revolution: Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite
ou la Mort; whilst, as if to give a crowning point to the work of
destruction and to emphasise its motto, someone had decorated the
portrait of Marie Antoinette with a scarlet cap, and drawn a red and
ominous line across her neck. And at the table two men were sitting in close and eager conclave. Between them a solitary tallow candle, unsnuffed and weirdly flickering,
threw fantastic shadows upon the walls, and illumined with fitful and
uncertain light the faces of the two men. How different were these in character! One, high cheek-boned, with coarse, sensuous lips, and hair elaborately
and carefully powdered; the other pale and thin-lipped, with the keen
eyes of a ferret and a high intellectual forehead, from which the sleek
brown hair was smoothly brushed away. The first of these men was Robespierre, the ruthless and incorruptible
demagogue; the other was Citizen Chauvelin, ex-ambassador of the
Revolutionary Government at the English Court. The hour was late, and the noises from the great, seething city
preparing for sleep came to this remote little apartment in the now
deserted Palace of the Tuileries, merely as a faint and distant echo. It was two days after the Fructidor Riots. Paul Deroulede and the woman
Juliette Marny, both condemned to death, had been literally spirited
away out of the cart which was conveying them from the Hall of Justice
to the Luxembourg Prison, and news had just been received by the
Committee of Public Safety that at Lyons, the Abbe du Mesnil, with the
ci-devant Chevalier d'Egremont and the latter's wife and family, had
effected a miraculous and wholly incomprehensible escape from the
Northern Prison. But this was not all. When Arras fell into the hands of the
Revolutionary army, and a regular cordon was formed round the town, so
that not a single royalist traitor might escape, some three score women
and children, twelve priests, the old aristocrats Chermeuil, Delleville
and Galipaux and many others, managed to pass the barriers and were
never recaptured. Raids were made on the suspected houses: in Paris chiefly where the
escaped prisoners might have found refuge, or better still where their
helpers and rescuers might still be lurking. Foucquier Tinville, Public
Prosecutor, led and conducted these raids, assisted by that bloodthirsty
vampire, Merlin. They heard of a house in the Rue de l'Ancienne Comedie
where an Englishmen was said to have lodged for two days. They demanded admittance, and were taken to the rooms where the
Englishman had stayed. These were bare and squalid, like hundreds of
other rooms in the poorer quarters of Paris. The landlady, toothless and
grimy, had not yet tidied up the one where the Englishman had slept: in
fact she did not know he had left for good. He had paid for his room, a week in advance, and came and went as he
liked, she explained to Citizen Tinville. She never bothered about him,
as he never took a meal in the house, and he was only there two days. She did not know her lodger was English until the day he left. She
thought he was a Frenchman from the South, as he certainly had a
peculiar accent when he spoke. "It was the day of the riots," she continued; "he would go out, and I
told him I did not think that the streets would be safe for a foreigner
like him: for he always wore such very fine clothes, and I made sure
that the starving men and women of Paris would strip them off his back
when their tempers were roused. But he only laughed. He gave me a bit of
paper and told me that if he did not return I might conclude that he had
been killed, and if the Committee of Public Safety asked me questions
about me, I was just to show the bit of paper and there would be no
further trouble." She had talked volubly, more than a little terrified at Merlin's scowls,
and the attitude of Citizen Tinville, who was known to be very severe if
anyone committed any blunders. But the Citizeness--her name was Brogard and her husband's brother kept
an inn in the neighbourhood of Calais--the Citizeness Brogard had a
clear conscience. She held a license from the Committee of Public Safety
for letting apartments, and she had always given due notice to the
Committee of the arrival and departure of her lodgers. The only thing
was that if any lodger paid her more than ordinarily well for the
accommodation and he so desired it, she would send in the notice
conveniently late, and conveniently vaguely worded as to the
description, status and nationality of her more liberal patrons. This had occurred in the case of her recent English visitor. But she did not explain it quite like that to Citizen Foucquier Tinville
or to Citizen Merlin. However, she was rather frightened, and produced the scrap of paper
which the Englishman had left with her, together with the assurance that
when she showed it there would be no further trouble. Tinville took it roughly out of her hand, but would not glance at it. He crushed it into a ball and then Merlin snatched it from him with a
coarse laugh, smoothed out the creases on his knee and studied it for a
moment. There were two lines of what looked like poetry, written in a language
which Merlin did not understand. English, no doubt. But what was perfectly clear, and easily comprehended by any one, was
the little drawing in the corner, done in red ink and representing a
small star-shaped flower. Then Tinville and Merlin both cursed loudly and volubly, and bidding
their men follow them, turned away from the house in the Rue de
l'Ancienne Comedie and left its toothless landlady on her own doorstep
still volubly protesting her patriotism and her desire to serve the
government of the Republic. Tinville and Merlin, however, took the scrap of paper to Citizen
Robespierre, who smiled grimly as he in his turn crushed the offensive
little document in the palm of his well-washed hands. Robespierre did not swear. He never wasted either words or oaths, but he
slipped the bit of paper inside the double lid of his silver snuff box
and then he sent a special messenger to Citizen Chauvelin in the Rue
Corneille, bidding him come that same evening after ten o'clock to room
No. 16 in the ci-devant Palace of the Tuileries. It was now half-past ten, and Chauvelin and Robespierre sat opposite one
another in the ex-boudoir of Queen Marie Antoinette, and between them on
the table, just below the tallow-candle, was a much creased, exceedingly
grimy bit of paper. It had passed through several unclean hands before Citizen Robespierre's
immaculately white fingers had smoothed it out and placed it before the
eyes of ex-Ambassador Chauvelin. The latter, however, was not looking at the paper, he was not even
looking at the pale, cruel face before him. He had closed his eyes and
for a moment had lost sight of the small dark room, of Robespierre's
ruthless gaze, of the mud-stained walls and greasy floor. He was seeing,
as in a bright and sudden vision, the brilliantly-lighted salons of the
Foreign Office in London, with beautiful Marguerite Blakeney gliding
queenlike on the arm of the Prince of Wales. He heard the flutter of many fans, the frou-frou of silk dresses, and
above all the din and sound of dance music, he heard an inane laugh and
an affected voice repeating the doggerel rhyme that was even now written
on that dirty piece of paper which Robespierre had placed before him:

     "We seek him here, and we seek him there,
      Those Frenchies seek him everywhere! Is he in heaven, is he in hell,
      That demmed elusive Pimpernel?" It was a mere flash! One of memory's swiftly effaced pictures, when she
shows us for the fraction of a second, indelible pictures from out our
past. Chauvelin, in that same second, while his own eyes were closed
and Robespierre's fixed upon him, also saw the lonely cliffs of Calais,
heard the same voice singing: "God save the King!" the volley of
musketry, the despairing cries of Marguerite Blakeney; and once again he
felt the keen and bitter pang of complete humiliation and defeat. Chapter III: Ex-Ambassador Chauvelin



Robespierre had quietly waited the while. He was in no hurry: being a
night-bird of very pronounced tastes, he was quite ready to sit here
until the small hours of the morning watching Citizen Chauvelin mentally
writhing in the throes of recollections of the past few months. There was nothing that delighted the sea-green Incorruptible quite so
much as the aspect of a man struggling with a hopeless situation and
feeling a net of intrigue drawing gradually tighter and tighter around
him. Even now, when he saw Chauvelin's smooth forehead wrinkled into an
anxious frown, and his thin hand nervously clutched upon the table,
Robespierre heaved a pleasurable sigh, leaned back in his chair, and
said with an amiable smile:

"You do agree with me, then, Citizen, that the situation has become
intolerable?" Then as Chauvelin did not reply, he continued, speaking more sharply:

"And how terribly galling it all is, when we could have had that man
under the guillotine by now, if you had not blundered so terribly last
year." His voice had become hard and trenchant like that knife to which he was
so ready to make constant allusion. But Chauvelin still remained silent. There was really nothing that he could say. "Citizen Chauvelin, how you must hate that man!" exclaimed Robespierre
at last. Then only did Chauvelin break the silence which up to now he had
appeared to have forced himself to keep. "I do!" he said with unmistakable fervour. "Then why do you not make an effort to retrieve the blunders of last
year?" queried Robespierre blandly. "The Republic has been unusually
patient and long-suffering with you, Citizen Chauvelin. She has taken
your many services and well-known patriotism into consideration. But
you know," he added significantly, "that she has no use for worthless
tools." Then as Chauvelin seemed to have relapsed into sullen silence, he
continued with his original ill-omened blandness:

"Ma foi! Citizen Chauvelin, were I standing in your buckled shoes, I
would not lose another hour in trying to avenge mine own humiliation!" "Have I ever had a chance?" burst out Chauvelin with ill-suppressed
vehemence. "What can I do single-handed? Since war has been declared
I cannot go to England unless the Government will find some official
reason for my doing so. There is much grumbling and wrath over here, and
when that damned Scarlet Pimpernel League has been at work, when a score
or so of valuable prizes have been snatched from under the very knife
of the guillotine, then, there is much gnashing of teeth and useless
cursings, but nothing serious or definite is done to smother those
accursed English flies which come buzzing about our ears." "Nay! you forget, Citizen Chauvelin," retorted Robespierre, "that we of
the Committee of Public Safety are far more helpless than you. You
know the language of these people, we don't. You know their manners and
customs, their ways of thought, the methods they are likely to employ:
we know none of these things. You have seen and spoken to men in England
who are members of that damned League. You have seen the man who is its
leader. We have not." He leant forward on the table and looked more searchingly at the thin,
pallid face before him. "If you named that leader to me now, if you described him, we could
go to work more easily. You could name him, and you would, Citizen
Chauvelin." "I cannot," retorted Chauvelin doggedly. "Ah! but I think you could. But there! I do not blame your silence. You
would wish to reap the reward of your own victory, to be the instrument
of your own revenge. Passions! I think it natural! But in the name of
your own safety, Citizen, do not be too greedy with your secret. If the
man is known to you, find him again, find him, lure him to France! We
want him--the people want him! And if the people do not get what they
want, they will turn on those who have withheld their prey." "I understand, Citizen, that your own safety and that of your government
is involved in this renewed attempt to capture the Scarlet Pimpernel,"
retorted Chauvelin drily. "And your head, Citizen Chauvelin," concluded Robespierre. "Nay! I know that well enough, and you may believe me, and you will,
Citizen, when I say that I care but little about that. The question is,
if I am to lure that man to France what will you and your government do
to help me?" "Everything," replied Robespierre, "provided you have a definite plan
and a definite purpose. "I have both. But I must go to England in, at least, a semi-official
capacity. I can do nothing if I am to hide in disguise in out-of-the-way
corners." "That is easily done. There has been some talk with the British
authorities anent the security and welfare of peaceful French subjects
settled in England. After a good deal of correspondence they have
suggested our sending a semi-official representative over there to look
after the interests of our own people commercially and financially. We can easily send you over in that capacity if it would suit your
purpose." "Admirably. I have only need of a cloak. That one will do as well as
another." "Is that all?" "Not quite. I have several plans in my head, and I must know that I
am fully trusted. Above all, I must have power--decisive, absolute,
illimitable power." There was nothing of the weakling about this small, sable-clad man, who
looked the redoubtable Jacobin leader straight in the face and brought a
firm fist resolutely down upon the table before him. Robespierre paused
a while ere he replied; he was eying the other man keenly, trying to
read if behind that earnest, frowning brow there did not lurk some
selfish, ulterior motive along with that demand for absolute power. But Chauvelin did not flinch beneath that gaze which could make every
cheek in France blanch with unnamed terror, and after that slight moment
of hesitation Robespierre said quietly:

"You shall have the complete power of a military dictator in every town
or borough of France which you may visit. The Revolutionary Government
shall create you, before you start for England, Supreme Head of all the
Sub-Committees of Public Safety. This will mean that in the name of the
safety of the Republic every order given by you, of whatsoever nature
it might be, must be obeyed implicitly under pain of an arraignment for
treason." Chauvelin sighed a quick, sharp sigh of intense satisfaction, which he
did not even attempt to disguise before Robespierre. "I shall want agents," he said, "or shall we say spies? and, of course,
money." "You shall have both. We keep a very efficient secret service in
England and they do a great deal of good over there. There is much
dissatisfaction in their Midland counties--you remember the Birmingham
riots? They were chiefly the work of our own spies. Then you know
Candeille, the actress? She had found her way among some of those
circles in London who have what they call liberal tendencies. I believe
they are called Whigs. Funny name, isn't it? It means perruque, I think. Candeille has given charity performances in aid of our Paris poor,
in one or two of these Whig clubs, and incidentally she has been very
useful to us." "A woman is always useful in such cases. I shall seek out the Citizeness
Candeille." "And if she renders you useful assistance, I think I can offer her
what should prove a tempting prize. Women are so vain!" he added,
contemplating with rapt attention the enamel-like polish on his
finger-nails. "There is a vacancy in the Maison Moliere. Or--what might
prove more attractive still--in connection with the proposed National
fete, and the new religion for the people, we have not yet chosen
a Goddess of Reason. That should appeal to any feminine mind. The
impersonation of a goddess, with processions, pageants, and the rest...
Great importance and prominence given to one personality.... What
say you, Citizen? If you really have need of a woman for the furtherance
of your plans, you have that at your disposal which may enhance her
zeal." "I thank you, Citizen," rejoined Chauvelin calmly. "I always entertained
a hope that some day the Revolutionary Government would call again on
my services. I admit that I failed last year. The Englishman is
resourceful. He has wits and he is very rich. He would not have
succeeded, I think, but for his money--and corruption and bribery are
rife in Paris and on our coasts. He slipped through my fingers at the
very moment when I thought that I held him most securely. I do admit all
that, but I am prepared to redeem my failure of last year, and... there
is nothing more to discuss.--I am ready to start." He looked round for his cloak and hat, and quietly readjusted the set
of his neck-tie. But Robespierre detained him a while longer: that
born mountebank, born torturer of the souls of men, had not gloated
sufficiently yet on the agony of mind of this fellow-man. Chauvelin had always been trusted and respected. His services in
connection with the foreign affairs of the Revolutionary Government had
been invaluable, both before and since the beginning of the European
War. At one time he formed part of that merciless decemvirate
which--with Robespierre at its head--meant to govern France by laws of
bloodshed and of unparalleled ferocity. But the sea-green Incorruptible had since tired of him, then had
endeavoured to push him on one side, for Chauvelin was keen and clever,
and, moreover, he possessed all those qualities of selfless patriotism
which were so conspicuously lacking in Robespierre. His failure in bringing that interfering Scarlet Pimpernel to justice
and the guillotine had completed Chauvelin's downfall. Though not
otherwise molested, he had been left to moulder in obscurity during this
past year. He would soon enough have been completely forgotten. Now he was not only to be given one more chance to regain public favour,
but he had demanded powers which in consideration of the aim in
view, Robespierre himself could not refuse to grant him. But the
Incorruptible, ever envious and jealous, would not allow him to exult
too soon. With characteristic blandness he seemed to be entering into all
Chauvelin's schemes, to be helping in every way he could, for there
was something at the back of his mind which he meant to say to the
ex-ambassador, before the latter took his leave: something which
would show him that he was but on trial once again, and which would
demonstrate to him with perfect clearness that over him there hovered
the all-powerful hand of a master. "You have but to name the sum you want, Citizen Chauvelin," said the
Incorruptible, with an encouraging smile, "the government will not stint
you, and you shall not fail for lack of authority or for lack of funds." "It is pleasant to hear that the government has such uncounted wealth,"
remarked Chauvelin with dry sarcasm. "Oh! the last few weeks have been very profitable," retorted
Robespierre; "we have confiscated money and jewels from emigrant
royalists to the tune of several million francs. You remember the
traitor Juliette Marny, who escape to England lately? Well! her mother's
jewels and quite a good deal of gold were discovered by one of our most
able spies to be under the care of a certain Abbe Foucquet, a calotin
from Boulogne--devoted to the family, so it seems." "Yes?" queried Chauvelin indifferently. "Our men seized the jewels and gold, that is all. We don't know yet what
we mean to do with the priest. The fisherfolk of Boulogne like him, and
we can lay our hands on him at any time, if we want his old head for
the guillotine. But the jewels were worth having. There's a historic
necklace worth half a million at least." "Could I have it?" asked Chauvelin. Robespierre laughed and shrugged his shoulders. "You said it belonged to the Marny family," continued the ex-ambassador. "Juliette Marny is in England. I might meet her. I cannot tell what may
happen: but I feel that the historic necklace might prove useful. Just
as you please," he added with renewed indifference. "It was a thought
that flashed through my mind when you spoke--nothing more." "And to show you how thoroughly the government trusts you, Citizen
Chauvelin," replied Robespierre with perfect urbanity, "I will myself
direct that the Marny necklace be placed unreservedly in your hands; and
a sum of fifty thousand francs for your expenses in England. You see,"
he added blandly, "we give you no excuse for a second failure." "I need none," retorted Chauvelin drily, as he finally rose from his
seat, with a sigh of satisfaction that this interview was ended at last. But Robespierre too had risen, and pushing his chair aside he took
a step or two towards Chauvelin. He was a much taller man than the
ex-ambassador. Spare and gaunt, he had a very upright bearing, and
in the uncertain light of the candle he seemed to tower strangely
and weirdly above the other man: the pale hue of his coat, his
light-coloured hair, the whiteness of his linen, all helped to give to
his appearance at that moment a curious spectral effect. Chauvelin somehow felt an unpleasant shiver running down his spine as
Robespierre, perfectly urbane and gentle in his manner, placed a long,
bony hand upon his shoulder. "Citizen Chauvelin," said the Incorruptible, with some degree of
dignified solemnity, "meseems that we very quickly understood one
another this evening. Your own conscience, no doubt, gave you a
premonition of what the purport of my summons to you would be. You say
that you always hoped the Revolutionary Government would give you one
great chance to redeem your failure of last year. I, for one, always
intended that you should have that chance, for I saw, perhaps, just
a little deeper into your heart than my colleagues. I saw not only
enthusiasm for the cause of the People of France, not only abhorrence
for the enemy of your country, I saw a purely personal and deadly hate
of an individual man--the unknown and mysterious Englishman who proved
too clever for you last year. And because I believe that hatred will
prove sharper and more far-seeing than selfless patriotism, therefore I
urged the Committee of Public Safety to allow you to work out your own
revenge, and thereby to serve your country more effectually than any
other--perhaps more pure-minded patriot would do. You go to England
well-provided with all that is necessary for the success of your plans,
for the accomplishment of your own personal vengeance. The Revolutionary
Government will help you with money, passports, safe conducts; it
places its spies and agents at your disposal. It gives you practically
unlimited power, wherever you may go. It will not enquire into your
motives, nor yet your means, so long as these lead to success. But
private vengeance or patriotism, whatever may actuate you, we here in
France demand you deliver into our hands the man who is known in two
countries as the Scarlet Pimpernel! We want him alive if possible,
or dead if it must be so, and we want as many of his henchmen as will
follow him to the guillotine. Get them to France, and we'll know how to
deal with them, and let the whole of Europe be damned." He paused for a while, his hand still resting on Chauvelin's shoulder,
his pale green eyes holding those of the other man as if in a trance. But Chauvelin neither stirred nor spoke. His triumph left him quite
calm; his fertile brain was already busy with his plans. There was no
room for fear in his heart, and it was without the slightest tremor that
he waited for the conclusion of Robespierre's oration. "Perhaps, Citizen Chauvelin," said the latter at last, "you have already
guessed what there is left for me to say. But lest there should remain
in your mind one faint glimmer of doubt or of hope, let me tell you
this. The Revolutionary Government gives you this chance of redeeming
your failure, but this one only; if you fail again, your outraged
country will know neither pardon nor mercy. Whether you return to France
or remain in England, whether you travel North, South, East or West,
cross the Oceans, or traverse the Alps, the hand of an avenging People
will be upon you. Your second failure will be punished by death,
wherever you may be, either by the guillotine, if you are in France, or
if you seek refuge elsewhere, then by the hand of an assassin. "Look to it, Citizen Chauvelin! for there will be no escape this time,
not even if the mightiest tyrant on earth tried to protect you, not even
if you succeeded in building up an empire and placing yourself upon a
throne." His thin, strident voice echoed weirdly in the small, close boudoir. Chauvelin made no reply. There was nothing that he could say. All that
Robespierre had put so emphatically before him, he had fully realised,
even whilst he was forming his most daring plans. It was an "either--or" this time, uttered to HIM now. He thought again
of Marguerite Blakeney, and the terrible alternative he had put before
HER less than a year ago. Well! he was prepared to take the risk. He would not fail again. He was
going to England under more favourable conditions this time. He knew who
the man was, whom he was bidden to lure to France and to death. And he returned Robespierre's threatening gaze boldly and unflinchingly;
then he prepared to go. He took up his hat and cloak, opened the door
and peered for a moment into the dark corridor, wherein, in the far
distance, the steps of a solitary sentinel could be faintly heard: he
put on his hat, turned to look once more into the room where Robespierre
stood quietly watching him, and went his way. Chapter IV: The Richmond Gala



It was perhaps the most brilliant September ever known in England, where
the last days of dying summer are nearly always golden and beautiful. Strange that in this country, where that same season is so peculiarly
radiant with a glory all its own, there should be no special expression
in the language with which to accurately name it. So we needs must call it "fin d'ete": the ending of the summer; not the
absolute end, nor yet the ultimate departure, but the tender lingering
of a friend obliged to leave us anon, yet who fain would steal a day
here and there, a week or so in which to stay with us: who would make
that last pathetic farewell of his endure a little while longer still,
and brings forth in gorgeous array for our final gaze all that he has
which is most luxuriant, most desirable, most worthy of regret. And in this year of grace 1793, departing summer had lavished the
treasures of her palette upon woodland and river banks; had tinged the
once crude green of larch and elm with a tender hue of gold, had brushed
the oaks with tones of warm russet, and put patches of sienna and
crimson on the beech. In the gardens the roses were still in bloom, not the delicate blush
or lemon ones of June, nor yet the pale Banksias and climbers, but the
full-blooded red roses of late summer, and deep-coloured apricot ones,
with crinkled outside leaves faintly kissed by the frosty dew. In
sheltered spots the purple clematis still lingered, whilst the dahlias,
brilliant of hue, seemed overbearing in their gorgeous insolence,
flaunting their crudely colored petals against sober backgrounds of
mellow leaves, or the dull, mossy tones of ancient, encircling walls. The Gala had always been held about the end of September. The weather,
on the riverside, was most dependable then, and there was always
sufficient sunshine as an excuse for bringing out Madam's last new
muslin gown, or her pale-coloured quilted petticoat. Then the ground
was dry and hard, good alike for walking and for setting up tents and
booths. And of these there was of a truth a most goodly array this year:
mountebanks and jugglers from every corner of the world, so it seemed,
for there was a man with a face as black as my lord's tricorne, and
another with such flat yellow cheeks as made one think of batter
pudding, and spring aconite, of eggs and other very yellow things. There was a tent wherein dogs--all sorts of dogs, big, little, black,
white or tan--did things which no Christian with respect for his own
backbone would have dared to perform, and another where a weird-faced
old man made bean-stalks and walking sticks, coins of the realm and lace
kerchiefs vanish into thin air. And as it was nice and hot one could sit out upon the green and listen
to the strains of the band, which discoursed sweet music, and watch the
young people tread a measure on the sward. The quality had not yet arrived: for humbler folk had partaken of very
early dinner so as to get plenty of fun, and long hours of delight for
the sixpenny toll demanded at the gates. There was so much to see and so much to do: games of bowls on the
green, and a beautiful Aunt Sally, there was a skittle alley, and two
merry-go-rounds: there were performing monkeys and dancing bears, a
woman so fat that three men with arms outstretched could not get round
her, and a man so thin that he could put a lady's bracelet round his
neck and her garter around his waist. There were some funny little dwarfs with pinched faces and a knowing
manner, and a giant come all the way from Russia--so 'twas said. The mechanical toys too were a great attraction. You dropped a penny
into a little slit in a box and a doll would begin to dance and play the
fiddle: and there was the Magic Mill, where for another modest copper
a row of tiny figures, wrinkled and old and dressed in the shabbiest of
rags, marched in weary procession up a flight of steps into the Mill,
only to emerge again the next moment at a further door of this wonderful
building looking young and gay, dressed in gorgeous finery and tripping
a dance measure as they descended some steps and were finally lost to
view. But what was most wonderful of all and collected the goodliest crowd of
gazers and the largest amount of coins, was a miniature representation
of what was going on in France even at this very moment. And you could not help but be convinced of the truth of it all, so
cleverly was it done. There was a background of houses and a very
red-looking sky. "Too red!" some people said, but were immediately
quashed by the dictum of the wise, that the sky represented a sunset, as
anyone who looked could see. Then there were a number of little figures,
no taller than your hand, but with little wooden faces and arms and
legs, just beautifully made little dolls, and these were dressed in
kirtles and breeches--all rags mostly--and little coats and wooden
shoes. They were massed together in groups with their arms all turned
upwards. And in the center of this little stage on an elevated platform there
were miniature wooden posts close together, and with a long flat board
at right angles at the foot of the posts, and all painted a bright red. At the further end of the boards was a miniature basket, and between the
two posts, at the top, was a miniature knife which ran up and down in a
groove and was drawn by a miniature pulley. Folk who knew said that this
was a model of a guillotine. And lo and behold! when you dropped a penny into a slot just below the
wooden stage, the crowd of little figures started waving their arms up
and down, and another little doll would ascend the elevated platform and
lie down on the red board at the foot of the wooden posts. Then a figure
dressed in brilliant scarlet put out an arm presumably to touch the
pulley, and the tiny knife would rattle down on to the poor little
reclining doll's neck, and its head would roll off into the basket
beyond. Then there was a loud whirr of wheels, a buzz of internal mechanism, and
all the little figures would stop dead with arms outstretched, whilst
the beheaded doll rolled off the board and was lost to view, no doubt
preparatory to going through the same gruesome pantomime again. It was very thrilling, and very terrible: a certain air of hushed awe
reigned in the booth where this mechanical wonder was displayed. The booth itself stood in a secluded portion of the grounds, far from
the toll gates, and the band stand and the noise of the merry-go-round,
and there were great texts, written in red letters on a black ground,
pinned all along the walls. "Please spare a copper for the starving poor of Paris." A lady, dressed in grey quilted petticoat and pretty grey and black
striped paniers, could be seen walking in the booth from time to time,
then disappearing through a partition beyond. She would emerge again
presently carrying an embroidered reticule, and would wander round among
the crowd, holding out the bag by its chain, and repeating in tones
of somewhat monotonous appeal: "For the starving poor of Paris, if you
please!" She had fine, dark eyes, rather narrow and tending upwards at the outer
corners, which gave her face a not altogether pleasant expression. Still, they were fine eyes, and when she went round soliciting alms,
most of the men put a hand into their breeches pocket and dropped a coin
into her embroidered reticule. She said the word "poor" in rather a funny way, rolling the "r" at the
end, and she also said "please" as if it were spelt with a long line of
"e's," and so it was concluded that she was French and was begging for
her poorer sisters. At stated intervals during the day, the mechanical
toy was rolled into a corner, and the lady in grey stood up on a
platform and sang queer little songs, the words of which nobody could
understand. "Il etait une bergere et ron et petit pataplon...."

But it all left an impression of sadness and of suppressed awe upon the
minds and susceptibilities of the worthy Richmond yokels come with
their wives or sweethearts to enjoy the fun of the fair, and gladly
did everyone emerge out of that melancholy booth into the sunshine, the
brightness and the noise. "Lud! but she do give me the creeps," said Mistress Polly, the pretty
barmaid from the Bell Inn, down by the river. "And I must say that I
don't see why we English folk should send our hard-earned pennies to
those murdering ruffians over the water. Bein' starving so to speak,
don't make a murderer a better man if he goes on murdering," she added
with undisputable if ungrammatical logic. "Come, let's look at something
more cheerful now." And without waiting for anyone else's assent, she turned towards the
more lively portion of the grounds, closely followed by a ruddy-faced,
somewhat sheepish-looking youth, who very obviously was her attendant
swain. It was getting on for three o-clock now, and the quality were beginning
to arrive. Lord Anthony Dewhurst was already there, chucking every
pretty girl under the chin, to the annoyance of her beau. Ladies were
arriving all the time, and the humbler feminine hearts were constantly
set a-flutter at sight of rich brocaded gowns, and the new Charlottes,
all crinkled velvet and soft marabout, which were so becoming to the
pretty faces beneath. There was incessant and loud talking and chattering, with here and there
the shriller tones of a French voice being distinctly noticeable in the
din. There were a good many French ladies and gentlemen present, easily
recognisable, even in the distance, for their clothes were of more sober
hue and of lesser richness than those of their English compeers. But they were great lords and ladies, nevertheless, Dukes and Duchesses
and Countesses, come to England for fear of being murdered by those
devils in their own country. Richmond was full of them just now, as they
were made right welcome both at the Palace and at the magnificent home
of Sir Percy and Lady Blakeney. Ah! here comes Sir Andrew Ffoulkes with his lady! so pretty and
dainty does she look, like a little china doll, in her new-fashioned
short-waisted gown: her brown hair in soft waves above her smooth
forehead, her great, hazel eyes fixed in unaffected admiration on the
gallant husband by her side. "No wonder she dotes on him!" sighed pretty Mistress Polly after she had
bobbed her curtsy to my lady. "The brave deeds he did for love of her! Rescued her from those murderers over in France and brought her to
England safe and sound, having fought no end of them single-handed, so
I've beard it said. Have you not, Master Thomas Jezzard?" And she looked defiantly at her meek-looking cavalier. "Bah!" replied Master Thomas with quite unusual vehemence in response to
the disparaging look in her brown eyes, "'Tis not he who did it all,
as you well know, Mistress Polly. Sir Andrew Ffoulkes is a gallant
gentleman, you may take your Bible oath on that, but he that fights
the murdering frogeaters single-handed is he whom they call The Scarlet
Pimpernel: the bravest gentleman in all the world." Then, as at mention of the national hero, he thought that he detected in
Mistress Polly's eyes an enthusiasm which he could not very well ascribe
to his own individuality, he added with some pique:

"But they do say that this same Scarlet Pimpernel is mightily
ill-favoured, and that's why no one ever sees him. They say he is fit to
scare the crows away and that no Frenchy can look twice at his face, for
it's so ugly, and so they let him get out of the country, rather than
look at him again." "Then they do say a mighty lot of nonsense," retorted Mistress Polly,
with a shrug of her pretty shoulders, "and if that be so, then why don't
you go over to France and join hands with the Scarlet Pimpernel? I'll
warrant no Frenchman'll want to look twice at your face." A chorus of laughter greeted this sally, for the two young people had
in the meanwhile been joined by several of their friends, and now formed
part of a merry group near the band, some sitting, others standing, but
all bent on seeing as much as there was to see in Richmond Gala this
day. There was Johnny Cullen, the grocer's apprentice from Twickenham,
and Ursula Quekett, the baker's daughter, and several "young 'uns" from
the neighbourhood, as well as some older folk. And all of them enjoyed a joke when they heard one and thought Mistress
Polly's retort mightily smart. But then Mistress Polly was possessed of
two hundred pounds, all her own, left to her by her grandmother, and
on the strength of this extensive fortune had acquired a reputation for
beauty and wit not easily accorded to a wench that had been penniless. But Mistress Polly was also very kind-hearted. She loved to tease Master
Jezzard, who was an indefatigable hanger-on at her pretty skirts, and
whose easy conquest had rendered her somewhat contemptuous, but at the
look of perplexed annoyance and bewildered distress in the lad's face,
her better nature soon got the upper hand. She realized that her remark
had been unwarrantably spiteful, and wishing to make atonement, she
said with a touch of coquetry which quickly spread balm over the honest
yokel's injured vanity:

"La! Master Jezzard, you do seem to make a body say some queer things. But there! you must own 'tis mighty funny about that Scarlet Pimpernel!" she added, appealing to the company in general, just as if Master
Jezzard had been disputing the fact. "Why won't he let anyone see who he
is? And those who know him won't tell. Now I have it for a fact from
my lady's own maid Lucy, that the young lady as is stopping at Lady
Blakeney's house has actually spoken to the man. She came over from
France, come a fortnight to-morrow; she and the gentleman they call
Mossoo Deroulede. They both saw the Scarlet Pimpernel and spoke to him. He brought them over from France. Then why won't they say?" "Say what?" commented Johnny Cullen, the apprentice. "Who this mysterious Scarlet Pimpernel is." "Perhaps he isn't," said old Clutterbuck, who was clerk of the vestry at
the church of St. John's the Evangelist. "Yes!" he added sententiously, for he was fond of his own sayings and
usually liked to repeat them before he had quite done with them, "that's
it, you may be sure. Perhaps he isn't." "What do you mean, Master Clutterbuck?" asked Ursula Quekett, for she
knew the old man liked to explain his wise saws, and as she wanted to
marry his son, she indulged him whenever she could. "What do you mean? He isn't what?" "He isn't. That's all," explained Clutterbuck with vague solemnity. Then seeing that he had gained the attention of the little party round
him, he condescended to come to more logical phraseology. "I mean, that perhaps we must not ask, 'who IS this mysterious Scarlet
Pimpernel?' but 'who WAS that poor and unfortunate gentleman?'" "Then you think..." suggested Mistress Polly, who felt unaccountably
low-spirited at this oratorical pronouncement. "I have it for a fact," said Mr. Clutterbuck solemnly, "that he whom
they call the Scarlet Pimpernel no longer exists now: that he was
collared by the Frenchies, as far back as last fall, and in the language
of the poets, has never been heard of no more." Mr. Clutterbuck was very fond of quoting from the works of certain
writers whose names he never mentioned, but who went by the poetical
generality of "the poets." Whenever he made use of phrases which he was
supposed to derive from these great and unnamed authors, he solemnly
and mechanically raised his hat, as a tribute of respect to these giant
minds. "You think that The Scarlet Pimpernel is dead, Mr. Clutterbuck? That
those horrible Frenchies murdered him? Surely you don't mean that?" sighed Mistress Polly ruefully. Mr. Clutterbuck put his hand up to his hat, preparatory no doubt to
making another appeal to the mysterious poets, but was interrupted in
the very act of uttering great thoughts by a loud and prolonged laugh
which came echoing from a distant corner of the grounds. "Lud! but I'd know that laugh anywhere," said Mistress Quekett, whilst
all eyes were turned in the direction whence the merry noise had come. Half a head taller than any of his friends around him, his lazy blue
eyes scanning from beneath their drooping lids the motley throng around
him, stood Sir Percy Blakeney, the centre of a gaily-dressed little
group which seemingly had just crossed the toll-gate. "A fine specimen of a man, for sure," remarked Johnnie Cullen, the
apprentice. "Aye! you may take your Bible oath on that!" sighed Mistress Polly, who
was inclined to be sentimental. "Speakin' as the poets," pronounced Mr. Clutterbuck sententiously,
"inches don't make a man." "Nor fine clothes neither," added Master Jezzard, who did not approve of
Mistress Polly's sentimental sigh. "There's my lady!" gasped Miss Barbara suddenly, clutching Master
Clutterbuck's arm vigorously. "Lud! but she is beautiful to-day!" Beautiful indeed, and radiant with youth and happiness, Marguerite
Blakeney had just gone through the gates and was walking along the sward
towards the band stand. She was dressed in clinging robes of shimmery
green texture, the new-fashioned high-waisted effect suiting her
graceful figure to perfection. The large Charlotte, made of velvet to
match the gown, cast a deep shadow over the upper part of her face, and
gave a peculiar softness to the outline of her forehead and cheeks. Long lace mittens covered her arms and hands and a scarf of diaphanous
material edged with dull gold hung loosely around her shoulders. Yes! she was beautiful! No captious chronicler has ever denied that! and
no one who knew her before, and who saw her again on this late summer's
afternoon, could fail to mark the additional charm of her magnetic
personality. There was a tenderness in her face as she turned her head
to and fro, a joy of living in her eyes that was quite irresistibly
fascinating. Just now she was talking animatedly with the young girl who was walking
beside her, and laughing merrily the while:

"Nay! we'll find your Paul, never fear! Lud! child, have you forgotten
he is in England now, and that there's no fear of his being kidnapped
here on the green in broad daylight." The young girl gave a slight shudder and her child-like face became a
shade paler than before. Marguerite took her hand and gave it a kindly
pressure. Juliette Marny, but lately come to England, saved from under
the very knife of the guillotine, by a timely and daring rescue, could
scarcely believe as yet that she and the man she loved were really out
of danger. "There is Monsieur Deroulede," said Marguerite after a slight pause,
giving the young girl time to recover herself and pointing to a group of
men close by. "He is among friends, as you see." They made such a pretty picture, these two women, as they stood together
for a moment on the green with the brilliant September sun throwing
golden reflections and luminous shadows on their slender forms. Marguerite, tall and queen-like in her rich gown, and costly jewels,
wearing with glorious pride the invisible crown of happy wifehood:
Juliette, slim and girlish, dressed all in white, with a soft, straw
hat on her fair curls, and bearing on an otherwise young and child-like
face, the hard imprint of the terrible sufferings she had undergone, of
the deathly moral battle her tender soul had had to fight. Soon a group of friends joined them. Paul Deroulede among these, also
Sir Andrew and Lady Ffoulkes, and strolling slowly towards them, his
hands buried in the pockets of his fine cloth breeches, his broad
shoulders set to advantage in a coat of immaculate cut, priceless lace
ruffles at neck and wrist, came the inimitable Sir Percy. Chapter V: Sir Percy and His Lady



To all appearances he had not changed since those early days of
matrimony, when his young wife dazzled London society by her wit and by
her beauty, and he was one of the many satellites that helped to bring
into bold relief the brilliance of her presence, of her sallies and of
her smiles. His friends alone, mayhap--and of these only an intimate few--had
understood that beneath that self-same lazy manner, those shy and
awkward ways, that half-inane, half-cynical laugh, there now lurked an
undercurrent of tender and passionate happiness. That Lady Blakeney was in love with her own husband, nobody could fail
to see, and in the more frivolous cliques of fashionable London this
extraordinary phenomenon had oft been eagerly discussed. "A monstrous thing, of a truth, for a woman of fashion to adore her own
husband!" was the universal pronouncement of the gaily-decked little
world that centred around Carlton House and Ranelagh. Not that Sir Percy Blakeney was unpopular with the fair sex. Far be it
from the veracious chronicler's mind even to suggest such a thing. The
ladies would have voted any gathering dull if Sir Percy's witty sallies
did not ring from end to end of the dancing hall, if his new satin coat
and 'broidered waistcoat did not call for comment or admiration. But that was the frivolous set, to which Lady Blakeney had never
belonged. It was well known that she had always viewed her good-natured husband
as the most willing and most natural butt for her caustic wit; she still
was fond of aiming a shaft or two at him, and he was still equally ready
to let the shaft glance harmlessly against the flawless shield of his
own imperturbable good humour, but now, contrary to all precedent, to
all usages and customs of London society, Marguerite seldom was seen at
routs or at the opera without her husband; she accompanied him to all
the races, and even one night--oh horror!--had danced the gavotte with
him. Society shuddered and wondered! tried to put Lady Blakeney's sudden
infatuation down to foreign eccentricity, and finally consoled itself
with the thought that after all this nonsense could not last, and that
she was too clever a woman and he too perfect a gentleman to keep up
this abnormal state of things for any length of time. In the meanwhile, the ladies averred that this matrimonial love was a
very one-sided affair. No one could assert that Sir Percy was anything
but politely indifferent to his wife's obvious attentions. His lazy eyes
never once lighted up when she entered a ball-room, and there were those
who knew for a fact that her ladyship spent many lonely days in her
beautiful home at Richmond whilst her lord and master absented himself
with persistent if unchivalrous regularity. His presence at the Gala had been a surprise to everyone, for all
thought him still away, fishing in Scotland or shooting in Yorkshire,
anywhere save close to the apron strings of his doting wife. He himself
seemed conscious of the fact that he had not been expected at this
end-of-summer fete, for as he strolled forward to meet his wife and
Juliette Marny, and acknowledge with a bow here and a nod there the many
greetings from subordinates and friends, there was quite an apologetic
air about his good-looking face, and an obvious shyness in his smile. But Marguerite gave a happy little laugh when she saw him coming towards
her. "Oh, Sir Percy!" she said gaily, "and pray have you seen the show? I vow
'tis the maddest, merriest throng I've seen for many a day. Nay! but for
the sighs and shudders of my poor little Juliette, I should be enjoying
one of the liveliest days of my life." She patted Juliette's arm affectionately. "Do not shame me before Sir Percy," murmured the young girl, casting shy
glances at the elegant cavalier before her, vainly trying to find in the
indolent, foppish personality of this society butterfly, some trace of
the daring man of action, the bold adventurer who had snatched her and
her lover from out the very tumbril that bore them both to death. "I know I ought to be gay," she continued with an attempt at a smile, "I
ought to forget everything, save what I owe to..."

Sir Percy's laugh broke in on her half-finished sentence. "Lud! and to think of all that I ought not to forget!" he said loudly. "Tony here has been clamouring for iced punch this last half-hour, and I
promised to find a booth wherein the noble liquid is properly dispensed. Within half an hour from now His Royal Highness will be here. I assure
you, Mlle. Juliette, that from that time onwards I have to endure the
qualms of the damned, for the heir to Great Britain's throne always
contrives to be thirsty when I am satiated, which is Tantalus' torture
magnified a thousandfold, or to be satiated when my parched palate most
requires solace; in either case I am a most pitiable man." "In either case you contrive to talk a deal of nonsense, Sir Percy,"
said Marguerite gaily. "What else would your ladyship have me do this lazy, hot afternoon?" "Come and view the booths with me," she said. "I am dying for a sight of
the fat woman and the lean man, the pig-faced child, the dwarfs and
the giants. There! Monsieur Deroulede," she added, turning to the young
Frenchman who was standing close beside her, "take Mlle. Juliette to
hear the clavecin players. I vow she is tired of my company." The gaily-dressed group was breaking up. Juliette and Paul Deroulede
were only too ready to stroll off arm-in-arm together, and Sir Andrew
Ffoulkes was ever in attendance on his young wife. For one moment Marguerite caught her husband's eye. No one was within
earshot. "Percy," she said. "Yes, m'dear." "When did you return?" "Early this morning." "You crossed over from Calais?" "From Boulogne." "Why did you not let me know sooner?" "I could not, dear. I arrived at my lodgings in town, looking a
disgusting object.... I could not appear before you until I had washed
some of the French mud from off my person. Then His Royal Highness
demanded my presence. He wanted news of the Duchesse de Verneuil, whom I
had the honour of escorting over from France. By the time I had told him
all that he wished to hear, there was no chance of finding you at home,
and I thought I should see you here." Marguerite said nothing for a moment, but her foot impatiently tapped
the ground, and her fingers were fidgeting with the gold fringe of her
scarf. The look of joy, of exquisite happiness, seemed to have suddenly
vanished from her face; there was a deep furrow between her brows. She sighed a short, sharp sigh, and cast a rapid upward glance at her
husband. He was looking down at her, smiling good-naturedly, a trifle
sarcastically perhaps, and the frown on her face deepened. "Percy," she said abruptly. "Yes, m'dear." "These anxieties are terrible to bear. You have been twice over to
France within the last month, dealing with your life as lightly as if
it did not now belong to me. When will you give up these mad adventures,
and leave others to fight their own battles and to save their own lives
as best they may?" She had spoken with increased vehemence, although her voice was scarce
raised above a whisper. Even in her sudden, passionate anger she was on
her guard not to betray his secret. He did not reply immediately, but
seemed to be studying the beautiful face on which heartbroken anxiety
was now distinctly imprinted. Then he turned and looked at the solitary booth in the distance, across
the frontal of which a large placard had been recently affixed, bearing
the words: "Come and see the true representation of the guillotine!" In front of the booth a man dressed in ragged breeches, with Phrygian
cap on his head, adorned with a tri-colour cockade, was vigorously
beating a drum, shouting volubly the while:

"Come in and see, come in and see! the only realistic presentation of
the original guillotine. Hundreds perish in Paris every day! Come and
see! Come and see! the perfectly vivid performance of what goes on
hourly in Paris at the present moment." Marguerite had followed the direction of Sir Percy's eyes. She too was
looking at the booth, she heard the man's monotonous, raucous cries. She
gave a slight shudder and once more looked imploringly at her husband. His face--though outwardly as lazy and calm as before--had a strange set
look about the mouth and firm jaw, and his slender hand, the hand of a
dandy accustomed to handle cards and dice and to play lightly with the
foils, was clutched tightly beneath the folds of the priceless Mechlin
frills. It was but a momentary stiffening of the whole powerful frame, an
instant's flash of the ruling passion hidden within that very secretive
soul. Then he once more turned towards her, the rigid lines of his face
relaxed, he broke into a pleasant laugh, and with the most elaborate and
most courtly bow he took her hand in his and raising her fingers to his
lips, he gave the answer to her questions:

"When your ladyship has ceased to be the most admired woman in Europe,
namely, when I am in my grave." Chapter VI: For the Poor of Paris



There was no time to say more then. For the laughing, chatting groups
of friends had once more closed up round Marguerite and her husband,
and she, ever on the alert, gave neither look nor sign that any serious
conversation had taken place between Sir Percy and herself. Whatever she might feel or dread with regard to the foolhardy adventures
in which he still persistently embarked, no member of the League
ever guarded the secret of his chief more loyally than did Marguerite
Blakeney. Though her heart overflowed with a passionate pride in her husband, she
was clever enough to conceal every emotion save that which Nature had
insisted on imprinting in her face, her present radiant happiness
and her irresistible love. And thus before the world she kept up that
bantering way with him, which had characterized her earlier matrimonial
life, that good-natured, easy contempt which he had so readily accepted
in those days, and which their entourage would have missed and would
have enquired after, if she had changed her manner towards him too
suddenly. In her heart she knew full well that within Percy Blakeney's soul
she had a great and powerful rival: his wild, mad, passionate love of
adventure. For it he would sacrifice everything, even his life; she
dared not ask herself if he would sacrifice his love. Twice in a few weeks he had been over to France: every time he went she
could not know if she would ever see him again. She could not imagine
how the French Committee of Public Safety could so clumsily allow the
hated Scarlet Pimpernel to slip through its fingers. But she never
attempted either to warn him or to beg him not to go. When he brought
Paul Deroulede and Juliette Marny over from France, her heart went
out to the two young people in sheer gladness and pride because of his
precious life, which he had risked for them. She loved Juliette for the dangers Percy had passed, for the anxieties
she herself had endured; only to-day, in the midst of this beautiful
sunshine, this joy of the earth, of summer and of the sky, she had
suddenly felt a mad, overpowering anxiety, a deadly hatred of the
wild adventurous life, which took him so often away from her side. His
pleasant, bantering reply precluded her following up the subject, whilst
the merry chatter of people round her warned her to keep her words and
looks under control. But she seemed now to feel the want of being alone, and, somehow, that
distant booth with its flaring placard, and the crier in the Phrygian
cap, exercised a weird fascination over her. Instinctively she bent her steps thither, and equally instinctively the
idle throng of her friends followed her. Sir Percy alone had halted in
order to converse with Lord Hastings, who had just arrived. "Surely, Lady Blakeney, you have no though of patronising that
gruesome spectacle?" said Lord Anthony Dewhurst, as Marguerite almost
mechanically had paused within a few yards of the solitary booth. "I don't know," she said, with enforced gaiety, "the place seems
to attract me. And I need not look at the spectacle," she added
significantly, as she pointed to a roughly-scribbled notice at the
entrance of the tent: "In aid of the starving poor of Paris." "There's a good-looking woman who sings, and a hideous mechanical toy
that moves," said one of the young men in the crowd. "It is very dark
and close inside the tent. I was lured in there for my sins, and was in
a mighty hurry to come out again." "Then it must be my sins that are helping to lure me too at the present
moment," said Marguerite lightly. "I pray you all to let me go in there. I want to hear the good-looking woman sing, even if I do not see the
hideous toy on the move." "May I escort you then, Lady Blakeney?" said Lord Tony. "Nay! I would rather go in alone," she replied a trifle impatiently. "I
beg of you not to heed my whim, and to await my return, there, where the
music is at its merriest." It had been bad manners to insist. Marguerite, with a little
comprehensive nod to all her friends, left the young cavaliers still
protesting and quickly passed beneath the roughly constructed doorway
that gave access into the booth. A man, dressed in theatrical rags and wearing the characteristic scarlet
cap, stood immediately within the entrance, and ostentatiously rattled a
money box at regular intervals. "For the starving poor of Paris," he drawled out in nasal monotonous
tones the moment he caught sight of Marguerite and of her rich gown. She
dropped some gold into the box and then passed on. The interior of the booth was dark and lonely-looking after the glare
of the hot September sun and the noisy crowd that thronged the sward
outside. Evidently a performance had just taken place on the elevated
platform beyond, for a few yokels seemed to be lingering in a desultory
manner as if preparatory to going out. A few disjointed comments reached Marguerite's ears as she approached,
and the small groups parted to allow her to pass. One or two women
gaped in astonishment at her beautiful dress, whilst others bobbed a
respectful curtsey. The mechanical toy arrested her attention immediately. She did not find
it as gruesome as she expected, only singularly grotesque, with all
those wooden little figures in their quaint, arrested action. She drew nearer to have a better look, and the yokels who had lingered
behind, paused, wondering if she would make any remark. "Her ladyship was born in France," murmured one of the men, close to
her, "she would know if the thing really looks like that." "She do seem interested," quoth another in a whisper. "Lud love us all!" said a buxom wench, who was clinging to the arm of a
nervous-looking youth, "I believe they're coming for more money." On the elevated platform at the further end of the tent, a slim
figure had just made its appearance, that of a young woman dressed in
peculiarly sombre colours, and with a black lace hood thrown lightly
over her head. Marguerite thought that the face seemed familiar to her, and she also
noticed that the woman carried a large embroidered reticule in her
bemittened hand. There was a general exodus the moment she appeared. The Richmond yokels
did not like the look of that reticule. They felt that sufficient
demand had already been made upon their scant purses, considering the
meagerness of the entertainment, and they dreaded being lured to further
extravagance. When Marguerite turned away from the mechanical toy, the last of the
little crowd had disappeared, and she was alone in the booth with the
woman in the dark kirtle and black lace hood. "For the poor of Paris, Madame," said the latter mechanically, holding
out her reticule. Marguerite was looking at her intently. The face certainly seemed
familiar, recalling to her mind the far-off days in Paris, before
she married. Some young actress no doubt driven out of France by that
terrible turmoil which had caused so much sorrow and so much suffering. The face was pretty, the figure slim and elegant, and the look of
obvious sadness in the dark, almond-shaped eyes was calculated to
inspire sympathy and pity. Yet, strangely enough, Lady Blakeney felt repelled and chilled by this
sombrely-dressed young person: an instinct, which she could not have
explained and which she felt had no justification, warned her that
somehow or other, the sadness was not quite genuine, the appeal for the
poor not quite heartfelt. Nevertheless, she took out her purse, and dropping some few sovereigns
into the capacious reticule, she said very kindly:

"I hope that you are satisfied with your day's work, Madame; I fear
me our British country folk hold the strings of their purses somewhat
tightly these times." The woman sighed and shrugged her shoulders. "Oh, Madame!" she said with a tone of great dejection, "one does what
one can for one's starving countrymen, but it is very hard to elicit
sympathy over here for them, poor dears!" "You are a Frenchwoman, of course," rejoined Marguerite, who had noted
that though the woman spoke English with a very pronounced foreign
accent, she had nevertheless expressed herself with wonderful fluency
and correctness. "Just like Lady Blakeney herself," replied the other. "You know who I am? "Who could come to Richmond and not know Lady Blakeney by sight." "But what made you come to Richmond on this philanthropic errand of
yours?" "I go where I think there is a chance of earning a little money for
the cause which I have at heart," replied the Frenchwoman with the same
gentle simplicity, the same tone of mournful dejection. What she said was undoubtedly noble and selfless. Lady Blakeney felt in
her heart that her keenest sympathy should have gone out to this
young woman--pretty, dainty, hardly more than a girl--who seemed to be
devoting her young life in a purely philanthropic and unselfish cause. And yet in spite of herself, Marguerite seemed unable to shake off that
curious sense of mistrust which had assailed her from the first, nor
that feeling of unreality and staginess with which the Frenchwoman's
attitude had originally struck her. Yet she tried to be kind and to be cordial, tried to hide that coldness
in her manner which she felt was unjustified. "It is all very praiseworthy on your part, Madame," she said somewhat
lamely. "Madame...?" she added interrogatively. "My name is Candeille--Desiree Candeille," replied the Frenchwoman. "Candeille?" exclaimed Marguerite with sudden alacrity, "Candeille...
surely..."

"Yes... of the Varietes." "Ah! then I know why your face from the first seemed familiar to me,"
said Marguerite, this time with unaffected cordiality. "I must have
applauded you many a time in the olden days. I am an ex-colleague, you
know. My name was St. Just before I married, and I was of the Maison
Moliere." "I knew that," said Desiree Candeille, "and half hoped that you would
remember me." "Nay! who could forget Demoiselle Candeille, the most popular star in
the theatrical firmament?" "Oh! that was so long ago." "Only four years." "A fallen star is soon lost out of sight." "Why fallen?" "It was a choice for me between exile from France and the guillotine,"
rejoined Candeille simply. "Surely not?" queried Marguerite with a touch of genuine sympathy. With characteristic impulsiveness, she had now cast aside her former
misgivings: she had conquered her mistrust, at any rate had relegated
it to the background of her mind. This woman was a colleague: she had
suffered and was in distress; she had every claim, therefore, on a
compatriot's help and friendship. She stretched out her hand and took
Desiree Candeille's in her own; she forced herself to feel nothing but
admiration for this young woman, whose whole attitude spoke of sorrows
nobly borne, of misfortunes proudly endured. "I don't know why I should sadden you with my story," rejoined Desiree
Candeille after a slight pause, during which she seemed to be waging
war against her own emotion. "It is not a very interesting one. Hundreds
have suffered as I did. I had enemies in Paris. God knows how that
happened. I had never harmed anyone, but someone must have hated me and
must have wished me ill. Evil is so easily wrought in France these days. A denunciation--a perquisition--an accusation--then the flight from
Paris... the forged passports... the disguise... the bribe... the
hardships... the squalid hiding places.... Oh! I have gone through
it all... tasted every kind of humiliation... endured every kind of
insult.... Remember! that I was not a noble aristocrat... a Duchess
or an impoverished Countess..." she added with marked bitterness, "or
perhaps the English cavaliers whom the popular voice has called the
League of the Scarlet Pimpernel would have taken some interest in me. I
was only a poor actress and had to find my way out of France alone, or
else perish on the guillotine." "I am so sorry!" said Marguerite simply. "Tell me how you got on, once you were in England," she continued after
a while, seeing that Desiree Candeille seemed absorbed in thought. "I had a few engagements at first," replied the Frenchwoman. "I played
at Sadler's Wells and with Mrs. Jordan at Covent Garden, but the Aliens'
Bill put an end to my chances of livelihood. No manager cared to give me
a part, and so..."

"And so?" "Oh! I had a few jewels and I sold them.... A little money and I live on
that.... But when I played at Covent Garden I contrived to send part of
my salary over to some of the poorer clubs of Paris. My heart aches for
those that are starving.... Poor wretches, they are misguided and misled
by self-seeking demagogues.... It hurts me to feel that I can do nothing
more to help them... and eases my self-respect if, by singing at public
fairs, I can still send a few francs to those who are poorer than
myself." She had spoken with ever-increasing passion and vehemence. Marguerite,
with eyes fixed into vacancy, seeing neither the speaker nor her
surroundings, seeing only visions of those same poor wreckages of
humanity, who had been goaded into thirst for blood, when their shrunken
bodies should have been clamouring for healthy food,--Marguerite
thus absorbed, had totally forgotten her earlier prejudices and now
completely failed to note all that was unreal, stagy, theatrical, in the
oratorical declamations of the ex-actress from the Varietes. Pre-eminently true and loyal herself in spite of the many deceptions and
treacheries which she had witnessed in her life, she never looked for
falsehood or for cant in others. Even now she only saw before her a
woman who had been wrongfully persecuted, who had suffered and had
forgiven those who had caused her to suffer. She bitterly accused
herself for her original mistrust of this noble-hearted, unselfish
woman, who was content to tramp around in an alien country, bartering
her talents for a few coins, in order that some of those, who were the
originators of her sorrows, might have bread to eat and a bed in which
to sleep. "Mademoiselle," she said warmly, "truly you shame me, who am also
French-born, with the many sacrifices you so nobly make for those who
should have first claim on my own sympathy. Believe me, if I have
not done as much as duty demanded of me in the cause of my starving
compatriots, it has not been for lack of good-will. Is there any way
now," she added eagerly, "in which I can help you? Putting aside the
question of money, wherein I pray you to command my assistance, what can
I do to be of useful service to you?" "You are very kind, Lady Blakeney..." said the other hesitatingly. "Well? What is it? I see there is something in your mind..."

"It is perhaps difficult to express... but people say I have a good
voice... I sing some French ditties... they are a novelty in England, I
think.... If I could sing them in fashionable salons... I might
perhaps..."

"Nay! you shall sing in fashionable salons," exclaimed Marguerite
eagerly, "you shall become the fashion, and I'll swear the Prince of
Wales himself shall bid you sing at Carlton House... and you shall name
your own fee, Mademoiselle... and London society shall vie with the
elite of Bath, as to which shall lure you to its most frequented
routs.... There! there! you shall make a fortune for the Paris poor...
and to prove to you that I mean every word I say, you shall begin your
triumphant career in my own salon to-morrow night. His Royal Highness
will be present. You shall sing your most engaging songs... and for
your fee you must accept a hundred guineas, which you shall send to
the poorest workman's club in Paris in the name of Sir Percy and Lady
Blakeney." "I thank your ladyship, but..."

"You'll not refuse?" "I'll accept gladly... but... you will understand... I am not very old,"
said Candeille quaintly, "I... I am only an actress... but if a young
actress is unprotected... then..."

"I understand," replied Marguerite gently, "that you are far too pretty
to frequent the world all alone, and that you have a mother, a sister
or a friend... which?... whom you would wish to escort you to-morrow. Is
that it?" "Nay," rejoined the actress, with marked bitterness, "I have neither
mother, nor sister, but our Revolutionary Government, with tardy
compassion for those it has so relentlessly driven out of France,
has deputed a representative of theirs in England to look after the
interests of French subjects over here!" "Yes?" "They have realised over in Paris that my life here has been devoted to
the welfare of the poor people of France. The representative whom the
government has sent to England is specially interested in me and in
my work. He is a stand-by for me in case of trouble... in case of
insults... A woman alone is oft subject to those, even at the hands of
so-called gentlemen... and the official representative of my own country
becomes in such cases my most natural protector." "I understand." "You will receive him?" "Certainly." "Then may I present him to your ladyship?" "Whenever you like." "Now, and it please you." "Now?" "Yes. Here he comes, at your ladyship's service." Desiree Candeille's almond-shaped eyes were fixed upon a distant part of
the tent, behind Lady Blakeney in the direction of the main entrance
to the booth. There was a slight pause after she had spoken and
then Marguerite slowly turned in order to see who this official
representative of France was, whom at the young actress' request she had
just agreed to receive in her house. In the doorway of the tent, framed
by its gaudy draperies, and with the streaming sunshine as a brilliant
background behind him, stood the sable-clad figure of Chauvelin. Chapter VII: Premonition



Marguerite neither moved nor spoke. She felt two pairs of eyes fixed
upon her, and with all the strength of will at her command she forced
the very blood in her veins not to quit her cheeks, forced her eyelids
not to betray by a single quiver the icy pang of a deadly premonition
which at sight of Chauvelin seemed to have chilled her entire soul. There he stood before her, dressed in his usual somber garments, a look
almost of humility in those keen grey eyes of his, which a year ago on
the cliffs of Calais had peered down at her with such relentless hate. Strange that at this moment she should have felt an instinct of fear. What cause had she to throw more than a pitiful glance at the man who
had tried so cruelly to wrong her, and who had so signally failed? Having bowed very low and very respectfully, Chauvelin advanced towards
her, with all the airs of a disgraced courtier craving audience from his
queen. As he approached she instinctively drew back. "Would you prefer not to speak to me, Lady Blakeney?" he said humbly. She could scarcely believe her ears, or trust her eyes. It seemed
impossible that a man could have so changed in a few months. He even
looked shorter than last year, more shrunken within himself. His hair,
which he wore free from powder, was perceptibly tinged with grey. "Shall I withdraw?" he added after a pause, seeing that Marguerite made
no movement to return his salutation. "It would be best, perhaps," she replied coldly. "You and I, Monsieur
Chauvelin, have so little to say to one another." "Very little indeed," he rejoined quietly; "the triumphant and happy
have ever very little to say to the humiliated and the defeated. But
I had hoped that Lady Blakeney in the midst of her victory would have
spared one thought of pity and one of pardon." "I did not know that you had need of either from me, Monsieur." "Pity perhaps not, but forgiveness certainly." "You have that, if you so desire it." "Since I failed, you might try to forget." "That is beyond my power. But believe me, I have ceased to think of the
infinite wrong which you tried to do to me." "But I failed," he insisted, "and I meant no harm to YOU." "To those I care for, Monsieur Chauvelin." "I had to serve my country as best I could. I meant no harm to your
brother. He is safe in England now. And the Scarlet Pimpernel was
nothing to you." She tried to read his face, tried to discover in those inscrutable eyes
of his, some hidden meaning to his words. Instinct had warned her of
course that this man could be nothing but an enemy, always and at all
times. But he seemed so broken, so abject now, that contempt for his
dejected attitude, and for the defeat which had been inflicted on him,
chased the last remnant of fear from her heart. "I did not even succeed in harming that enigmatical personage,"
continued Chauvelin with the same self-abasement. "Sir Percy Blakeney,
you remember, threw himself across my plans, quite innocently of course. I failed where you succeeded. Luck has deserted me. Our government
offered me a humble post, away from France. I look after the interests
of French subjects settled in England. My days of power are over. My
failure is complete. I do not complain, for I failed in a combat of
wits... but I failed... I failed... I failed... I am almost a fugitive
and I am quite disgraced. That is my present history, Lady Blakeney," he
concluded, taking once more a step towards her, "and you will understand
that it would be a solace if you extended your hand to me just once
more, and let me feel that although you would never willingly look upon
my face again, you have enough womanly tenderness in you to force your
heart to forgiveness and mayhap to pity." Marguerite hesitated. He held out his hand and her warm, impulsive
nature prompted her to be kind. But instinct would not be gainsaid: a
curious instinct to which she refused to respond. What had she to fear
from this miserable and cringing little worm who had not even in him
the pride of defeat? What harm could he do to her, or to those whom she
loved? Her brother was in England! Her husband! Bah! not the enmity of
the entire world could make her fear for him! Nay! That instinct, which caused her to draw away from Chauvelin, as
she would from a venomous asp, was certainly not fear. It was hate! She
hated this man! Hated him for all that she had suffered because of
him; for that terrible night on the cliffs of Calais! The peril to
her husband who had become so infinitely dear! The humiliations and
self-reproaches which he had endured. Yes! it was hate! and hate was of all emotions the one she most
despised. Hate? Does one hate a slimy but harmless toad or a stinging fly? It seemed ridiculous, contemptible and pitiable to think of hate in
connection with the melancholy figure of this discomfited intriguer,
this fallen leader of revolutionary France. He was holding out his hand to her. If she placed even the tips of
her fingers upon it, she would be making the compact of mercy and
forgiveness which he was asking of her. The woman Desiree Candeille
roused within her the last lingering vestige of her slumbering wrath. False, theatrical and stagy--as Marguerite had originally suspected--she
appeared to have been in league with Chauvelin to bring about this
undesirable meeting. Lady Blakeney turned from one to another, trying to conceal her contempt
beneath a mask of passionless indifference. Candeille was standing close
by, looking obviously distressed and not a little puzzled. An instant's
reflection was sufficient to convince Marguerite that the whilom actress
of the Varietes Theatre was obviously ignorant of the events to
which Chauvelin had been alluding: she was, therefore, of no serious
consequence, a mere tool, mayhap, in the ex-ambassador's hands. At the
present moment she looked like a silly child who does not understand the
conversation of the "grown-ups." Marguerite had promised her help and protection, had invited her to her
house, and offered her a munificent gift in aid of a deserving cause. She was too proud to go back now on that promise, to rescind the
contract because of an unexplainable fear. With regard to Chauvelin,
the matter stood differently: she had made him no direct offer of
hospitality: she had agreed to receive in her house the official
chaperone of an unprotected girl, but she was not called upon to show
cordiality to her own and her husband's most deadly enemy. She was ready to dismiss him out of her life with a cursory word of
pardon and a half-expressed promise of oblivion: on that understanding
and that only she was ready to let her hand rest for the space of one
second in his. She had looked upon her fallen enemy, seen his discomfiture and his
humiliation! Very well! Now let him pass out of her life, all the
more easily, since the last vision of him would be one of such utter
abjection as would even be unworthy of hate. All these thoughts, feelings and struggles passed through her mind
with great rapidity. Her hesitation had lasted less than five seconds:
Chauvelin still wore the look of doubting entreaty with which he had
first begged permission to take her hand in his. With an impulsive toss
of the head, she had turned straight towards him, ready with the phrase
with which she meant to dismiss him from her sight now and forever, when
suddenly a well-known laugh broke in upon her ear, and a lazy, drawly
voice said pleasantly:

"La! I vow the air is fit to poison you! Your Royal Highness, I entreat,
let us turn our backs upon these gates of Inferno, where lost souls
would feel more at home than doth your humble servant." The next moment His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales had entered the
tent, closely followed by Sir Percy Blakeney. Chapter VIII: The Invitation



It was in truth a strange situation, this chance meeting between Percy
Blakeney and ex-Ambassador Chauvelin. Marguerite looked up at her husband. She saw him shrug his broad
shoulders as he first caught sight of Chauvelin, and glance down in his
usual lazy, good-humoured manner at the shrunken figure of the silent
Frenchman. The words she meant to say never crossed her lips; she was
waiting to hear what the two men would say to one another. The instinct of the grande dame in her, the fashionable lady accustomed
to the exigencies of society, just gave her sufficient presence of mind
to make the requisite low curtsey before His Royal Highness. But the
Prince, forgetting his accustomed gallantry, was also absorbed in the
little scene before him. He, too, was looking from the sable-clad figure
of Chauvelin to that of gorgeously arrayed Sir Percy. He, too, like
Marguerite, was wondering what was passing behind the low, smooth
forehead of that inimitable dandy, what behind the inscrutably
good-humoured expression of those sleepy eyes. Of the five persons thus present in the dark and stuffy booth, certainly
Sir Percy Blakeney seemed the least perturbed. He had paused just long
enough to allow Chauvelin to become fully conscious of a feeling
of supreme irritation and annoyance, then he strolled up to the
ex-ambassador, with hand outstretched and the most engaging of smiles. "Ha!" he said, with his usual half-shy, half-pleasant-tempered smile,
"my engaging friend from France! I hope, sir, that our demmed climate
doth find you well and hearty to-day." The cheerful voice seemed to ease the tension. Marguerite sighed a sigh
of relief. After all, what was more natural than that Percy with his
amazing fund of pleasant irresponsibility should thus greet the man
who had once vowed to bring him to the guillotine? Chauvelin, himself,
accustomed by now to the audacious coolness of his enemy, was scarcely
taken by surprise. He bowed low to His Highness, who, vastly amused at
Blakeney's sally, was inclined to be gracious to everyone, even though
the personality of Chauvelin as a well-known leader of the regicide
government was inherently distasteful to him. But the Prince saw in
the wizened little figure before him an obvious butt for his friend
Blakeney's impertinent shafts, and although historians have been unable
to assert positively whether or no George Prince of Wales knew aught of
Sir Percy's dual life, yet there is no doubt that he was always ready
to enjoy a situation which brought about the discomfiture of any of the
Scarlet Pimpernel's avowed enemies. "I, too, have not met M. Chauvelin for many a long month," said His
Royal Highness with an obvious show of irony. "And I mistake not, sir,
you left my father's court somewhat abruptly last year." "Nay, your Royal Highness," said Percy gaily, "my friend Monsieur...
er... Chaubertin and I had serious business to discuss, which could only
be dealt with in France.... Am I not right, Monsieur?" "Quite right, Sir Percy," replied Chauvelin curtly. "We had to discuss abominable soup in Calais, had we not?" continued
Blakeney in the same tone of easy banter, "and wine that I vowed
was vinegar. Monsieur... er... Chaubertin... no, no, I beg pardon...
Chauvelin... Monsieur Chauvelin and I quite agreed upon that point. The only matter on which we were not quite at one was the question of
snuff." "Snuff?" laughed His Royal Highness, who seemed vastly amused. "Yes, your Royal Highness... snuff... Monsieur Chauvelin here had--if I
may be allowed to say so--so vitiated a taste in snuff that he prefers
it with an admixture of pepper... Is that not so, Monsieur... er... Chaubertin?" "Chauvelin, Sir Percy," remarked the ex-ambassador drily. He was determined not to lose his temper and looked urbane and pleasant,
whilst his impudent enemy was enjoying a joke at his expense. Marguerite
the while had not taken her eyes off the keen, shrewd face. Whilst the
three men talked, she seemed suddenly to have lost her sense of the
reality of things. The present situation appeared to her strangely
familiar, like a dream which she had dreamt oft times before. Suddenly it became absolutely clear to her that the whole scene had been
arranged and planned: the booth with its flaring placard, Demoiselle
Candeille soliciting her patronage, her invitation to the young actress,
Chauvelin's sudden appearance, all, all had been concocted and arranged,
not here, not in England at all, but out there in Paris, in some dark
gathering of blood-thirsty ruffians, who had invented a final trap for
the destruction of the bold adventurer, who went by the name of the
Scarlet Pimpernel. And she also was only a puppet, enacting a part which had been written
for her: she had acted just as THEY had anticipated, had spoken the very
words they had meant her to say: and when she looked at Percy, he seemed
supremely ignorant of it all, unconscious of this trap of the existence
of which everyone here present was aware, save indeed himself. She
would have fought against this weird feeling of obsession, of being a
mechanical toy would up to do certain things, but this she could not do;
her will appeared paralysed, her tongue even refused her service. As in a dream she heard His Royal Highness ask for the name of the young
actress who was soliciting alms for the poor of Paris. That also had been prearranged. His Royal Highness for the moment was
also a puppet, made to dance, to speak and to act as Chauvelin and his
colleagues over in France had decided that he should. Quite mechanically
Marguerite introduced Demoiselle Candeille to the Prince's gracious
notice. "If your Highness will permit," she said, "Mademoiselle Candeille will
give us some of her charming old French songs at my rout to-morrow." "By all means! By all means!" said the Prince. "I used to know some
in my childhood days. Charming and poetic.... I know.... I know.... We
shall be delighted to hear Mademoiselle sing, eh, Blakeney?" he added
good-humouredly, "and for your rout to-morrow will you not also invite
M. Chauvelin?" "Nay! but that goes without saying, your Royal Highness," responded Sir
Percy, with hospitable alacrity and a most approved bow directed at his
arch-enemy. "We shall expect M. Chauvelin. He and I have not met for so
long, and he shall be made right welcome at Blakeney Manor." Chapter IX: Demoiselle Candeille



Her origin was of the humblest, for her mother--so it was said--had
been kitchen-maid in the household of the Duc de Marny, but Desiree had
received some kind of education, and though she began life as a dresser
in one of the minor theatres of Paris, she became ultimately one of its
most popular stars. She was small and dark, dainty in her manner and ways, and with a
graceful little figure, peculiarly supple and sinuous. Her humble
origin certainly did not betray itself in her hands and feet, which were
exquisite in shape and lilliputian in size. Her hair was soft and glossy, always free from powder, and cunningly
arranged so as to slightly overshadow the upper part of her face. The chin was small and round, the mouth extraordinarily red, the neck
slender and long. But she was not pretty: so said all the women. Her
skin was rather coarse in texture and darkish in colour, her eyes
were narrow and slightly turned upwards at the corners; no! she was
distinctly not pretty. Yet she pleased the men! Perhaps because she was so artlessly determined
to please them. The women said that Demoiselle Candeille never left a
man alone until she had succeeded in captivating his fancy if only for
five minutes; an interval in a dance... the time to cross a muddy road. But for five minutes she was determined to hold any man's complete
attention, and to exact his admiration. And she nearly always succeeded. Therefore the women hated her. The men were amused. It is extremely
pleasant to have one's admiration compelled, one's attention so
determinedly sought after. And Candeille could be extremely amusing, and as Madelon in Moliere's
"Les Precieuses" was quite inimitable. This, however, was in the olden days, just before Paris went quite mad,
before the Reign of Terror had set in, and ci-devant Louis the King had
been executed. Candeille had taken it into her frolicsome little head that she would
like to go to London. The idea was of course in the nature of an
experiment. Those dull English people over the water knew so little
of what good acting really meant. Tragedy? Well! passons! Their heavy,
large-boned actresses might manage one or two big scenes where a
commanding presence and a powerful voice would not come amiss, and where
prominent teeth would pass unnoticed in the agony of a dramatic climax. But Comedy! Ah! ca non, par example! Demoiselle Candeille had seen several English
gentlemen and ladies in those same olden days at the Tuileries, but
she really could not imagine any of them enacting the piquant scenes of
Moliere or Beaumarchais. Demoiselle Candeille thought of every English-born individual as having
very large teeth. Now large teeth do not lend themselves to well-spoken
comedy scenes, to smiles, or to double entendre. Her own teeth were exceptionally small and white, and very sharp, like
those of a kitten. Yes! Demoiselle Candeille thought it would be extremely interesting to
go to London and to show to a nation of shopkeepers how daintily one can
be amused in a theatre. Permission to depart from Paris was easy to obtain. In fact the fair
lady had never really found it difficult to obtain anything she very
much wanted. In this case she had plenty of friends in high places. Marat was still
alive and a great lover of the theatre. Tallien was a personal admirer
of hers, Deputy Dupont would do anything she asked. She wanted to act in London, at a theatre called Drury Lane. She wanted
to play Moliere in England in French, and had already spoken with
several of her colleagues, who were ready to join her. They would give
public representations in aid of the starving population of France;
there were plenty of Socialistic clubs in London quite Jacobin and
Revolutionary in tendency: their members would give her full support. She would be serving her country and her countrymen and incidentally see
something of the world, and amuse herself. She was bored in Paris. Then she thought of Marguerite St. Just, once of the Maison Moliere, who
had captivated an English milor of enormous wealth. Demoiselle Candeille
had never been of the Maison Moliere; she had been the leading star of
one of the minor--yet much-frequented--theatres of Paris, but she felt
herself quite able and ready to captivate some other unattached milor,
who would load her with English money and incidentally bestow an English
name upon her. So she went to London. The experiment, however, had not proved an unmitigated success. At first
she and her company did obtain a few engagements at one or two of the
minor theatres, to give representations of some of the French classical
comedies in the original language. But these never quite became the fashion. The feeling against France
and all her doings was far too keen in that very set, which Demoiselle
Candeille had desired to captivate with her talents, to allow of the
English jeunesse doree to flock and see Moliere played in French, by a
French troupe, whilst Candeille's own compatriots resident in England
had given her but scant support. One section of these--the aristocrats and emigres--looked upon the
actress who was a friend of all the Jacobins in Paris as nothing better
than canaille. They sedulously ignored her presence in this country, and
snubbed her whenever they had an opportunity. The other section--chiefly consisting of agents and spies of the
Revolutionary Government--she would gladly have ignored. They had at
first made a constant demand on her purse, her talents and her time:
then she grew tired of them, and felt more and more chary of being
identified with a set which was in such ill-odour with that very same
jeunesse doree whom Candeille had desired to please. In her own country she was and always had been a good republican: Marat
had given her her first start in life by his violent praises of her
talent in his widely-circulated paper; she had been associated in
Paris with the whole coterie of artists and actors: every one of them
republican to a man. But in London, although one might be snubbed by
the emigres and aristocrats--it did not do to be mixed up with the
sans-culotte journalists and pamphleteers who haunted the Socialistic
clubs of the English capital, and who were the prime organizers of all
those seditious gatherings and treasonable unions that caused Mr. Pitt
and his colleagues so much trouble and anxiety. One by one, Desiree Candeille's comrades, male and female, who had
accompanied her to England, returned to their own country. When war was
declared, some of them were actually sent back under the provisions of
the Aliens Bill. But Desiree had stayed on. Her old friends in Paris had managed to advise her that she would not
be very welcome there just now. The sans-culotte journalists of England,
the agents and spies of the Revolutionary Government, had taken their
revenge of the frequent snubs inflicted upon them by the young actress,
and in those days the fact of being unwelcome in France was apt to have
a more lurid and more dangerous significant. Candeille did not dare return: at any rate not for the present. She trusted to her own powers of intrigue, and her well-known
fascinations, to re-conquer the friendship of the Jacobin clique, and
she once more turned her attention to the affiliated Socialistic clubs
of England. But between the proverbial two stools, Demoiselle Candeille
soon came to the ground. Her machinations became known in official
quarters, her connection with all the seditious clubs of London was soon
bruited abroad, and one evening Desiree found herself confronted with
a document addressed to her: "From the Office of His Majesty's Privy
Seal," wherein it was set forth that, pursuant to the statute 33 George
III. cap. 5, she, Desiree Candeille, a French subject now resident in
England, was required to leave this kingdom by order of His Majesty
within seven days, and that in the event of the said Desiree Candeille
refusing to comply with this order, she would be liable to commitment,
brought to trial and sentenced to imprisonment for a month, and
afterwards to removal within a limited time under pain of transportation
for life. This meant that Demoiselle Candeille had exactly seven days in which to
make complete her reconciliation with her former friends who now ruled
Paris and France with a relentless and perpetually bloodstained hand. No wonder that during the night which followed the receipt of this
momentous document, Demoiselle Candeille suffered gravely from insomnia. She dared not go back to France, she was ordered out of England! What
was to become of her? This was just three days before the eventful afternoon of the Richmond
Gala, and twenty-four hours after ex-Ambassador Chauvelin had landed in
England. Candeille and Chauvelin had since then met at the "Cercle des
Jacobins Francais" in Soho Street, and now fair Desiree found herself in
lodgings in Richmond, the evening of the day following the Gala, feeling
that her luck had not altogether deserted her. One conversation with Citizen Chauvelin had brought the fickle jade
back to Demoiselle Candeilles' service. 