



Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                               THE CHARGE
                             TOWARD DESTINY


Daoud slung his bow across his back and drew his long, curving saif from
the scabbard. The noonday sun flashed on it as he held it high. His men
roamed and brandished their own swords. The band had caught up with them, and the trumpets and hautboys screamed
death to the enemy while the kettledrums rumbled. There was nothing left to protect Charles d'Anjou now. There was not
even time for the French leader to run. He seemed to know it. He had his
sword out and he held up a white shield with a red cross. Urging the Arabian on, shouting the name of God, Daoud raced toward
triumph....




_Also by Robert Shea:_

ILLUMINATUS! (with Robert Anton Wilson)

SHIKE: TIME OF THE DRAGONS

SHIKE: LAST OF THE ZINJA

ALL THINGS ARE LIGHTS*

THE SARACEN: LAND OF THE INFIDEL*


*Published by Ballantine Books




        THE SARACEN:
          THE HOLY
             WAR

         ROBERT SHEA


 BALLANTINE BOOKS . NEW YORK




Copyright (C) 1989 by Robert Shea

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States of America by Ballantine
Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in
Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 88-92181

ISBN: 0-345-35933-X

Manufactured in the United States of America

First Edition: April 1989




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings remain as printed, whilst inconsistent hyphenation has
    been standardised. Thanks to Michael Shea for giving Project Gutenberg permission to
    distribute _The Saracen: The Holy War_. PROLOGUE

A summary of _The Saracen_ Book One, _Land of the Infidel_


_A.D. April 12, 1264 / 4th day of Jumada, A.H. 662_

Feverish, his arrow-wounded leg throbbing, Daoud ibn Abdallah lies in
bed after a night of battle and defeat. As dawn lights the
eggshell-white windowpanes in his room, he recalls the events that led
him to this bitter hour. Daoud was born to an English crusading family that had settled in
Palestine. Captured by Muslims as a child, he was taken to El Kahira,
Cairo, chief city of Egypt, and selected for the Mamelukes, the elite
corps of slave warriors gathered from all parts of the Middle East to
serve the sultans of El Kahira. He became a favorite of a leading Mameluke emir, Baibars. Young and in
need of comfort, he converted to Islam. He came to love the faith of
Muhammad, totally and humbly dedicating himself to its tenets and to the
welfare of the Muslim people. He studied with Sheikh Saadi, a Sufi
mystic, and with the Hashishiyya, the dreaded sect known in Europe as
the Assassins. In those years the Tartars, invincible legions of mounted barbarians,
had come out of Asia, invading the Islamic world. A huge army led by
Hulagu, grandson of the Tartar conqueror, Genghis Khan, had already
conquered Persia and Syria and was poised to attack Egypt. And Hulagu
was sending ambassadors to the pope to urge Christian Europe to join
with the Tartars in destroying the Muslims. Should Tartars and crusaders strike at Egypt simultaneously, the people
and faith Daoud has come to love would perish. Daoud has seen with his
own eyes how the Tartars obliterated Baghdad, its 200,000 men, women,
and children slaughtered to the last soul, the city leveled, a
wasteland. He is determined that the same fate not befall his adopted El
Kahira. Baibars--having made himself Sultan of El Kahira--sent Daoud into the
land of the infidel. Because Daoud is blond and gray-eyed, no one would
ever suspect him to be a Saracen, as Christians call all Muslims. Daoud's mission was to go to the court of the pope and use every means
necessary--from intrigue and bribery to assassination and outright
war--to stop Christians and Tartars from forming an alliance against
Islam. He went first to Manfred, king of southern Italy and Sicily. King
Manfred's family, the imperial German house of Hohenstaufen, had been at
war with the popes for generations, and Manfred had among his subjects
many Sicilian Muslims. Manfred agreed to help Daoud. But to protect his
own interests Manfred insisted that Daoud take with him Lorenzo Celino,
a middle-aged Sicilian warrior, and Sophia Karaiannides, a beautiful
Byzantine woman. Lorenzo brought along his huge, formidable dog, Scipio. Journeying northward, the three rescued Rachel, a Jewish girl, from
tavern ruffians. Daoud agreed, with misgivings, to let her travel with
them. The pope, threatened by political violence in Rome, had moved his
residence to Orvieto, a strongly walled town built on a huge flat-topped
rock. Here, Cardinal Adelberto Ugolini, a Sicilian churchman who had
long been secretly sending information to Baibars, was horrified to find
Baibars's agent on his doorstep expecting hospitality. But the cardinal
reluctantly agreed to help. Hulagu Khan's ambassadors to the pope, Christianized Tartars named John
Chagan and Philip Uzbek, arrived in Orvieto two weeks after Daoud. A
young French nobleman, Count Simon de Gobignon, commanded their military
escort. Daoud had arranged for garbage-throwing hecklers to mar the
ambassadors' procession. The arrogant Cardinal Paulus de Verceuil,
accompanying the Tartars, was hit by excrement. He ordered the hired
Venetian crossbowmen to fire into the crowd, killing two innocent
bystanders. Calling himself David of Trebizond, a merchant from the eastern shore of
the Black Sea, Daoud appeared publicly for the first time at a council
of Church leaders called by Pope Urban. He spoke from firsthand
knowledge of the horrors committed by the Tartars. But Friar Mathieu
d'Alcon, the Tartars' interpreter, testified that in his opinion the
Tartar empire was no longer a danger to Europe. The Tartar ambassadors and their entourage were guests at the palace of
Orvieto's most powerful family, the Monaldeschi. When Contessa Elvira di
Monaldeschi gave a reception for the emissaries, Daoud drew them into
drunken gloating over their atrocities and boasting of their plans for
world conquest. Pope Urban and many other Church dignitaries were
appalled listeners. With Ugolini's help, Daoud was able to persuade the influential
Dominican philosopher Fra Tomasso d'Aquino to write and preach against
the alliance. But then, subjected to unknown pressures, Fra Tomasso
suddenly changed his position. Daoud now felt that he could do no more through intrigue. He had been in
contact with the Filippeschi, an Orvieto clan who were hereditary
enemies of the Monaldeschi family. And through Lorenzo he had been
quietly recruiting a company of bravos--armed adventurers. Offering the
help of his mercenaries, he persuaded the Filippeschi to attack the
Monaldeschi palace. With de Gobignon and the Tartars' other guards
diverted, he could enter the palace and kill the ambassadors. While the Filippeschi prepared for the attack, Daoud discovered that
Andrea Sordello, one of his hired bravos, had been set to spy on him by
Simon de Gobignon. In Tilia's brothel, Daoud subjected Sordello to a
Hashishiyya initiation, using drugs and women to make the spy his slave. He implanted in Sordello's mind a command that if he should see a silver
locket that Daoud keeps on his person, he would immediately kill Simon
de Gobignon. And henceforth Sordello was to give Simon only the
information Daoud wanted him to have. After the initiation Daoud was troubled. He had been taught how to do
this, but had never done it before. Had he truly and completely
subjugated Sordello's soul? On the night of the attack he was dismayed to discover the Monaldeschi
ready for a siege. But, garbed in black as a Hashishiyya fighter, Daoud
went ahead and slipped into the Monaldeschi palace. The Tartars, with Simon de Gobignon, Friar Mathieu, and four guards,
were in the most secure room in the palace, the cellar pantry, where
costly spices from the East were kept behind a thick door with a strong
lock. Trained by the Hashishiyya to use his senses other than sight to fight
in the dark, Daoud forced his way into the spice pantry and put out the
lantern. He struggled with Simon in pitch blackness and came close to
killing him. Swords thrust at him from all directions. He had the
Tartars' lives almost in his grasp, but de Gobignon was thwarting him. He tried frantically to kill de Gobignon and was no more able to do it
than if the man were a djinn. Then the old priest escaped from the cellar and came back with a lighted
candle. Gripped by the terrible fear that he would be caught and
exposed, Daoud raced up the cellar stairs. Despair almost killed him
when he felt the searing pain of a Tartar arrow in his leg. He felt terror when he saw the white-bearded friar on the stairs
blocking his way, even though the old man held no weapon in his
outstretched arms. He had been about to stab the friar, who was too useful to the Tartars
and the Christians to be allowed to live. But his arm could not move. It
was as if a powerful hand held it, and he seemed to hear a voice booming
in his head, _You dare to murder a priest?_

In his dread he hesitated, but if he did not escape Sophia would die. The moment of paralysis passed, and instead of killing Friar Mathieu, he
thrust him aside, to fall from the banisterless stairs. As he lies in bed the following morning in Ugolini's mansion, Daoud
forces himself to think. He has extended himself to the limit of his
powers and failed, but he must try again. He has to find a new plan,
lest his faith and his people, his whole world, meet annihilation. In a room near Daoud's, Sophia Karaiannides kneels before an icon of
Saint Simon Stylites that she herself painted. She is thankful that
Daoud escaped alive from the Monaldeschi palace. She is glad that Simon,
who coincidentally shares the name of her favorite saint, is alive, too. But how much longer, she wonders, will she have to live here in the
midst of enemies with the fear of a hideous death as a spy and an enemy
of the Church dogging her day and night? Sophia was born in Constantinople during the years when it was ruled by
French invaders. As a very young woman she had seen her parents and her
lover slaughtered by rampaging French troops. She went on to serve the
Byzantine general Michael Paleologos, who drove out the French and
became the Basileus, Emperor of Constantinople. Michael sent Sophia as a confidential envoy to his ally, Manfred, and
she and Manfred became lovers. But when the blond Saracen who called
himself David of Trebizond arrived at Manfred's court, Manfred told her
she must help David in his mission of preventing the Christian-Tartar
alliance. Manfred hinted at danger to her if she stayed with him. Though
heartbroken at being sent away by Manfred, Sophia accepted the
undertaking because another French crusade might well lead to another
French attack on "the Polis," her beloved home city. When Rachel joined their party, Sophia, remembering her own orphan
girlhood, befriended her. But Daoud insisted, to protect the secrecy of
the mission, that after they arrived in Orvieto, Rachel be sent to the
brothel run by Tilia Caballo, Cardinal Ugolini's mistress. After a few months in Daoud's company, Sophia felt powerfully attracted
to him. The Saracen admitted that he was likewise drawn to her, but
insisted that they deny any loving feelings, because he must use Sophia
to corrupt and defeat the advocates of the Tartar-Christian alliance. And he did so at the Contessa di Monaldeschi's reception for the
Tartars, sending Sophia to lure Simon de Gobignon away from the great
hall of the palace while he tempted the Tartars to discredit themselves. Sophia and Simon went for a walk in the atrium, and in a dark corner she
let him kiss her. A month after the reception Simon and she had a clandestine tryst in her
room at Ugolini's. Though she was ready to take him to bed, Simon
insisted that they remain chaste, according to the customs of courtly
love, thereby endearing himself to her all the more. She is surprised to realize that she has come to care deeply for the
idealistic, innocent young Frenchman. But her feeling for the Saracen is
stronger. More than once the ruthless things Daoud has done in pursuit
of his mission have made her almost hate him. Even so, when Sophia is
with Daoud she feels a fire building in herself to match the fire she
perceives behind those gray eyes. She glances at an hourglass, sighs, and rises from where she has been
kneeling before the saint's icon. It is time to prepare a fresh poultice
for Daoud's wound. *       *       *       *       *

Morning at the Palazzo Monaldeschi. The dead are laid out and wept over,
the debris of the siege cleared away, repairs begun on the damaged
walls. Simon de Gobignon strips off his mail shirt, about to step into a
hot bath. He is profoundly grateful to be alive and relieved that he
successfully protected the Tartar ambassadors from being murdered by the
man in black. But relief turns to anguish each time he is reminded that
his friend and adviser, Friar Mathieu, has been cruelly hurt by his fall
and may yet die. Count Charles d'Anjou, brother of King Louis of France, commissioned
Simon to guard the Tartar ambassadors. King Louis wants to go on crusade
to win back the Holy Land with the help of the Tartars. Pope Urban,
however, is not interested in a crusade in the Middle East, but wants
the help of the French in wresting southern Italy and Sicily away from
Manfred von Hohenstaufen. He has offered Manfred's crown to Count
Charles, but King Louis so far has not agreed to let his brother make
the attempt. So the two strongest leaders in Christendom are stalemated. Simon is desperately determined that the alliance of Tartars and
Christians succeed. As he has confessed to Friar Mathieu, he bears a
double dishonor. The world despises him as the son of Count Amalric de
Gobignon, whose treachery caused the disastrous defeat of his king and
the death of thousands of his comrades on crusade in Egypt fourteen
years earlier. But only Simon and his parents know that Simon is in
truth the offspring of an adulterous affair between his mother,
Nicolette de Gobignon, and the troubadour Roland de Vency. Ultimately
Roland killed Amalric in a duel and Nicolette married him. And Simon,
though not Amalric's son, inherited the title and the domain of the
Count de Gobignon. Simon has undertaken the task of guarding the Tartars
as a way of restoring the honor of the name de Gobignon and proving to
himself his right to bear that name. The cause of the alliance has met with many setbacks in Orvieto, and
Simon suspects a secret enemy is behind them. But in recent months the
influential Fra Tomasso became a vigorous supporter of the alliance. And
Sophia, Cardinal Ugolini's lovely niece from Sicily, responded favorably
to Simon's attentions. Events seemed to be taking a turn for the better. But then Sordello warned Simon that the Filippeschi were planning to
attack the Monaldeschi palace. Preparing to defend his hostess, the
contessa, Simon insisted that the Tartars, despite their desire to
fight, be kept safe in the spice pantry. Directing the defense of the
palace from its tower, Simon suddenly sensed that the attack must be
only a diversion, that the Tartars were the real target of whoever was
behind the Filippeschi. He abruptly left the tower and rushed down to
the spice pantry. He had barely gotten there when a man all in black forced his way in and
doused the lights. In darkness the stalker killed two of the Tartars'
guards and almost strangled Simon. Simon fought off the killer long enough to give Friar Mathieu time to
open doors and let in light. One of the Tartars managed to wound the man
in black with an arrow. The attacker threw Friar Mathieu from the stairs
and vanished into the maze of rooms on the first floor of the palace. Now, Simon thinks as he eases himself into his bath, he has met the
hidden enemy whose presence he felt ever since coming to Orvieto. Evil
as Satan, powerful enough to throw an army against a fortified palace,
subtle enough to strike at victims no matter how well protected. A
being of almost inhuman strength and skill. Cruel and pitiless, ready to
murder anyone who stands in his way. Certain as the judgment of God it is that Simon and the man in black
will fight again. This is war to the death. BOOK TWO

                             THE HOLY WAR

                       _Anno Domini 1264-1266
                     Year of the Hegira 662-664_

 "That which striketh! What is that which striketh? Ah, who will convey to thee what the Striking is?" --The Koran, Surah CI

 "How many men have slept in happiness, unaware that sudden death was
 about to strike them?" --Hulagu Khan




XLV


Daoud drifted in and out of consciousness for two days after the fight
at the Monaldeschi palace. Sleeping was much better than being awake and
remembering failure. In dreams he rode once again with his khushdashiya, his brother
Mamelukes. A yellow silk banner rippled in the breeze before them, declaring, WAGE
WAR UTTERLY ON THE IDOLATORS, AS THEY WAGE WAR UTTERLY ON YOU. Dust clouds swirled around them as they thundered down upon a row of
Frankish knights. From a distance Daoud sent bolt after bolt from his
compound bow whistling into the dark line of mail-clad men. He saw men
clutch at their throats and topple from the saddle. Screaming, he charged into the midst of the Franks, whirling his saif
over his head, his lance in his left hand. A knight galloped into his
path, holding up a shield white as an eggshell, emblazoned with a red
cross. Daoud brought the saif down, and the knight raised his shield to
fend off the blow. That left the crusader momentarily blind, and Daoud
thrust under the shield with his lance. The lance went in as if the knight wore no mail. As the Frank fell
backward from his horse, Daoud saw that it was Simon de Gobignon. Sophia's light touch on his shoulder woke Daoud. He was lying on his
stomach. He propped himself up on his elbows and saw the glowing,
diamond-shaped windowpanes and the familiar white walls of his room on
the upper floor of Cardinal Ugolini's mansion. He turned his head to
look at Sophia. Her dark eyes comforted him. "Time for your poultice," she said. He tried to smile at her. "And something to drink. My mouth tastes dry
and foul." "Wine?" "By the Archangel, no! The juice of oranges, and later kaviyeh." Sophia laughed. "Oranges? In April? You must be dreaming. Trees do not
bear fruit all year round in this part of the world, David. Your bitter
beverage I can supply. But let me see to your wound first." She raised
the blanket that covered his body. He felt his skin grow hot from scalp
to toes. She was gazing upon his nude body. He was glad he was lying on
his stomach rather than on his back. Did his nakedness mean anything to her? Among Christians, he knew, men
and women often saw each other naked. Not only did women go through the
streets with their faces uncovered, but in warm weather the common folk,
men and women both, walked to the public baths with barely a bit of
cloth wrapped around their loins. And all Christians slept naked. When
Sophia saw his body like this, was it just another unclothed body, like
the many she had doubtless seen in her lifetime? Did she feel any
embarrassment? Or desire? As for himself, his sense of helplessness made
him feel only embarrassed, nothing more. He turned his head again to look at her. She was intent on administering
the poultice, and that doubtless took her mind off his nakedness. She
had lifted off the old cloth, stained an ugly yellow-brown, and dropped
it to the floor. He got a glimpse of the wound, a red slit about half a
finger's length with black knots of thread in it in the back of his
right leg, halfway between knee and buttock. Gently she patted and
stroked on the wound a paste made of ground rose petals, lime water, and
egg white, the Sufi remedy he had taught her to make. Lorenzo had used his knife to open the hole made by the arrow so that he
would not tear Daoud's flesh pulling the barbed head out. While Lorenzo
worked over him, Daoud drew upon Saadi's final teaching to him to defend
himself against the pain. In his mind he began to create the drug called
Soma. He envisioned it as a bowl of glowing, silver-colored liquid, and
he believed it could form a capsule around any part of his body where
there was pain and wall it off from the rest of himself, at the same
time filling him with a feeling of well being. _Once you have experienced the effects of material drugs on your body
and learned to master them_, Saadi said to him, _you have the knowledge
you need to create a drug of the mind, Soma. This is more powerful and
more reliable, and it will not harm your body in any way. Indeed, Soma
will make your body stronger. It will calm your mind, fill you with
peace, sometimes give you visions. But if you should suddenly need all
your faculties, they are yours at once. The drug is gone in an instant._

It was Saadi's teaching that whatever a man could accomplish with
drugs, he could accomplish more effectively and reliably with his mind
alone. A trained man could envision a drug that would serve any desired
purpose. And thus a man could transcend the Hashishiyya reliance on
administered drugs. While he had drunk from the bowl of Soma and it had flooded through his
body, Daoud's fingers had gripped the little leather case hung around
his neck that contained the Sufi tawidh, the numerological invocation
that he believed would speed his healing. A river of blood had poured
out of his leg when Lorenzo drew out the arrow, and he had fainted. Sophia had stitched the wound with cotton thread that was now black with
congealed blood. Now Sophia laid a clean, folded linen cloth over the wound, used another
strip of linen to tie the poultice to his leg, and then pulled the
blanket up over him. Their eyes had not met once during the time she was
caring for him. He found to his surprise that he had to know what she
was thinking and feeling. As if sensing his need, she spoke. "I have wanted to tell you, but you
were too sick to understand me. D'Ucello, the podesta, came here the
night of the uprising, looking for you and Lorenzo. As we planned, I
told him you had both gone to Perugia." Daoud's body went cold. He felt as if he were being stalked, and the
hunter was closing in. "Did he believe you?" he asked. She shrugged. "He blustered some, but the cardinal ordered him off in
the end. I think he must have hoped to find you among the dead or
wounded at the Monaldeschi palace." Daoud rolled over in bed, the wooden frame creaking, and the pain tore
through his leg like the slash of a scimitar. He groaned through
clenched teeth. Despite his ability to shield his mind from pain when it
took him unexpectedly like this, it could hurt like the torments of the
damned. "What are you doing?" He gasped. "Trying to get up. D'Ucello will be back, and he must not see
me wounded." He tried to sit up, and she laid her hand, firm and cool,
on his forehead and pushed him back against the pillows. "You are in more danger from fever than you are from d'Ucello," she
said, letting her hand rest on his forehead. "You will be surprised at how quickly the wound heals," he said,
touching the tawidh at his neck. "As for fever, it is healthy. It burns
out impurities." He laughed bitterly. "I hope it is burning the
stupidity out of me." "You--stupid?" She laughed. He did not join her. It pleased him a little, in the midst of his
anguish and self-disgust, to see that she thought well of him. But she
was wrong about him--and her life depended on him, and that thought made
him feel worse. "De Gobignon was waiting for me. He knew I was coming for the Tartars. He _knew_." "How much could he have known?" she asked. "No one knew what your plans
were." "Sophia, if de Gobignon had not been there, I would have been able to
kill those two barbarian pigs easily. I did my best, with all my skill,
all my training, all my experience, and it went for nothing." That was a pain Soma would not shield him from, the pain of failure. It
felt like a mace blow to his chest every time he remembered the fight in
the blackness of the spice pantry. To drive away the damnable memory of being routed by the Christians, he
had to concentrate on the present and the future. "Send someone to fetch Sordello to me." "You should be resting." He laughed and touched her hand lightly. "Resting! Our enemies are not
resting." She sighed, but went. When Sordello entered Daoud's room, Lorenzo followed him closely, eyes
boring into the back of the mercenary's skull. Sophia entered behind
Lorenzo. Trembling, Sordello knelt by Daoud's bed. "I feared for you, Messer
David. I am happy to see you looking so well." Would Sordello give up the pleasures of hashish and the promise of a
paradise with beautiful women? What reward could Simon de Gobignon offer
him that could be more enticing? _Yet, I have always known that this man was a two-edged sword that could
turn in my hand._

"The Monaldeschi were prepared for us," said Daoud. "They were armed and
on their battlements when we came. Someone warned them." "You do not suspect me, Messer David?" Sordello, crouched on the floor
by Daoud's bed, looked up slyly sideways at him. "I would be a fool to
injure one who has been so great a benefactor to me." Daoud felt rage boil up inside him at Sordello's false abjectness. He
glared at the old bravo and saw a faint tremor in his jaw. Propping himself up on one elbow, he leaned toward Sordello. "Your
fawning insults me. I think you lie." Hatred briefly twisted Sordello's face. Then a knowing smile made it
even uglier. "Messer David, if I had told the Count de Gobignon what I know about
you, you would surely be dead by now." Daoud forced himself to his feet. The pain shot through him like a
lightning bolt, but in his fury he ignored it. He bent down and seized
Sordello's throat with his right hand. He fell back sitting on the bed,
pulling the popeyed bravo toward him so that his good knee pressed into
the Sordello's chest. Somewhere, nearby, he heard Sophia cry out in protest, but he paid no
attention. "Confess that it was you, and I will kill you quickly," Daoud whispered. "I have shown you paradise, and I can show you hell. If you do not give
yourself up now, and I find out later that it was you, I will inflict
torments of mind and body on you beyond your imagining." "David, stop, you will kill him!" Sophia screamed. She gripped Daoud's
arm, digging her nails into his muscle. Gradually Daoud released his hold on the corded throat. With his eyes
alone, employing the Hashishiyya "look that imprisons," he held Sordello
fast. The bravo's eyes were bloodshot and red-rimmed. He was glad Sophia had stopped him. She must have realized that he would
regret it if he killed Sordello in a fit of rage. If Sordello had not
betrayed them, his false reports to Simon de Gobignon would still be
useful. And in any case his sudden disappearance immediately after the
attack on the Monaldeschi palace would draw de Gobignon's attention. "If it is not you, then there is another among us who told Simon de
Gobignon about my plans. If you want to save your life, you will find
out who it is." "I promise you, Messere." Sordello's voice was a hoarse croak. "Whoever
the escremento is, I will deliver his life into your hands." Sordello stood up, then turned to Sophia and bowed. "Madonna," Sordello gasped. "My eternal gratitude--"

"Just get out," Sophia snapped. Was there a suggestion of a leer in Sordello's lumpy face as he stared
at Sophia? But pain spread from the wound in Daoud's leg in great
ripples through him, and he lay back and concentrated on the Sufi
exercise that detached him from his body. The heavy oak door closed behind Sordello. They were all three silent
for a moment. Then Lorenzo jerked the door open and looked out into the
corridor. He nodded, indicating Sordello had truly gone. "It might have been wiser to strangle him," said Lorenzo. "He has all
our lives in his hands." Daoud held up his hand. "What he said was true. He could have delivered
us to our enemies before the attack. I believe he is still in my power." *       *       *       *       *

When alone with Sophia, Daoud lay back on his cushions. She stood
looking down at him, and he wondered if that was pity he saw in her
face. "You are in such pain," she said. He shook his head. "It is nothing." "I do not mean the pain of the body." She understood, then, what he was feeling. He smiled at her and shut his
eyes. She sat in silence on the edge of the bed while he lay there, brooding. Again he escaped into drowsiness. His mind drifted back to the sands of
Egypt. He dreamed again of riding as a Mameluke. When he woke, a short time had passed, and Sophia was still sitting
there, gazing down at him. Hints of a new plan began to come together in his mind. As fever purged
him of poison, it had brought him dreams of battle. Not of intrigues
with the priests and bishops around the pope. Not of ambushes in narrow
streets. Rather, open war. That was the meaning of those dreams. Perhaps God Himself had sent them. He was called upon to wage jihad against the enemies of Islam as a
Mameluke, on horseback, at the head of an army. He held out his arm to Sophia. "Help me up. You and Lorenzo and I must
meet with Ugolini." *       *       *       *       *

Later that morning, a heavy spring rain hammered on the windows of
Ugolini's cabinet. The storm had so darkened the room that the
cardinal's servants had lit extra candles. Daoud, Lorenzo, and Sophia
sat in a semicircle across from Ugolini's worktable. The painted glass eyes of Ugolini's stuffed owl glared disapprovingly
down from the bookshelves at Daoud, who had a sense that the cardinal
felt as the owl looked. The skull on the table seemed to be laughing at
him. He understood now what he had to do, but would the others, especially
Ugolini, go along with it? Over Ugolini's frantic protests he had
insisted on inciting the Filippeschi to attack the Palazzo Monaldeschi. That attack having failed of its purpose, would the three of them still
accept Daoud's authority? Ugolini, surely, would think that events had
proved him right about the futility of the attack on the Monaldeschi. How could he be won over to the idea of a wider war? _Make war utterly
on the idolaters_--that, he had decided, was the meaning of his dream. "Manfred's supporters, the Ghibellini, must take the pope captive," he
said. "I know that you would prefer peace to war, but now that I have
tried to kill the Tartars and failed, we do not have that choice." It
was best, he thought, to admit his failure openly before Ugolini threw
it in his face. The cardinal's eyes were almost as wide and as stark as the owl's. "You
would plunge the whole of Italy into war?" "No," said Daoud, "but that is what is going to happen. The one thing
that has kept the French out of Italy is the pope's refusal to give the
Christian kings, especially the king of France, permission to ally
themselves with the Tartars. But now that Urban is ill, he may give King
Louis what he wants. When the pope allows the alliance, Louis will give
his brother Charles permission to attack Manfred. It is not I who will
plunge Italy into war. I am proposing only that we act before the French
do." Ugolini shook his head. "What do you mean, take the pope captive?" "The Papal States are surrounded by cities ruled by Manfred's Ghibellino
supporters. The nearest is Siena. With gold and with timely warnings
about the danger from the French, we can persuade Siena to move against
the pope." He held up his fist. "And then we can make sure that the next
pope elected is favorable to Manfred. And through him, well disposed
toward peace with Islam." It was the same sort of plan, Daoud thought, as inciting the Filippeschi
against the Monaldeschi. But Lorenzo had already visited Siena and made
sure that the Ghibellini of Siena, with Daoud's help, could raise a far
greater army than the pope could muster in Orvieto. This time he would
succeed. "Impossible!" Ugolini cried. "No king can control the Papacy. The
Hohenstaufen have been trying to rule over the popes for centuries, and
for centuries they have failed." "Perhaps it takes a stranger to see that where the Hohenstaufen failed,
the French are about to succeed," said Daoud. "France is now the
strongest kingdom in Europe. If Manfred does not get control of the pope
and the cardinals, the next pope will be under the protection of the
French, and will have to do whatever they want." "Urban is a sick man," said Ugolini. "There is not a cardinal who would
risk a wager that he will live to see the year 1265. He will not call
for the French to save him when he knows the angels are coming to get
him." "No, there I must disagree with Your Eminence," said Lorenzo, lounging
in a large chair facing Ugolini's table. "Urban is a Frenchman, and he
will work to bring the French into Italy until the moment the angels
knock at his door." Sophia, who had been sitting quietly in an armless straight-back chair
with her hands folded in her lap, said, "The pope will blame the
Ghibellini for the attack on the Monaldeschi. He will want help, and he
will ask it from the French even if it means Christians joining the
Tartars in a crusade the pope does not really want." "Very shrewd," said Daoud with a smile in her direction. "Except that
the pope had decided before the attack on the Monaldeschi to approve the
alliance with the Tartars. As we know from his persuading Fra Tomasso to
switch sides. It was because the pope had clearly turned against us that
I planned to kill the Tartars." Daoud was tired of sitting. Despite the pain in his leg, he used his
stick to push himself to his feet and stepped out of the window recess. He limped over to Ugolini's table. "We must send Lorenzo to Siena with enough of our precious stones to
raise an army big enough to overwhelm the papal soldiery and the Orvieto
militia. It may take time to persuade the Sienese to act. It will take
more time to muster an army and march on Orvieto. We must begin as
quickly as we can. With the pope in Ghibellino hands, with the
Ghibellini in a position to sway the outcome of the next papal election,
we may yet keep the French out of Italy." And that, he thought, would keep crusaders and Tartars out of the Dar
al-Islam. Ugolini's shrug spoke more of despair than of acquiescence. "Certainly
the French will come if we do nothing. You are right about that. Do as
you will. It is a miracle we have survived this long." Strange, Daoud thought. Ugolini saw their mere survival as miraculous. To Daoud, failure so far to put a final stop to the alliance of
Christians and Tartars made him wonder whether God disapproved of him. *       *       *       *       *

Once he accepted the fact that he had to go, Lorenzo had hoped the rain
would continue. Under its cover his leaving the city was less likely to
be noticed or impeded. But by mid-afternoon, the hour of None, when he
was packed and mounted, a spare horse trotting behind him, a bright,
hot sun had come out, and the puddles in the narrow streets were turning
to steam. At the Porta Maggiore he stopped when he saw two clerks seated at tables
on either side of the gateway, one questioning each person entering the
town, the other examining those leaving. A dozen of the podesta's men in
yellow and blue stood by to keep people in line. Each clerk consulted
what appeared to be a list on a scroll and on another scroll wrote down
the names of those he questioned. Only two days ago Sophia had told d'Ucello that David of Trebizond and
his man Giancarlo were in Perugia. Now, Lorenzo thought, those damned
clerks were probably watching for their return. They could have been set
at the gate the morning after the attack on the Monaldeschi palace. He smiled ironically as he remembered how, last summer, he had sat as
these clerks did now, at the gateway to Lucera waiting to catch a
certain Saracen newly arrived from Egypt. Now, thought Lorenzo, if he tried to leave Orvieto he would not only be
stopped and possibly arrested, he would be as good as telling the
podesta that he and David had never been out of the town at all. Lorenzo clenched his fists. He felt like a tuna caught in a net. _And if I stand here much longer staring they'll notice me and haul me
in._

He quickly turned his horses away from the gate and headed back to
Ugolini's mansion. *       *       *       *       *

At the beginning of the third Nocturn, Lorenzo, David, and a servant of
Ugolini's named Riccardo, whom they had chosen for his size and
strength, emerged from an alley near the north side of the city wall. David wore a hood pulled low over his face. He limped and walked with a
stick. Lorenzo had advised against his being out in the street at all,
but David had answered that the watch did not know he was in Orvieto and
would not be looking for him. Lorenzo was amazed at how rapidly David had gotten better. He had never
seen a man walking only two days after taking a bad arrow wound in the
leg. The Muslims who taught David the art of healing must be even better
than Jewish physicians. As they walked, Lorenzo made David recite the names of half a dozen
prominent Perugian merchants who were supporters of King Manfred. If the
podesta were to question David about his whereabouts the night of the
Filippeschi uprising, these men would bear witness that David and
Lorenzo had been in Perugia. "If d'Ucello does question you, how will you explain that you are back
in Orvieto without having been seen entering through the gate?" Lorenzo
asked him. "I will tell him--with the greatest reluctance--that the line was very
long when I arrived and that I was in haste to enter, so I bribed the
men on duty to let me by. The more time passes before he discovers my
presence in Orvieto, the more believable that will be." "If he suspects you of anything, he will arrest you no matter how good a
story you tell him," Lorenzo said. David stopped walking and rested his hand on Lorenzo's shoulder. "That
is why you must go tonight, my friend. And come back quickly with an
army from Siena." *       *       *       *       *

Lorenzo had a pack over his shoulder and wore a long traveling cloak. Riccardo carried a coil of rope. Ahead of them was a small stone shed
built against the wall, beside one of the round guard towers. Lorenzo was not particularly frightened by the ordeal ahead. He had done
enough climbing in his younger days. But he was repelled by the thought
that through the large opening in the floor of the little house the
people of this quarter dumped, not only their garbage, but also the
contents of their chamber pots. They went quietly to the door of the shed. There was a guard in the
tower above them, though he would have no reason to watch the garbage
chute. Riccardo put a meaty hand on the rough-hewn door. It gave without a
struggle. Not even locked, thought Lorenzo. He supposed the podesta, may
his ballocks wrinkle up like prunes, had not thought that anyone would
choose this ignominious way to escape from the city. "Sophia told me to tell you she would miss you," David said. "Kiss her for me," said Lorenzo. _Wonder if David has bedded Sophia yet._

Riccardo filled the little room so that Lorenzo felt himself being
crowded to the edge of the chute. "Hey! Riccardo! Push me down _after_ you have the rope around me." "Sorry, Messere." The burly man tied the rope tightly around Lorenzo's
waist, just above the belt that held the jewels, and they both pulled
hard on the knot to test it. Tying the knots in the dark, they had to be
doubly careful. Then Riccardo tied the other end of the rope around his
own waist and donned heavy oxhide gloves. It was a warm April night, and Lorenzo smelled a horrid odor of garbage
and excrement coming up from the pit. It was not actually a pit, but a
crevice in the face of the cliff on which Orvieto was built. Lorenzo had
hoped the day's heavy rain would have washed the cliffside clean. But
the people of Orvieto had been dumping offal here for centuries. "Your final instructions?" he said to David. "Ugolini's servant Guglielmo seems to have gotten safely out of the city
with your horses and baggage," said David. "He must not have been on any
list. He will meet you at the shrine of Saint Sebastian on the road to
Siena. From there you know what you have to do." David grasped him by the shoulders and then patted his back. They had
become good friends, Lorenzo realized. Look how David was trusting him
to ride with a fortune in gems to Siena, meet the right parties, bargain
with them, deliver the gems to them and come back to Orvieto with a
Ghibellino army. That was much to expect of a man. Yet David seemed not
to doubt that Lorenzo would do it. Lorenzo felt warm when he thought how much David meant to him. He had
come on this mission as King Manfred's man, but he was going to Siena
just as much for David as for Manfred. Bringing the Sienese into the
struggle might keep the French away, though, and that would help Manfred
as much as it would the Muslims. "Lower away, then," Lorenzo said to Riccardo. David stepped back. Riccardo and Lorenzo both took hold of the rope. Lorenzo stepped over the edge of the chute. His legs dangled, and he
tried not to think about how much empty space was between him and the
rocks at the base of Orvieto's mountain. The rope cut painfully into his
waist and back. He gripped it tightly with his gloved hands and wrapped
his legs around it to take some of the strain off the loop around his
waist. Grunting, Riccardo slowly lowered Lorenzo through the chute. David was
standing beside Ugolini's man and had laid a protective hand on the
rope. The hole in the floor was just wide enough for Lorenzo's shoulders
to pass through. Then he was hanging free below the city wall, his back
to the cliff, staring out at a starry black sky and the silhouettes of
distant hillsides. He felt dizzy and shut his eyes. "Turn me," he whispered hoarsely up at the opening above him. After a moment he felt his body rotating, and again he had to fight
dizziness. He was facing in toward the smelly crevice, and he drew up
his legs and planted his feet firmly on its walls. With the help of the
rope he could walk down the cliffside. Riccardo let out the rope a
little more, and Lorenzo's boot sole scraped loudly against the
crumbling tufa surface, releasing a shower of pebbles. "Who's down there?" a distant voice shouted, and Lorenzo felt as if
someone had dumped a bucket of cold water over him. That was the guard
in the tower high above. He wondered if the guard could see him down
here. He tried to grip the sides of the crevice with his feet and pull
himself closer to the cliff face. "I am taking a piss, buon'amico!" Riccardo called up to the guard. "Do
you mind?" "That place is not for pissing," the guard called back. "Would you rather I sprinkled your tower?" There was no answer this time, and Riccardo began whistling loudly to
cover any further noises Lorenzo might make. Lorenzo hoped the guard
would not come down to investigate. What if he did, and Riccardo felt he
must let go of the rope? Riccardo must have had the same thought, because he began paying out the
rope more rapidly, and Lorenzo's feet flew over the crackling rock. He
was like a man running furiously backward. It would be comical, he
thought, were he not in danger of breaking his neck. This was a time when he wished he had clung to a religion of some sort
rather than abandoning the faith of his fathers and replacing it with
nothing. It would be so comforting to pray to an all-powerful being who
might be kind enough to protect him. Just _hoping_ not to get hurt
seemed stupid and futile. He felt the cliff wall beginning to slant outward a bit under his feet. The whistling from the shed had stopped. He looked up and saw that he
was halfway down the side of the cliff. The backs of his legs ached from
the strain of supporting his weight, and his shoulders and arms hurt
too. He began to worry, not so much about whether he would fall as what
he might land in when he reached the bottom. And the smell of rot and filth all around him might choke him before he
ever got down. He saw directly below him a pit of blackness surrounded
by trees that were only a little less dark. The muck might be over his
head; he might just sink into it. As he reached the level of the trees he drew his knees up and then
straightened them hard, giving himself a push away from the cliff. He
was still being lowered, so that when he swung back to the cliff he was
much farther down. This time his boots hit a coating of soft stuff on
the rock, and the smell was unbearable. _I'd rather break my neck than smother in shit._

He kicked again with his legs, and when he hit the end of the outward
swing, the rope feeling as if it would cut him in two, he grabbed for a
tree branch, barely visible in the darkness. It hit him in the stomach
and knocked all the wind out of him, but he clung to it desperately. Bent double over the tree limb, he looked down and saw shadows that
might be forest floor as far below him as his own height. Then again, he
might be seeing the tops of other trees. He drew his dagger and cut the
rope around his middle but held it with one hand. He took deep, relieved
breaths when the constraint was gone. He gave three sharp jerks on the
rope, the signal that he was down. After a moment all tension left the
rope, and he felt it falling in the darkness. Another moment and he
heard rustlings, thumps, and splashes as the rope landed at the bottom
of the crevice. Tomorrow's dumping, he thought, would quite conceal it. He wondered briefly if David and Riccardo had safely left the dumping
shed and were on their way back to Ugolini's. He looked down again into
the darkness, realizing that if he jumped from here he might fall far
enough to kill himself. Having swung away from the pile of offal, he was
now more worried about breaking his neck. He pulled himself up,
straddling the tree and facing in toward the trunk. He slid down to the
trunk, then tried to feel about with his foot for another branch. His feet met nothing. He swung over the side of the branch, feeling the
trunk with one hand and the space below him with his feet. Still
nothing. Now he was dangling from the limb, holding on with two aching
hands. If he had not worn gloves, he would have no skin left on his
palms. _Well, here goes one hopeful atheist._ He let go. He fell a short distance, feetfirst, into a pool of water. It came up
over his low boots, soaking his hose. There was no smell; apparently it
was a pure forest pool, probably a puddle enlarged by the recent rain. Sighing, he sloshed out of it. Small creatures hopped and scurried away
from him. _It could have been much, much worse._

Glad to feel his feet on the ground, he hoped the rest of his journey to
Siena would be less exciting than the beginning. XLVI


Friar Mathieu sat in a cushion-lined armchair in the cloistered garden
of the Hospital of Santa Clara, the white wisps of his beard ruffling
like feathers in the morning breeze. The dappled shade of a pear tree
protected him from the June sun. A young Franciscan, his tonsured head a gleaming pink spot surrounded by
a wreath of close-cropped black hair, stood at a tall desk beside Friar
Mathieu, writing on a piece of parchment. "All things lead to good if one looks at them aright," Friar Mathieu
said with a chuckle. "That murderer in black gave me the time I needed
to do something needful--get the story of my journey among the Tartars
written before it is lost in my failing memory. A good thing I did not
land on my head." Despite the pain he felt at Friar Mathieu's injuries, Simon had to smile
at the old Franciscan's little joke. And indeed, he might look small and
fragile huddled in his chair, but he was showing energy and zest for
life. He was pulling through. "And behold," Friar Mathieu went on, lifting his bandaged right arm, "I
myself am exempted from writing. Friar Giuseppe must do the work while I
sit here and explore my memory. And when I grow tired of even that
little bit of work, Friar Giuseppe reads to me from the newly arrived
manuscript on mathematics, called _De Computo Naturali_, by our gifted
brother Friar Bacon of Oxford. I could almost be grateful to that
Assassin." Simon stood awkwardly, looking unhappily down at him, till Friar Mathieu
motioned him to sit on the ground beside him. To make room for himself,
Simon moved a pair of crutches out of the way. It was worrisome that so
soon--only a few weeks after the fall that had almost killed him--Friar
Mathieu had started hobbling about on crutches and had begun dictating,
sitting painfully upright, to Friar Giuseppe. Even though one leg was
certainly broken and there were probably a dozen other cracks in his
arms and ribs, Friar Mathieu insisted that he was more likely to die if
he remained in bed than if he was up and moving about. "You are looking well today, Father." He had to admit it, even though
the old priest was not taking proper care of himself. "I am lucky this happened to me in the spring," said Friar Mathieu. "The
sun and air help me mend. But I fear you will not see my complete
recovery, since you will have to leave Orvieto shortly." "Leave? Why, Father? Has something gone wrong?" His first thought, as
always, was for the safety of the Tartars. Ever since that terrible
night in April, he dreaded leaving them out of his sight. Instead of answering, Friar Mathieu asked Friar Giuseppe for privacy. The young priest bowed deeply and touched the old man's hand reverently
before gathering up his writing materials and turning to go. "You have not heard, then? A courier brought the news to the pope's
palace last night. All through the north, the Ghibellini are on the
move. Siena, it seems, has been quietly raising an army to send against
Orvieto. And the Ghibellino party has taken power in Pisa and Lucca. It
appears the Ghibellini have decided to seize all of Italy before the
French come in and take it." _But we are French_, thought Simon, _and we have no ambitions in Italy_. _Uncle Charles does._

In this quiet garden it was hard to believe that an army could be
preparing to march against Orvieto. Or even that the attack on the
Palazzo Monaldeschi had happened in the same city. Simon watched a friar
in his brown robe serenely weeding. The rows of plants were already tall
and thick--peas, haricots, lettuce, cabbage, carrots. At Gobignon this
time of year the seedlings would not be half as high. "Will the Sienese besiege Orvieto?" he asked. _Another battle? And another attempt on the Tartars?_

"Pope Urban will not wait to see what they do," said Friar Mathieu. "He
feels threatened from both north and south, and intends to move away
from here as soon as possible. There is a rumor that Manfred of Sicily
himself may invade the Papal States this summer." Simon sprang to his feet and threw his arms wide in astonishment. "And
what about the Tartars?" "They will certainly go where His Holiness goes." "God's blood!" Simon struck his forehead with his hand. "Forgive me,
Father. But if the pope has not enough troops to keep him safe in
Orvieto, surely he is in even more danger on the road. And if the
Tartars are with him, we could lose everything." Friar Mathieu shook his head, absently rubbing his bound right arm with
his left hand. "We can gain everything. His Holiness needs help
desperately. Now he can be persuaded to give King Louis permission to
join with the Tartars." The old Franciscan's eyes fixed on Simon's. "You
must go to the pope." Simon felt the palms of his hands grow cold. "The pope will not listen
to me, Father." Friar Mathieu chuckled. "Is he more likely to listen to that fool--God
forgive me--de Verceuil?" "Yes," said Simon after a moment's thought. "De Verceuil is a cardinal. And is it not his task to treat with the pope? Mine is to guard the
ambassadors." "Are you not close to King Louis, Simon? Almost a foster son?" Simon hesitated. "That is putting it a bit strongly. But he knows me
well." Friar Mathieu gestured with his left hand. "Then you are the person to
carry His Holiness's appeal for help to King Louis." The suggestion dismayed Simon. It meant he would have to leave the
Tartars for months. And just when they would be much more vulnerable to
attack, following the pope from one city to another. "No, Father," he said. "I cannot leave the Tartars." Friar Mathieu shook his head patiently. "Do you not see, Simon? If the
pope does decide to approve an alliance with the Tartars, John and
Philip's work is done." Standing on the gravel walk of the Franciscan cloister garden, Simon
felt as if the earth were shaking under him. He could not picture
himself speaking to the pope as one statesman to another. Persuade the
pope suddenly to take a stand, when he had vacillated for nearly a year? And yet, he told himself, he was the Count de Gobignon, and the lands he
held were larger than some kingdoms. But that only reminded him that he held the title through a lie. *       *       *       *       *

The courtyard before the papal palace was crowded with covered wagons
and open carts, horses and donkeys, men carrying crates and bales. Here
and there, mailed papal archers in gold and white surcoats strode,
crossbows on their shoulders, alert for pilfering. Simon asked a series
of servants for the pope's majordomo and was directed to that official,
clad in a glittering embroidered tunic, who stood at the center of the
papal library overseeing the packing of books and scrolls. Simon
summoned up all his confidence and presented himself to the man. "The Count de Gobignon of France?" the horse-faced majordomo repeated. "I will try to find His Holiness for you, Your Signory." They found Pope Urban in a tiny chamber on the second floor of the
palace, writing furiously at a desk that faced a window opposite the
door. He was wearing a white cassock with a white linen hood drawn up
over his head. On his desk Simon saw a jar of ink, a sheaf of quills,
and a stack of parchment sheets. A wrought-iron stand held a black
earthenware pitcher over a candle flame. "Holy Father--" the majordomo began, addressing the pope's back. Simon
watched with fascination the rapid movements of Pope Urban's right arm
as his quill raced over the parchment, leaping after each line to the
ink jar and back again. "Maledizione!" the pope exclaimed. "Not now, Ludovico. God's pity, let
me get at least one letter done without you interrupting me. The
Archangel Michael run you through if you speak another word to me." Simon was momentarily shocked, but then recalled that the pope was a
shoemaker's son. Once a bourgeois, always a bourgeois, he thought, even
if one becomes God's vicar on earth. But, by God's robe, the man could
write fast. In a moment he had filled a sheet of parchment with the
short, unadorned black strokes of a chancery hand. Simon estimated it
would take him the better part of a morning to write that much. Of
course Pope Urban, being a churchman all his life, had a good deal more
practice at writing. Urban folded the parchment and poured melted red wax from the black
pitcher to seal it. He took the large gold ring from his finger and
stamped it into the wax. Without looking around, he handed the letter to
his majordomo. "To Duke Alberto Baglione at Perugia by our best horses," said Pope
Urban. "Have Pietro Pettorini carry it; he is our fastest man." "Holiness," said the majordomo diffidently, taking the letter, "the
Count de Gobignon wishes to see you." "Ah!" Urban half turned in his chair to look at Simon. Simon saw that
the pope's wrinkled face was a deep pink, and his eyes glittered. Loose
strands of gray hair escaping from under his hood quivered as his head
shook with a slight, constant tremor. Simon had heard that men sometimes
rallied in the final stages of an illness, before the slide into
darkness. That, perhaps, accounted for the pope's color and energy. Simon's heart ached for the old man. This was the spiritual father of
the world, and his troubles, troubles Simon had in part brought to him,
were aiding whatever disease was destroying him. "Simon de Gobignon!" Urban cried, raising bony hands in benediction. "If
you had not come to me, I should have sent for you." His pale blue eyes
shifted from side to side, and Simon felt even more pain for him. _This man should not think of traveling. It will kill him._

Urban half stood, and his majordomo rushed past Simon to turn his chair
so that the pope could face his visitor. He was sitting in a simple
straight-back chair without arms. Simon stepped into the room and dropped to one knee. The pope extended
his trembling right hand, and Simon kissed his gold Fisherman's Ring. On
its circular face was an engraving of a bearded man whom Simon guessed
must be Saint Peter, casting a net from the stern of a boat. Seen close at hand and without the tall tiara and the crozier and the
heavy robes of office, Urban was very short. Simon wondered whether he
had always been a little man or whether age and the strains of his
office had shrunk him. "Stand up, Monseigneur le Comte, s'il vous plait," said the pope,
changing to French. "I am sorry there is no chair, but this is where I
do all my real work, and it is best not to encourage visitors to sit. Ludovico, leave us and shut the door behind you. And do not hang about
in the corridor eavesdropping." Simon rose, and found himself looking down at the skullcap on top of the
pope's head. Feeling awkward, he took a few steps backward until his
back was against the door of the tiny chamber. Urban said, "I have long wanted to hear from your own lips what happened
at the Palazzo Monaldeschi." Simon gave the pope a detailed account of the battle. He ended with his
fight with the man in black. Urban's eyes widened, and the trembling of
his head grew more pronounced. When Simon told how the enemy had
escaped, throwing Friar Mathieu from the cellar stairs, the pope winced
in pain. "So," Urban mused, "this murderer--doubtless sent by Manfred von
Hohenstaufen--still lurks somewhere in Orvieto." "We have tried to track him down," said Simon. "But the Filippeschi deny
any knowledge of him, and the podesta, it seems, has not the power to
make them answer our questions." He allowed the contempt he felt for
d'Ucello to creep into his voice. "Open the door and see if that sneaking Ludovico is listening outside,"
Pope Urban said. His lips twitched under his flowing gray beard in what
was probably a smile. Simon went to the door, and saw no one in the corridor but a helmeted
man-at-arms standing about ten paces away. Servants with a huge bed
frame struggled past. He closed the door and turned again to the pope. "Yes," said Urban. "What was I saying? Ah, yes--Simon, I expect to be in
my grave before the year is out." "God forbid, Your Holiness!" "God do me that kindness, you mean." Urban raised a deprecating hand. "I
am worn out. I am ready to go home. But I have a last task to do before
I die. I must insure the destruction of the odious Manfred. I must not
let him kill me before my work is done, and I must not fall into the
hands of the Ghibellini. So, though it will shorten my life even more, I
must leave Orvieto. Now that the Ghibellini have stirred up the
Filippeschi to make civil war, I am no longer safe on this mountaintop. Perugia is more secure. It has a big army, and it is surrounded by a
strong ring of other Guelfo cities and castles. After I am gone, the
cardinals will be safe there while they elect a new pope." Simon realized that he was indeed looking at a dying man. From here to
Perugia was a journey of at least two weeks, through difficult,
mountainous country. Urban might get there safely, but he would not live
there long. The election of a new pope would take months; it had been
known to take years. And Urban's successor might be even more reluctant
to join forces with the Tartars than Urban had been. What if it were
Cardinal Ugolini--he was as eligible as anyone--or someone under his
influence? The little they had accomplished so far might be wholly
undone. Time. Time was the most terrible enemy of all. The more time passed, the
less likely that the alliance would be formed, the joint attack on the
Saracens launched. Simon saw time as a black river in flood, sweeping
away everything he had worked and fought for. _I must prevail upon him to give his permission--now. But how can I sway
a man three times my age--the pope himself?_

The only way to keep from giving in to despair was to plunge in, as if
this were a tournament, or a fight to the death. Simon plunged in. "Your Holiness, before you leave Orvieto, I beg you to recognize that we
must join with the Tartars to crush the infidel." Urban sighed. "You think just as your King Louis does." He held up an
admonitory finger. "Europe first, Simon. The Church must be strong in
Europe before our princes go adventuring in Outremer." "But it was the popes who preached the Crusades in the first place,"
Simon answered, baffled. Urban's eyes grew wide and he leaned forward. "And I will preach yet
another crusade, Simon. Against Manfred the Antichrist. That is why I
would have sent for you if you had not come here. You must make the
journey to King Louis and tell him that this crusade that I will preach
is the most important war of his lifetime. He must come to my aid. I
will make his brother Charles king of southern Italy and Sicily. I will
write the letter to King Louis, and you will carry it to him." _Now I must make my effort._

"He will heed your appeal if you give him what he wants, Your Holiness. Write that letter. But in it give your permission for King Louis to ally
himself with the Tartars and begin preparations for a new crusade." Urban looked slyly up at Simon. "Surely you suspect that it was I who
persuaded Fra Tomasso d'Aquino to change his colors where the Tartars
are concerned. I saw to it that the possibility of an alliance was kept
alive, so that I might have something Louis and I could haggle over. Louis is the most stubborn man in the world. If I simply give him
whatever he wants, there is no guarantee that he will give me what I
want." Simon took a deep breath. What he was about to say might offend the pope
deeply. "Your Holiness, you have said it yourself. There is no more time for
haggling. You must make your best offer and hope it is enough." The pope shut his eyes and slumped in his chair. Simon's heart went
cold, thinking for a moment that the old man had suffered a seizure. But then Urban said very softly, "Help me to turn my chair around." Now Simon's heart beat faster as he moved the pope's chair so that it
faced his desk. Urban took a gleaming blank sheet of parchment from the
pile on his desk, dipped a quill, shook it, and began to write. Simon stood by the wall, his heart pounding with exhilaration. Could it
actually be that his words had moved the pope himself? It seemed
impossible, as if he had stood in the path of a mighty river and
diverted its course. "The Tartars," the old man said with a sigh sometime later, when he had
covered two sheets of parchment. "I hope I am not making a terrible
mistake. I still think Fra Tomasso was right in what he first said about
them." He dropped wax at the bottom of the letter, stamped it with his
ring, and blew on the wax to cool it. Then he folded the parchment and
sealed it again. "Ride to King Louis as quickly as possible." Urban turned, again half
rising from his chair, and handed Simon the letter. "Shall I carry the king's answer to Perugia, Holy Father?" Urban shrugged. "Oh, yes, I shall surely be in Perugia by the time you
come back. But God will take me before the first of Charles d'Anjou's
knights sets foot in Italy." He raised a pale hand to silence Simon's
polite protest, and there was actually a twinkle in his eye. "Whatever
my successor thinks, he will have a hard time undoing the decisions I
have made today. By the time the next pope is elected, he will have a
French army to help him destroy the Hohenstaufen. Whether he wants to or
not." "What of the Tartar ambassadors, Your Holiness?" Simon asked, thinking
that it would be best to hasten those negotiations, too, lest the next
pope disapprove of them. "Should I take them with me to the king?" "No," said Urban firmly. "Then you would have to take a troop with you
to guard them. You may have to travel far to find King Louis. He is
setting out on a royal progress through his kingdom. I had a report of
him just two days ago. That is one great benefit of this office--" His
gray beard twitched again, and Simon knew that he was smiling. "News
comes to us from everywhere." Then his eyelids lowered. "That is also
what makes being the Holy Father so wearisome." Yes, of course, King Louis made a journey of inspection through some
portion of his realm nearly every summer. It might be months, Simon
thought with a sinking heart, before he could find the king, deliver the
pope's letter, and get back to the papal court. So much could happen. _But the most important thing of all has already happened. We have won. We have the alliance!_

Triumph rang like cathedral bells in his ears. He was bringing victory
to the king and to Count Charles. And his success would restore honor to
the house of Gobignon. Simon knelt once again, kissing the Fisherman's Ring and thinking that
the hand that wore it would soon be cold. But as he hurried down a corridor in the Palazzo Papale, already
planning his route to France, the bells of triumph stopped ringing and
in the silence a face appeared before his mind's eye. Amber eyes, olive
skin, and wine-colored lips. _Sophia! By all the angels and saints, I may never see her again!_

For a moment he felt torn. Duty and honor demanded that he leave Orvieto
at once. But what of love? Sophia's image smiled, and he decided. He
would need at least a day to prepare for his journey anyway. Before he
left Orvieto he must see Sophia and make sure that the meeting would not
be their last. XLVII


Fat gray clouds hung low over the Umbrian hills, and Sophia thought she
heard thunder rumbling in the west. As Simon's message had promised, he
was waiting for her by the shrine of the Virgin on the road leading
north from Orvieto. But what was he doing here, she wondered, with spare
horses and a loaded baggage mule? He waved to her and dismounted, and his scudiero--the same man who had
yesterday delivered Simon's note to her--took charge of the beasts. Clearly Simon was beginning a journey. He had not simply come out here
to meet her. But he would not go anywhere far with no more company than
one squire. And how could he leave the Tartars when hardly two months
ago he had nearly lost his life protecting them? Trying to puzzle out what was afoot, she rode with Ugolini's man
Riccardo beside her to the shed-covered shrine where a blue-robed Mary
held a smiling baby Jesus. Riccardo helped her down from her horse and
Simon came forward. She took Simon's arm, and he led her into the pine forest beside the
road. She studied his face, trying to guess what thoughts were passing
behind his somber blue eyes. As soon as they were out of sight of their companions, she asked him,
"Are you going to Perugia ahead of the pope?" He did not answer her at once, so she kept her gaze on him. Sophia enjoyed looking at Simon as she enjoyed looking at beautiful
icons, jewels, sculptures. Yet his body did not have the fine
proportions she had seen in statues made by Greeks of old. He was very
tall and slender, all sharp lines pointing to heaven. His head, framed
by long dark brown hair, was narrow, the nose and chin angular. His
eyes, set in deep hollows, were bright with candor and intelligence,
though at times she saw in them a haunted look. She even found his barbaric Frankish garb pleasing. From Simon's narrow
shoulders hung a cloak of rich crimson silk, and he wore a soft maroon
cap adorned with a blood-red feather. The purple surcoat that extended
below his knees sparkled with dozens of embroidered repetitions of a
design of three gold crowns. In Constantinople only the Basileus and his
consort were permitted to wear purple. From Simon's black leather belt,
decorated with silver plates, hung a curving Saracen sword. Precious
stones twinkled in its handle. Now that she considered it, she recalled that she had always seen Simon
in more subdued colors. _He dressed this way to please me_, she thought fondly. He looked away from her, but there was nowhere for him to look. They
were walled in on all sides by a thick growth of pines. The lower trunks
of the trees were straight and clean, like the poles of a palisade,
their branches, which started higher than she could reach, putting out
the bright green needles of new summer growth. Somewhere far above them
was the cloudy, rain-heavy sky, but here they were enveloped in deep
shadow under interlocked pine branches. The forest was so dark and
soundless that she began to feel a little frightened. Simon and she were
enemies, after all, even though she hoped he would never realize it. She
often forgot it herself, when she was with him, liking him as much as
she did. "I am not going to Perugia," he said. "Did you have me ride all the way out here to tell me no more than
that?" she demanded. "I wanted to tell you that I love you," he said hoarsely. He turned
toward her, and his face glowed with adoration. _Oh, the boy! The dear, beautiful boy! He loves me, and he means it with
every fiber of his being._

She felt a wave of warmth, not love but surely a kindliness, going out
from her to him. He turned and took her shoulders in his big hands. She
liked the feel of his hands on her. If only she could forget about
David, she could happily give herself to him. But she _was_ acting for David, and she was here to find out what this
Frank was planning. She must make some guesses, and then see if she
could get him to confirm them. Such as, where was he going, and why was
he leaving the Tartars behind? She had to tilt her head back to look into his troubled face. "Come, let
us sit down," she said. She took his hand and led him to a tree whose
trunk was wide enough to let them rest their backs against it. Her silk
skirt formed a dark green semicircle around her, bordered by an
embroidered orange and red design of flowers. There was a grace in the way he sat down, despite his long arms and
legs. With a practiced movement he swept his sword back behind him, out
of his way. "Where were David of Trebizond and Giancarlo the night of the attack on
the Monaldeschi palace?" he asked suddenly. She went cold. Did he
suspect them, and her too? Had d'Ucello told him of his unsuccessful
effort to see David and Lorenzo that very night? "They had both left the city," she said. "They went to Perugia and
Assisi. David wished to see the wonder-working body of San Francesco at
Assisi." "I thought he was interested in silk, not saints." Simon glowered at
her. She made herself laugh. "Surely you do not think David the merchant was
in the streets, fighting, the night the Monaldeschi were attacked?" She heard a bell ring somewhere in the distance. Some little hillside
church ringing out the hour of Tierce. The chiming sounded clear and
peaceful. _Dear God, sometimes I wish I could have become a nun._

Simon sighed and took her hand gently and held it resting on his thigh. "Why does it have to be Cardinal Ugolini who is your uncle?" "If not for my Uncle Adelberto I would not be here and we would never
have met," she said. "You are so beautiful," he said. The adoration in his eyes was like a dagger in her heart. She wanted so
much for it to be for her, and it was for a woman who did not exist. _I am so far from what he thinks I am. Michael and Manfred treated me
like a whore. David sends me to seduce this man who is his enemy._

And that, she thought, was why she so much hated to see what had
happened to Rachel, and to know that David had done it and that she
herself had a hand in it. "You will never come back to Orvieto, will you?" she said
disconsolately. His grip on her hand tightened. "No. That is why I wanted to meet you
today. Tell me--if your uncle goes to Perugia to follow the pope, will
you go with him?" She let her body lean sideways till she was pressed against him. "Oh, I
am sure my uncle will go. He is the cardinal camerlengo, after all. As
for me, I would go if I thought I would see you there." His head drew down toward hers. "Do you care for me that much?" "I have never known love like this, Simon. My husband was kind to me,
and I was sorry when he died, but the way I feel about you is
different. I think I will die if I do not know when I can see you
again." Joy lit up his thin face, and she despised herself. "I will find you,
Sophia. I will be gone for months. But I will ride like the wind, and
when I come back it will be to Perugia." _He must be going to France!_ He was traveling with but one man, so as
to go faster. The Tartars had nearly been killed in the Filippeschi
uprising, but he would be leaving them for _months_. Only one thing could be more important to Simon than the lives of the
two Tartars, and that was what the Tartars represented. The pope must be offering to approve the alliance. Simon must be
carrying the message. _When I tell David about this, he will ride after Simon and kill him._

Her thoughts began to race. Even if Simon were stopped, was it not still
too late to keep the Franks and the Tartars from joining forces? No,
probably not, because the pope was dying. If this alliance were not
settled now, the talking and deciding would have to begin all over
again, with a new pope. Could she seduce Simon into abandoning his mission altogether, running
off with her? No, he would never betray so great a trust, not even for
love of her. "I swear to you, I will find you, I will see you again, Sophia," he was
saying. "Believe me." _You will not live long enough._

"I do believe you, Simon." Her loathing for herself grew stronger. Now his arms were around her, and he was pressing her back, away from
the tree trunk and down onto the soft bed of pine needles. His open mouth was against hers, his lips devouring hers. His hands
caressed her shoulders and her back, moving ceaselessly. One hand slid
around and held her breast, and she heard his little indrawn breath of
pleasure. It must feel good to him, she thought. It felt good to be
touched there, and she pushed back against his hand. She felt her body
relax and grow warm. It had been so long--nearly a year--since a man had
held her in his arms. _I need this as much as any man does. Men can go to whores, but where
can I go?_

She loved the feel of his strong arms around her as she lay beside him. He moved so that his whole length was pressed against her, and now he
did not seem any taller than she was. She felt the hardness at his
groin that he pressed against her leg, and she felt an answering heat
within herself. _No!_

_I cannot let this man make love to me and then send David after him to
kill him. I cannot, I cannot. I would hate myself forever._

She felt her body opening to him, felt her bone-deep need of him. If
they came together now, it would be love, not the love she felt for
David, but love even so. And if she condemned him to death then, she
would destroy herself. But if she did not tell David where Simon was
going, she would betray him, and bring ruin down on his people and her
own. If she let Simon make love to her, she would be so torn that
afterward she would probably go mad. He was already partly on top of her, and she wriggled away from him,
pushing at him. "Stop it!" There was a power in her voice that she had not intended to
unleash. She was no longer Cardinal Ugolini's sweet little niece, Sophia
Orfali from Sicily, but Sophia Karaiannides, the woman of Byzantium. A hand's width of space separated their faces. Her voice seemed to
freeze him. He stared at her as if he were seeing a stranger. Then anger blazed up in his eyes. His arms tightened. Those arms seemed
so lean, but the strength in them was like steel chains drawn tight. She
clenched her fists and locked her bent arms in front of her to keep him
away. His lips drew back from his teeth and she felt his hot breath on
her face. _Frankish barbarian!_ she thought. Where only a moment ago she had
wanted him, now she hated him. He was just like all those mail-clad
savages who had destroyed Constantinople, stolen, raped, murdered her
parents. Yes, and she had helped the Basileus Michael to drive them out,
and she would kill this one too. Never would a union of Frankish and
Tartar barbarians threaten her people. By this one man's death she could
guarantee that. With all the strength her anger gave her, she straightened her arms,
pushing him away. Her right arm free, she thrust her open palm against
his jaw, forcing his head back. "Let me go!" And again it was the powerful voice of Sophia Karaiannides. "God's blood!" His eyes were wide, and there was amazement in them, no
longer anger. He released her so suddenly she fell back, hard, against
the floor of the forest. Immediately he reached for her, but his hands were gentle once more,
helping her to sit up. He knelt before her. "Please forgive me." He sounded on the verge of
tears. "Please. I lost command of myself." Standing up, she brushed pine needles from the back of her skirt and her
shawl. He moved to help her, and she pulled away. "Sophia, I have never loved any woman as much as I love you." "Nonsense. Simon, you have far to ride." He moved around so that he was facing her, his usually pale face
flushed, his chest heaving. 