



Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                              THE ASSASSIN
                           AND THE LOVE SLAVE


He is Daoud ibn Abdallah. A warrior who is not afraid to go alone amid
multitudes of enemies. The servant of a very great ruler. Though young,
a wealthy and powerful man in his own land. A spy and a thief in the
lands of others. He is the man whom Sophia Karaiannides, accomplished courtesan and
mistress to a king, is to serve without reservation. The alliance has been struck. The adventure begins....




_Also by Robert Shea:_

ILLUMINATUS! (With Robert Anton Wilson)

SHIKE

ALL THINGS ARE LIGHT*


*Published by Ballantine Books




        THE SARACEN:
           LAND OF
         THE INFIDEL

         ROBERT SHEA


 BALLANTINE BOOKS . NEW YORK




Copyright (C) 1989 by Robert Shea

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States of America by Ballantine
Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in
Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 88-92191

ISBN 0-345-33588-0

Manufactured in the United States of America

First Edition: March 1989




Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note. Variant
    spellings remain as printed, whilst inconsistent hyphenation has
    been standardised. Thanks to Michael Shea for giving Project Gutenberg permission to
    distribute _The Saracen: Land of the Infidel_. TO MICHAEL ERIK SHEA

 _who helped me learn many things
  about the art of storytelling_




                               BOOK ONE

                               LAND OF
                             THE INFIDEL

                       _Anno Domini 1263-1264
                     Year of the Hegira 661-662_

 "Whoso fighteth in the way of God, be he slain or be he victorious, on
 him We shall bestow a vast reward." --The Koran, Surah IV

 "Nothing is true. Everything is permissible." --Hasan ibn-al-Sabbah,
                                        founder of the Hashishiyya




I


In the mist-filled plains around Lucera, cocks crowed. Daoud ibn Abdallah pushed himself slowly to his feet. After days and
nights of walking, his legs ached abominably. Tired as he was, he looked around carefully, studying the other
travelers who rested near him on the road, peering at the city wall a
hundred paces away with its shut gate of iron-studded oak. In his
stomach he felt the hollow ball of dread that had not left him since he
landed in Italy. _I am alone in the land of the infidel._

Dawn gave a pink tint to the pale yellow stones of the wall, about twice
the height of a man. Above it in the distance, covering the summit of
the central hill, rose the citadel of Lucera, surrounded by its own huge
wall set with more than a dozen many-sided towers. Daoud's feet throbbed in his knee-high boots. For three days he had
walked along the carter's track from the port of Manfredonia on the
Adriatic coast into the hills around Lucera. Yesterday at daybreak he
had been able to see, from a great distance, the outline of the fortress
emerging from the center of a rolling plain. It had taken him another
day and a night to reach its gate. Around Daoud now were dozens of people who had gathered at the gate
during the night, mostly merchants with packs on their backs. A few
farmers, hitched to carts loaded with melons, peaches, and oranges, had
dragged their burden over the plain. The more prosperous had donkeys to
pull the wagons. One man with a long stick drove six small sheep. And a cart near Daoud
was piled high with wooden cages full of squawking chickens. Walking in his direction was a tiny dwarf of a man who appeared
permanently doubled over, as if his back had been broken. It seemed to
Daoud that if the man were not holding his arms out from his sides for
balance, his knuckles would almost have brushed the ground. His little
cart was piled with broken tree limbs, firewood to sell in the city. The dwarf lifted his head and grinned at Daoud through a bushy black
mustache. Daoud smiled back, thinking, _God be kind to you, my friend_. From within the city issued a familiar cry, in Arabic, that tore at
Daoud's heart: "Come to prayer. Come to security. God is most great." It
was the adhan, the cry of the muezzins in the minarets of Lucera's
mosques. For, though he was in a Christian land, Lucera was a city
mostly populated by Muslims. Daoud wanted to fall to his knees, but he was pretending to be a
Christian, and could only stand and ignore the call to prayer as the
Christians around him did. He said the words of the salat, the required
prayer, in his mind. The people near Daoud spoke to one another sleepily, softly, in the
tongue of southern Italy. Someone laughed. Someone sang a snatch of
song. When the Muslim prayer ended, they expectantly looked up at the
town wall. Daoud saw two soldiers standing in the tower to the left of the gate. They were accoutred in the Muslim manner, with turbans wrapped around
their helmets and scimitars at their belts. One lifted a long brass
trumpet to his lips and blew a series of notes that sent shivers along
Daoud's spine. With a few changes it could have been the call that had
awakened him every morning in the Mameluke barracks on Raudha Island in
the Nile. Using ropes, the other soldier hoisted onto a tall pole a yellow banner
bearing a black bird with spread wings and claws, and two heads facing
in opposite directions. The double-headed eagle of King Manfred's
family, the Hohenstaufen. With a great squealing of cables and squeaking of hinges, the tall
wooden door swung wide. Daoud reached down and picked up the leather pack that had lain between
his feet. Leaning forward, he pushed his arms through the shoulder
straps. He wore draped over his pack a long countryman's cloak of cheap brown
wool. His tunic and hose were of lightweight undyed cotton. Only his
high boots were expensive. He needed good ones for the long walk from
the coast to Lucera. A sword swung at his belt, short and unadorned, the
sort any man of small means might wear. He had chosen it in El Kahira
out of a stack of swords taken from Christian men-at-arms during the
last crusade. He drew the hood of his cloak over his head. Later his blond hair and
gray eyes would guarantee that no one would suspect what he was. But
here in southern Italy, where most ordinary people were dark
complexioned, his appearance might draw unwanted attention. Even though the sun had just risen, he felt the heat on his back. But it
was not the dry heat of Egypt that he had known most of his life. A
heaviness in the air called forth a dampness from within his flesh. His
tunic clung to him. _If a Christian asks me what month this is, I must remember to say
July._

He brushed the dust from his clothing and fell into line behind the bent
man with his cart of firewood. Once inside Lucera, he would find his way to the inn of al-Kharim. And
tonight the chancellor Aziz would come to him from King Manfred. The line shuffled forward. Three guards were standing in the shadows
just inside the gateway. They were big dark men wearing long green capes
over red tunics. Red turbans were wrapped around their spike-topped
helmets. Curving swords hung from their belts. A boy in a red tunic and
turban held a sheaf of lightweight spears. Their thick beards reminded Daoud how much he missed his own beard,
shaved off in preparation for this mission. _My people._ Daoud felt a sudden warmth at the familiar sight of
warriors of Islam. The feeling was nonsense, he told himself. These were not his people,
but the Saracens of Manfred von Hohenstaufen. Their Arab ancestors had
once ruled southern Italy, but the Christians had conquered them over a
century before. No, these Muslim warriors were not Daoud's people. In truth, on this
whole earth there were no people Daoud ibn Abdallah could truly call his
own. *       *       *       *       *

Once he had been David Langmuir, living with his crusader father and
mother, in a castle near Ascalon by the plain of Gaza. An English
ancestor had been one of the first crusaders in the Holy Land. Just after David's ninth birthday Geoffrey Langmuir, his father, had
ridden out to war in gleaming mail with a cross of red silk sewn on his
white surcoat. David never saw him again. Some weeks later the Saracens appeared before the castle, and there
were days of thirst and hunger and constant fear. He remembered the
thunderous pounding at the walls and the dark men in their yellow robes
and green turbans, their crescent-shaped swords coated with blood. He
remembered his mother, Lady Evelyn, in her blue dress, running up the
spiral stairs of a tower. He heard her distant scream. When the Saracens
dragged him out of the castle, with men being cut down by swords all
around him and women thrown to the ground by laughing Turks who fell
upon them, he saw at the base of the tower a bundle of blue linen
splashed with red that must have been his mother. On their leisurely journey back to the Nile, the Turks forced him to lie
on his belly, and they used him as men use women. He would never forget
the needle-sharp tip of a curving dagger touched to his eyeball as a
bashi with a flowing black beard demanded that Daoud use his mouth to
give him pleasure. Whenever Daoud remembered that time, his insides
knotted and his face burned with shame. One day he stood naked on a platform in El Kahira, capital of the
sultans--the city the Christians called Cairo. A fat, laughing slave
dealer, who had raped him till he bled the night before, offered him for
sale. A tall man with one eye a glittering blue and the other a blank white, a
scimitar in a jeweled scabbard thrust through the embroidered sash
around his waist, came forward. A silence fell over the crowd of slave buyers, followed by whispers. The
one-eyed warrior paid the price asked in gold dinars and without
haggling. And when the slaver fondled David's loins one last time as he
covered him with a ragged tunic, the warrior seized the slaver by the
throat with one hand, forcing him to his knees, and squeezed till he
collapsed unconscious in the dust of the marketplace. David was almost mad with terror as the one-eyed warrior took him to his
mansion beside a lake in the center of El Kahira. But the tall man spoke
kindly to him and treated him decently. Amazingly, he could speak
French, David's language, though with a strange and heavy accent. He
told David that he was called Baibars al-Bunduqdari, Baibars the
Crossbowman. He was an emir of the Bhari Mamelukes, which meant, he
said, "slaves of the river." But though the Mamelukes were slaves, they
were also great and powerful warriors. Baibars gave David a new name--Daoud--and told him that he had selected
him to be a Mameluke. He explained in a firm but kindly way that Daoud
did have a choice but that the alternative was a life of unrelieved
wretchedness as a ghulman, a menial slave. As a Mameluke, Daoud would be
set free when his training was complete, and he could win riches and
glory and be a warrior for God and his emir. "I have long watched for such a one as you," Baibars said, "who could
look like a Christian but have the mind and heart of a Mameluke. One
like you could be a great weapon against the enemies of the faith." _But your faith is not my faith_, David, who was to be called Daoud,
thought, not daring to speak, _and your enemies are not my enemies_. His longing to please this man, the first Muslim to treat him with
respect, struggled as the years passed with his memories of a Christian
childhood. Daoud underwent the training of a Mameluke, and Baibars
watched him closely. Daoud accepted Islam and took the common surname of
a convert, ibn Abdallah. He took naturally to the life of a warrior and
grew in strength and skill. Year by year Baibars, too, became more powerful. At last he made himself
sultan of El Kahira, ruler of an empire that stretched from North Africa
to Syria. Daoud's hand had wielded the flame dagger of the Hashishiyya
that ended the previous sultan's life. Now, having raised Daoud, trained him as a Mameluke, and educated him in
statecraft, having sent him to learn wisdom from the Sufi and terror
from the Hashishiyya, having given him a new name and a new faith,
Baibars had sent Daoud into the Christian country called Italy. *       *       *       *       *

The stones of the gateway seemed to be marble, unusual for a
fortification. Daoud noticed large iron rings set at intervals under the
arch. His feet crunched on fresh straw. The space under the arch was about ten paces from outer portal to inner. On one side a broad-shouldered official sat at a table. The man glanced
up at Daoud, looked down at a leather-bound ledger in which he was
writing, then raised his eyes again for a longer look. This time the
brown eyes met Daoud's. The official's grizzled hair formed a cap of curls around his head,
hiding his ears. He had a thick mustache, black streaked with white. His
shirt of violet silk looked costly. On the straw beside him lay a huge
dog, doubtless bred for hunting, with short gray fur, forepaws stretched
before it like a sphinx. _These people live with unclean animals_, Daoud thought with distaste. When the official leaned back in his chair, Daoud saw the long, straight
dagger that hung from his belt in a scabbard decorated with crossed
bands of gold ribbon. Fear tightened Daoud's throat. _Will this man see through me? Will he guess what I am?_

_Come, come_, he chided himself. _You have gone among Christians before. You have walked in the midst of crusaders in the streets of Acre and
Antioch. You have landed on the island of Cyprus. You have even gone as
Baibars's emissary to the Greeks of Constantinople. Commend yourself to
God and cast fear aside._

He visualized what the Hashishiyya called "the Face of Steel within the
Mask of Clay." What he showed this official would be his Mask of Clay,
the look and manner of the merchant he was pretending to be. Beneath it,
unseen, was his true face, a Face of Steel forged over years of bodily
and spiritual training. The mustached man allowed most of the people in line to pass into the
city after a few quick questions. Daoud's heartbeat quickened and he tensed when his turn came to pass. "Come here. Lower your hood," the man said. Walking slowly toward him, Daoud reached up and pushed back his hood. The official raised thick black brows and beckoned to a guard. "If he
makes a move you do not like, skewer him." "Yes, Messer Lorenzo." Daoud felt a stiffness in his neck and a knot in his belly. King
Manfred's chancellor, Aziz, had written that Daoud would be quietly
admitted to the town. The heavyset, black-bearded Muslim soldier took a spear from the boy
standing near him and leveled it at Daoud, his face hard. "Now then," said Lorenzo, "give us your sword." This overzealous guard captain, or whatever he was, was paying too much
attention to him. But to avoid more attention, he must readily
cooperate. He unbuckled his sword belt and held it out. Another Muslim
guard took it and stepped beyond Daoud's reach. Messer Lorenzo said, "Open your pack and show me what is in it." "Silk, Your Signory." Daoud shrugged the pack off his shoulders and laid
it on the table. He unlaced its flap and drew out a folded length of
deep blue silk and then a crimson one. The shiny cloth slid through his
long fingers. "I am not a lord," said Lorenzo softly, reaching out to caress the silk. "Do not insult me by addressing me incorrectly." "Yes, Messere." Lorenzo took the pack with both hands and shook it. A shiny circular
object a little larger than a man's hand fell out. Lorenzo picked it up
and frowned at it. "What is this, a mirror?" "Yes, Messere. Our Trebizond mirrors are famed in Byzantium, Persia, and
the Holy Land. I brought this as another sample of what we can offer." "It is a good mirror," Lorenzo agreed. "It shows me my ugly face all too
well." Daoud was relieved to see Lorenzo had not guessed the secret of the
mirror, that it contained a deadly disk of Hindustan. Thrown properly,
the sharp-edged disk would slice into an opponent like a knife. At Lorenzo's command, two of the guards searched Daoud briskly and
efficiently. They even made him take off his boots. The fingers of one guard found the chain around Daoud's neck and pulled
on it. The locket Daoud had hidden under his tunic came out. "What is that?" Lorenzo growled. A chill ran over Daoud's body. Could Lorenzo possibly guess what the
locket was? "A locket with a holy inscription in our Greek language, Messere." "Open it up." With a leaden feeling in his belly Daoud turned a small screw in the
hammered silver case. Perhaps he should not have taken the locket with
him. What would Lorenzo see when he looked at it? The cover fell open,
and he glanced down at the intricate etched lines and curves on the
rock-crystal inner face of the locket. When Daoud saw beginning to
appear on the crystal the face of a dark-skinned woman with accents of
blue-black paint around her eyes, he looked away. He leaned forward to give Lorenzo a closer look at it without taking it
from around his neck. The locket's magic should work only for the person
to whom it was given. Daoud heard a low growl. The great hound had risen to his feet and was
staring at him with eyes as dark brown as his master's. His upper lip
curled, revealing teeth like ivory scimitars. "Silence, Scipio," Lorenzo said. His voice was soft, but iron with
command. The dog sat down again, but kept his eyes fixed on Daoud. Heart pounding, he waited for Lorenzo's reaction to the locket. The
official grasped it, pulling Daoud's head closer still. "Mh. This is Greek writing, you say? It looks more like Arabic to me." "It is very ancient, Messere, and the two alphabets are similar. I
cannot read it myself. But it has been blessed by our Christian
priests." Lorenzo let go of the locket and glowered at him. "What Christian priests? Where did you say you are from? What is your
name?" With deep relief Daoud stepped back from Lorenzo, snapped the locket
shut, and dropped it back inside the collar of his tunic. "I am David Burian, from Trebizond, Messere." "Trebizond? I never heard of it," said the mustached man. "It is on the eastern shore of the Black Sea." "You have come such a great distance with only a few yards of silk and a
mirror in your pack? Would you have me believe this is how you expect to
make your fortune?" Daoud reached deep in his lungs for breath. Now he would see whether the
Christians would believe the story he and Baibars had devised. "Messere, my city, Trebizond, lies on the only road to the East not cut
off by the Saracens. A few brave merchants come from the land called
Cathay bearing silk and spices. The samples I have brought with me,
doubtless you can see, are of the highest quality. We can send you many
bales of such silk overland from Trebizond to Constantinople, then by
ship to your port of Manfredonia. I am here to arrange this trade." "Arrange it with whom?" Daoud hesitated. He had come to Lucera to meet with King Manfred. If,
through some mistake, he should fall into the wrong hands, he would try
to get word to the king that he was there. "Your local merchants, your royal officials," he said. "Even your King
Manfred, if he wishes to talk to me." "So, a dusty peddler comes to our city gate and wants to speak with the
king." He turned to the guard with the spear. "Take him to the
castello." Daoud molded the Face of Clay into an expression of naive wonderment. "The castello? Where King Manfred is?" Lorenzo grinned without mirth. "Where King Manfred's _prison_ is, my
man. Where we hang the people sent by the pope to murder King Manfred." Lorenzo's eyes were hard as chips of obsidian, and when he said the word
_hang_, Daoud could feel the rough rope tightening around his neck. But he was more angry now than frightened. His jaw muscles clenched. Why
had Aziz not made sure there would be no mistake like this? "Why are you doing this to me, Messer Lorenzo? I mean no harm." "And I intend to see to it that you _do_ no harm in this place, Messere
of Trebizond," Lorenzo shot back. He waved to the guard. "To the
guardroom, Ahmad." _May a thousand afrits hound this infidel to his death_, thought Daoud
angrily. "And what will you do with me, Messer Lorenzo?" "I will examine you further at my leisure, after I have passed all these
good people into the city." One violet-sleeved arm made a flowing
gesture toward the waiting throng. Daoud noticed that the tiny firewood seller, who had already passed by
the guards, had paused at the inner portal. He shook his head sadly and
touched forehead, shoulders, and chest in that sign Christians made to
recall the cross of Jesus, their Messiah. _Why, I believe he is praying for me. That is kindly done._

Ahmad, the guard, pointed his spear at Daoud and jerked his head. Daoud
stood his ground. "What of my silk? If you keep it, I will truly have no honest business
in Lucera." Lorenzo smiled. He stuffed the lengths of silk and the mirror back into
the pack and held it out to Daoud. "There is not enough here to be worth stealing. Take it, then." "And my sword?" Lorenzo laughed gruffly. "Forget your sword. Take him away, Ahmad." They had missed the precious object hidden in a pouch tied in his groin. And they missed the Scorpion, the miniature crossbow devised by the
Hashishiyya, its parts concealed in the hem of his cloak. Nor did they
have any idea that the tie that held his cloak at the neck could be
pulled loose to become a long strangling cord, flexible as silk and hard
as steel. Daoud pulled his hood back over his head, shrugged into the pack under
his cloak, and began walking. Every step he took sent a jolt of anger
through his body. He would like to use his strangling cord on the man
responsible for this blunder. The news might well travel northward that a blond merchant had been
arrested trying to enter Lucera. And if that man should later appear at
the court of the pope, there might be those who would remember hearing
of him and wonder why he had gone first to the pope's enemy, Manfred von
Hohenstaufen. His first feelings of anger became a cold turmoil in his belly as he
thought what could happen if his mission failed--El Kahira leveled, its
people slaughtered, Islam crushed beneath the feet of barbarian
conquerors. He must not let that happen. The narrow street he walked on was lined with circular houses, their
brick walls a warm yellow color. The conical roofs were covered with
thin slates. A Muslim sword maker looked up from his forge to stare at Daoud and his
guard as they passed. Veiled women with red pottery jars on their heads
stopped and looked boldly into his eyes. Daoud lifted his gaze to the octagonal central tower of the citadel,
bright yellow-and-black flags flying from its battlements. Instead of
being squared off, the battlements were topped by forked points, like
the tails of swallows, proclaiming allegiance to the Ghibellini,
partisans of the Hohenstaufen family, enemies of the pope. Closer to the citadel, noises of men and animals came at Daoud from all
directions. He saw many buildings, all connected with one another, their
small windows protected by iron grillwork. To his right, in a large
grassy open field, a hundred or more Muslim guards in red and green were
swinging their scimitars as an officer on a stone platform called out
the count in Arabic. Daoud and his guard passed by a second yard, where
still more Muslim soldiers were grooming their slender Arab horses. A pungent smell of many beasts and fowl pent up close hung in the warm,
damp air. Another row of buildings echoed with the shrieks of birds. Falconers in yellow-and-black tunics walked up and down holding wicker
cages. As he peered into a doorway, Daoud saw the golden eyes of birds
of prey gleaming at him out of the shadows. The sun was high by the time they came to the gateway of the castello. _Well, so far they have taken me where I wanted to go_, Daoud thought
grimly. The entry hall of the castello was a large, vaulted room, as Daoud had
expected. He had studied the citadel of Lucera before leaving Egypt, as
he had studied many other strongholds in Italy, memorizing building
plans and talking at length with agents of the sultan who had been
there. A strange, almost dizzying sensation came over Daoud. He recognized the
feeling, having had it several times before when, in disguise, he
entered Christian fortresses. As he gazed around the shadowy stone hall,
its gloom relieved by shafts of light streaming in through high, narrow
windows, he seemed to be seeing everything through two pairs of eyes. One pair belonged to a Mameluke warrior, Daoud ibn Abdallah, scouting an
enemy stronghold. The other eyes were those of a boy named David
Langmuir, to whom a Christian castle had been home. And, as always on
sensing that inner division, Daoud felt a crushing sadness. Ahmad took Daoud through a series of small, low-ceilinged rooms in the
base of the castle. He spoke briefly to an officer seated at a table,
dressed like himself in red turban and green tunic. He gestured to a
heavy-looking door reinforced with strips of iron. "In there, Messer David." Every muscle in Daoud's body screamed out in protest. As part of his
initiation into the Hashishiyya, he had been locked in a tiny black
chamber in the Great Pyramid for days, and, except for the deaths of his
mother and father, it was the worst memory of his life. Now he ached to
strike down Ahmad and the other Muslim soldier and flee. Instead, he said quietly, "How long will I have to wait?" Ahmad shrugged. "God alone knows." Ahmad's southern Italian dialect was
as heavily accented as Daoud's own. _How surprised he would be if I were to address him in Arabic._

"Who is this man who orders me imprisoned?" Daoud demanded. Ahmad and the other guard shrugged at the question. "He is Messer
Lorenzo Celino of Sicily. He serves King Manfred." "What does he do for King Manfred?" "Whatever the king tells him to." Ahmad smiled at Daoud and gestured
again at the ironbound door. "Thank you for making the work of guarding
you easy. May God be kind to you." Daoud bowed in thanks. Remembering the proper Christian farewell, he
said, "Addio." The other soldier unlocked the door with a large iron key, and Daoud
walked reluctantly into a shadowy room. The door slammed shut behind
him, and again he went rigid with his hatred of confinement. The walls had recently been whitewashed, but the little room stank
abominably. The odor, Daoud saw, came from a privy hole in one corner,
where large black flies circled in a humming swarm. Half-light came in
through a window covered with a black iron grill whose openings were
barely wide enough to push a finger through. Noticing what appeared to
be a bundle of bedding against a wall, Daoud approached it and squatted
down for a closer look. He prodded it, feeling straw under a stained
cotton sheet. At his probing, black dots, almost too small to see, began
moving about rapidly over the sheet. Daoud crossed the room, unslung his pack from his back, and dropped it
to the floor. He sat down on the flagstones, as far from the bedding and
the privy opening as he could get, his back against the wall, his knees
drawn up, like a Bedouin in his tent. _I am helpless_, Daoud thought, and terror and rage rose up in him like
two djinns released from their jars, threatening to overwhelm him. He
sat perfectly still. To bring himself under control, he began the
contemplative exercise his Sufi teacher, Sheikh Saadi, called the
Presence of God. "God is everywhere, and most of all in man's heart," Saadi had said, his
old eyes twinkling. "He cannot be seen or heard or touched or smelled or
tasted. Therefore, make your mind as empty as the Great Desert, and you
may converse with God, Whose name be praised." Daoud touched the farewell present Saadi had given him when he left El
Kahira to begin the journey to Italy. It was a leather case tied around
his neck, and it contained a piece of paper called a tawidh, an
invocation whose words were represented by Arabic numerals. Like the locket, it would arouse curiosity if someone searching him
found it. But it could be simply explained as one of those curious
objects a traveler from distant places might have about his person. And, like the locket, it was simply too precious _not_ to be worn. Saadi said the tawidh would help wounds heal faster. Daoud refused to
let himself think about wounds. He tried to make his mind a blank, and
in the effort he forgot for a time where he was. II


Messer Lorenzo Celino of Sicily strode into the cell. He held in his
hands a large round slice of bread heaped with steaming slivers of meat
that gave off an unfamiliar but succulent smell. Daoud slowly climbed to his feet. The hound Scipio, trailing Celino,
watched him, standing in the doorway, as if unwilling to enter the
vile-smelling chamber. Daoud measured Celino. The top of the Sicilian's head would come to
Daoud's chin, but the shoulders under his violet tunic were broad and
straight, and he moved with menacing grace. Daoud judged that, though
Celino must be close to fifty, he would be quick and deadly with hands
and feet, and a good swordsman as well. "God's beard, man, I didn't mean to keep you sitting in this room all
day without food or drink," Celino said. "The damned farmers and traders
kept coming and coming. But you cannot eat in this stinking place. Come
out." Daoud emerged into the next room, and Lorenzo motioned him to sit at the
guards' table. Even though Daoud felt deep relief at being out of the
cell, he sensed he was in greater danger than before. His mouth went dry
and the palms of his hands turned cold as his eyes scanned the room for
weapons or an escape route. Lorenzo set the trencher and its burden of meat down before Daoud. "Just butchered. Here, eat in good health. And here is a beaker of our
good red wine of Monte Vultura." Daoud heard a false note in Celino's
present heartiness and liked it even less than his earlier gruff
suspicion. Wine. An abomination forbidden by the Prophet. As Celino set a pitcher
and two cups down on the table, Daoud recalled the nights he had spent
with Sheikh Saadi learning to master wine and other drugs. _God prohibits the drinking of wine and the eating of unclean foods, not
for His good, for nothing can harm Him, but for our good. Therefore,
when a man goes among the infidel as a spy, God permits him to eat and
drink the forbidden things lest he be discovered and put to death. You
must learn to separate your mind from your body so that what harms your
body will not affect your mind._

Daoud raised the cup, wondering if he would have as much power over wine
drunk in the land of the infidel as he did when he drank it with his
teacher. He sipped. The red liquid was thick and bitter and burned his
mouth, but he made himself smile, sigh appreciatively, and sip again. He
kept God at the center of his thoughts. Celino was watching him closely. Raising his cup in salute, he also
drank. "Good, good. Now eat. Fresh roasted. Pork." Daoud's fingers, poised over the meat, stopped short. Already made ill
by hunger, by the vile odor of the room in which he had been confined,
and by the wine that made his stomach churn, he felt himself on the
point of vomiting. For nearly twenty years the prohibition against
eating the flesh of pigs had been impressed upon him until the very
thought of pork made him sick. He knew he should have prepared himself
by eating it before he left El Kahira, but he had never found time for
that. So now, a prisoner of the enemy, he faced for the first time the
test of pork. Celino was watching him with a half smile. _He would not test me with wine and pig's meat unless he suspected I am
a Muslim._

Daoud's fingers grasped a slice of the hot meat. He tore it in half,
using both his clean right hand and his unclean left as a non-Muslim
would. He stuffed a slice of pork into his mouth. It had smelled good until he
found out what it was. Now it seemed slimy and tasteless. His stomach
clenched, but he held himself rigid, expressionless. He started to chew,
and found that his mouth was dry. His life might depend on his giving a
convincing imitation of pleasure. He chewed the meat to fragments and,
as though savoring it, swallowed the abomination crumb by crumb. He realized he was still holding the other scrap of pork in his left
hand. To give himself a respite, he tossed it to the flagstone floor
before Lorenzo's hound. Unclean to the unclean, he thought. Scipio looked at Daoud with an almost human look of surprise, then bent
to devour the meat. "Friday, Scipio," said Celino sharply. "You are forbidden meat." The dog looked sadly up at Celino, licked its chops, and sat back on its
haunches, leaving the meat untouched. In spite of his predicament, Daoud
laughed. "You see?" said Celino. "Even a dog can learn to obey the commandments." Celino gestured to the dog. "All right, Scipio, the bishop of Palermo
gives you a dispensation." The dog stood and struck at the meat with his long muzzle. It vanished
to the accompaniment of loud gulping sounds. "He likes it better than you do," Celino said. "You do not act very
hungry for a man who has not eaten all day. Come on, man, fill your
belly." Realizing that the pork would taste worse as it cooled, Daoud braced
himself and stuffed piece after piece into his mouth, chewing and
swallowing as rapidly as he could. "And," said Celino, watching him with narrowed eyes, "a dog can be
trained to break the commandments when permitted." From time to time Daoud threw a scrap to Scipio, grateful for the
hound's help. But as he ate, Daoud noticed that the meat began to taste
better to him, and the juices of his mouth began to flow. The familiar
feeling of sorrow came over him, and he looked around at the white walls
and ceiling, the wooden beams overhead painted blue. In his mind's eye
he saw in their place yellow stone walls and a vaulted ceiling, and
remembered that he had last tasted the flesh of pig at table with his
father and mother. He wiped his mouth with his sleeve and sat back. "Thank you. I feel
better now." Celino stood up, took the stale disk of bread, and dropped it to the
floor. Scipio picked it up in his mouth. "Then have the goodness to accompany me to the Hall of Mars, Messer
David," he said, and turned. _He shows me that he is not afraid to turn his back_, Daoud thought,
picking up his pack and following Celino. The Hall of Mars, he
remembered, was an indoor exercise hall for Manfred's troops. They
climbed stairs and walked through rooms in which Muslim soldiers were
cleaning and polishing helmets, coats of mail, and weapons. In one room,
men were painting shields. All the shields were yellow and bore the
black two-headed eagle of the Hohenstaufens. Daoud followed Lorenzo into a very large, bare room with a floor of
polished hardwood. Ropes and chains hung from the walls and the beamed
ceiling. Tall windows cut high up in smooth walls--too high to jump
to--let in afternoon sunlight and fresh air that did not quite dispel a
heavy odor of sweat. Opposite the doorway through which they passed was
another and larger entrance, with double doors. The room was not square;
the walls were of differing lengths and set at angles. Daoud recalled
the octagonal shape of Castello Lucera's central tower. He reviewed the plan of the castle he had committed to memory in El
Kahira. He was sure that behind the double doors was the great royal
audience hall. The wide doorway would allow troops assembled in the Hall
of Mars to march into the audience chamber for a review. Daoud noticed a group of Muslim guards lounging in one corner. At
Lorenzo's entrance they touched their hands to their turbans in salute. Lorenzo responded with the same gesture. Scipio carried the trencher in
his mouth to a corner of the room, where he lay down and began pushing
the hard bread around with his forepaws and, working at it with his
formidable teeth, making loud crunching noises. Celino led Daoud to the center of the room. He turned suddenly on Daoud. "Now, spy, you will tell me exactly who you are and exactly where you
come from," he said rapidly. "You will tell me the truth, or you will
die here and now." Daoud came within a breath of answering, then realized Lorenzo had
spoken in Arabic. Relieved laughter bubbled up toward his throat--he had
not been caught. He choked it down and assumed a puzzled expression. "I do not understand," Daoud said in Italian. "What tongue are you
speaking, Messer Lorenzo?" "Liar," said Lorenzo, still in Arabic, his eyes narrowing. "I understand Italian, Greek, and, of course, the speech of Scythia,"
said Daoud. "If you would question me, speak in one of those tongues." Daoud sensed that the Sicilian's sudden shifts of mood were calculated. While his mouth uttered accusations, Celino's eyes watched him with a
calm intelligence that reminded Daoud of an emir examining a
fine-looking horse for hidden flaws. Daoud saw, at the edge of his vision, that the guards who had been
lounging in the corner of the hall were now in motion. He glanced
quickly left and right. Three men, about fifty paces away, were coming
at him, curved swords drawn. The dog, Scipio, had abandoned the trencher
and risen to his feet, and he, too, was advancing on Daoud, fangs bared. Lorenzo stepped away from Daoud, still pointing at him. "Spegni! Kill!" Tension crackled across Daoud's stomach like a lash. Three swords, and a
dog that looked capable of killing a man. None of the weapons he had
hidden on him would do for this. He slung his pack toward the wall
behind him, leaving both hands free. He half turned, to keep Lorenzo in sight while watching the advancing
men. The Sicilian had a long dagger in a scabbard hung by his right
side, but he did not draw it. Facing the three swords, Daoud had not yet raised his hands. But his
legs tensed. He bent at the knees, shifted his weight to the balls of
his feet. He whirled and sprang at Lorenzo. The Sicilian jumped backward, and
Daoud could hear behind him the pounding of booted feet on the wooden
floor. The dog barked furiously. Daoud grappled with Lorenzo. The Sicilian grabbed his forearms, trying
to hold him at a distance, and his strength was almost a match for
Daoud's. But Daoud twisted his arms free, drove in, and caught Celino's
neck in the bend of his left arm. He swung him around so that the
Sicilian's body was between himself and the three attacking soldiers. While Lorenzo stumbled, Daoud plucked the man's dagger out of its
scabbard. It had two sharp edges and came to a diamond-bright point. Scipio leapt at him, but Daoud shifted Lorenzo between himself and the
hound, and Scipio fell back. His enraged barking was deafening, like the
roar of a lion. His fangs were a row of bone spear-points. He danced
right and left, seeking a way to get past Lorenzo to Daoud. The joy of battle, the weapon in his hand, made Daoud feel the power
coursing through his arms. But that damned dog had to be stopped. His
teeth were as dangerous to Daoud as the curving blades of the three
Muslim soldiers. Those fangs could rip through his boots, tear the
muscles of his legs, and cripple him. He would prefer death. Releasing Lorenzo's neck, Daoud gripped Lorenzo's wrist and twisted,
hard and fast. Biting his lip, Lorenzo resisted, but he had to turn and
bend, or the pressure on his arm would break it. Daoud laid the edge of
Lorenzo's dagger against his throat. "Call off your dog or I cut your throat." Daoud glanced over his
shoulder to make sure no one was behind him. "By all means cut my throat," Lorenzo flung back at him. "And Scipio
will tear _your_ throat out." "If the dog jumps at me, I will gut him." "The devil roast your balls," Lorenzo growled. "Scipio, sit!" The hound stopped barking and stared at Lorenzo. "Down, Scipio!" Lorenzo said. "He will not hurt me." To Daoud he said,
"If you do hurt me, you will suffer such things that you will beg us to
kill you." Scipio reluctantly crouched, murder in his brown eyes and a steady, low
growling issuing from his throat. The three Muslim guards were still
moving forward, far more warily. Daoud felt strong and able now to deal with these four men, but he could
almost feel the weight of the overwhelming trap he was in. The thick
walls. The thousands of soldiers. It was hopeless. He could fight on
only until he died. And that was not what he had come here for at all. Daoud stepped back toward the farther doorway, pulling Lorenzo with him. He glanced over his shoulder to be sure no one was behind him. "For my part," said Daoud, "I will hurt you till you beg _them_ to put
down their swords. I will start by breaking your arm." He gave the
twisted arm a vicious upward push till he could almost feel the agony of
the tendons. Lorenzo grunted, and Scipio barked angrily. Most men, Daoud
thought, would have screamed aloud at that. "No matter what you do to me, it will not help you," said Lorenzo. Three more turbaned Muslim soldiers joined those coming at Daoud. They
spread out in a wide circle, some of them trying to slip around to his
rear. "Stand where you are, or I'll kill him," Daoud shouted. To show he meant
it, he pressed the knife edge hard against Celino's throat and sliced
with it just enough to draw blood. "I hope you will enjoy the taste of your own intestines," Lorenzo said. He dug his boot heels into the wooden floor, trying to slow down Daoud's
effort to drag him to the door. Daoud pushed up harder on his arm to
make him move faster. Daoud felt no fear of death, and he would not let them take him prisoner
to torture him. He would die fighting. And go straight to paradise. But how foolish all this was. A waste of his own life and the lives he
would take with him. And many of those he would kill were Muslims, like
himself. "You must know that you will be the first to die here," he said. "And
believe me I will take many of your men with me. I may even manage to
kill your precious dog. I did not come here to fight with King Manfred's
men. Why are you doing this?" Celino, who had been struggling against Daoud, now relaxed and turned
his head. "You are too dangerous to live." "Dangerous to whom?" "To me," said a deep voice behind Daoud. III


Daoud turned, dragging Celino. A blond man stood, hands on hips, eyeing
him with a faint smile. One of the big doors leading into the royal
audience chamber was slightly ajar. Daoud was angry at himself for
letting someone slip up behind him unnoticed. "Sire, get back!" Lorenzo shouted. _Sire._ Daoud knew at once who this was. The same height as Lorenzo, as
Daoud now saw, the man had the very broad shoulders Christian knights
developed from wielding their huge two-handed swords. Daoud guessed his
age at a little over thirty. His hair, so blond it was almost silver,
hung in soft waves below his ears, curling at the ends. His silver-blond
mustache was carefully trimmed. His eyelids crinkled with amusement. He
wore a tunic of lime-colored silk under a short forest-green cloak
trimmed with white fur. His hose and boots were also shades of green. From a chain around his neck hung a five-pointed silver star with a
spherical ruby in its center. In every point he fit the description
Daoud had been given. The despair Daoud had been feeling a moment before gave way to a
profound relief. It had seemed that everything stood in the way of his
meeting this man, and now at last they were face-to-face. "Sire," Daoud said in Italian, "I know who you are, and you must know
who I am." "I do indeed," said Manfred von Hohenstaufen, still smiling. "Please
release Messer Lorenzo." Daoud hesitated only a moment. But if Manfred allowed Lorenzo to hurt
him now, the mission was a failure anyway. Tensed for attack, he let go
of Lorenzo, who sprang away. In an instant the Sicilian had taken a curving Islamic sword from a
soldier. "Sire, at least move back from him," Lorenzo said. "You know what we are
dealing with here." "Quiet, Lorenzo," snapped Manfred. "What we are dealing with is a
peddler from some misty land beyond the Black Sea who happens to be
infernally nimble. That is all." Daoud was pleased to hear Manfred go along with his disguise. He relaxed
a bit and eyed the king of southern Italy and Sicily. A splendid-looking
man with a charm that Daoud felt after only a moment's acquaintance. "Will the peddler be so kind as to return my dagger?" Lorenzo asked with
heavy irony. "This side of the Black Sea it is considered discourteous
to stand in the king's presence holding a naked weapon." "Of course," said Daoud, holding the dagger by its guard and handing it
hilt-first to Lorenzo, who in turn gave the Saracen soldier back his
sword. Daoud was glad he had not had to kill Lorenzo. The Sicilian, like his
master, Manfred, was clearly a man above the common run. His behavior
toward Daoud so far had been a series of clever pretenses. Indeed, Daoud
was sure he had not gotten to the bottom of Lorenzo yet. "I thank you for entertaining us with this display of your fighting
skills, Messer David," said King Manfred. "Now let us talk of the silk
trade. Join us, Lorenzo." Manfred led the way into the audience chamber beyond the Hall of Mars. Walking beside Daoud, Celino snapped his fingers at Scipio. The big gray
hound rose and followed, casting a hostile look at Daoud. _Why did they try to kill me?_

In the audience hall, marble pillars supported a vaulted ceiling pierced
by circular glazed windows. A dozen or more men and women stood around,
staring at Daoud. His glance quickly took in the feathered caps of the
men, the pale rose and violet gowns of the women, and the gilded nets
that held their hair. He tried not to stare at the women, whose faces were bare in the manner
of unbelievers. But they were all, he noted, beautiful in varying
degrees. Several had striking blond hair and blue eyes. Though it was
his own coloring, he was not used to seeing fair women, and his
heartbeat quickened. But the gaze of a darker woman met his. Her amber-colored eyes seemed to
burn. Her nose was small, the nostrils flaring, her lips full and dark
red. The face was carefully without expression, revealing as little as
if it were indeed covered with a veil. The dark woman's black hair was coiled on top of her head in braids
intertwined with ropes of pearls. Her scarlet gown was decorated with
long strips of satin embroidered in floral designs. Over her narrow
shoulders she wore a shawl of flame-colored silk. Having been to
Constantinople, Daoud recognized her style of dress as Byzantine. She
made the other women of Manfred's court look like barbarians. She held his gaze steadily. He bowed his head courteously, and she
responded with a faint nod. Then he was past her. Standing on a dais at the end of the hall was a large chair of black
wood with painted panels; to the left of the dais sat a small group of
purple-robed men holding string and wind instruments. On the right was a
small doorway. A servant leapt to fling open the door for Manfred, who
strode briskly toward it, tossing pleasantries to his courtiers. The door led through a series of rooms where clerks wrote busily, and
Daoud noticed with surprise that they went right on scribbling as their
king walked through. Obviously Manfred preferred their work to their
homage. Daoud sensed that their path was taking them on a circuit of the great
eight-sided structure. They passed through a small kitchen where bakers
were preparing fruit pastries. Manfred plucked a freshly baked cherry
tart from a tray, bit into it, and nodded to the bowing cook. To his surprise, Daoud noticed a small figure in one corner, the little
bent man who had earlier looked on him with pity. The dwarf lay curled
up on his side with closed eyes on his empty firewood cart. Not a bad
occupation, Daoud thought, supplying firewood to the king's pastry
kitchen. Beyond the kitchen the three men entered another great hall, so brightly
lit that Daoud's eyes hurt for a moment. The afternoon sun streamed
through arched windows of white glass set, as in the Hall of Mars, high
in the walls. The walls were lined with shelves loaded with books and
compartments filled with scrolls. Walkways at three levels ran around
the walls, and ladders were spaced along them. Men in long gray tunics
browsed at the shelves or sat at tables in the center of the room
reading books and scrolls and making notes on parchment. A servant opened a wrought-iron grill in the shortest wall of the
library, and the three men stepped out under the sky into an octagonal
space filled with trees and plants, enclosed on all sides by a
colonnaded gallery. In the center of the garden a small fountain played,
topped by a small bronze statue of a naked woman straddling a dolphin,
the water spurting from the dolphin's mouth. Daoud was momentarily
shocked. The most powerful and corrupt emir in Egypt would not dare to
have such a statue where strangers might see it. Manfred beckoned, and Daoud followed him down a pebble path to the basin
of the fountain. Small dark green fish flickered through the water. The
king seated himself on a marble bench, and the two men stood before him. At a gesture from Lorenzo, Scipio lay down in the sun beside a bush
bearing dozens of dark-red roses. The sun gleamed on Manfred's pale hair. "What does your sultan want of
me?" he asked. "I am ordered to speak openly only to you and your secretary Aziz," said
Daoud, his glance shifting to Lorenzo. "Ah, you did not know, then, that Aziz is the name Lorenzo Celino uses
when he writes to the Sultan of Cairo for me?" Lorenzo Celino--Aziz? Daoud turned to Celino and laughed with delighted
surprise. "You write excellent Arabic. I would never have guessed that you were
not one of us." Lorenzo accepted Daoud's compliment with a small bow. "One of _us_?" said Manfred. "And what are you, then, Messere? I see
before me a strapping man, blond enough to be one of my Swabian knights,
yet who claims to come from the Sultan of Cairo. You are no Arab or
Turk." "Indeed not, Sire," said Daoud. "I am a Mameluke." "A blond Mameluke." Manfred nodded. "Where are you from, then, Russia or
Circassia?" Without emotion Daoud told the king of his descent from crusaders and
his capture by the Muslims. "What a strange world this is," said Manfred. "And when did this happen
to you?" "Twenty years ago, Sire. For most of those years I have served my lord
Baibars al-Bunduqdari, who is now Sultan of Cairo." "And you are a Muslim?" "Of course, Sire." Manfred stood up and came close to him. "Of course? You say that so
firmly. Do you not remember the Christian teachings of your childhood?" The question made Daoud angry. _My soul is undivided. King or not, how
dare this infidel question that!_

"God willed that I find the truth, Sire," he said simply. Manfred shrugged. "It is all the same to me. I have lived among Muslims
all my life." "May I know, Sire, why your secretary, to whom my master sent me in good
faith, tried to kill me?" Daoud asked. Manfred turned his back on Daoud and strolled a short distance down the
pebble path. "Lorenzo is neither my secretary nor does he normally
command my gate guards. He performs for me _unusual_ tasks that require
a man of uncommon courage, loyalty, and wit. Such as testing you--first,
by taking you prisoner, then by giving you pork and wine and speaking to
you in Arabic, finally by trying to kill you." "But I might have killed him." "I did not realize how much of a risk I was taking," said Lorenzo. "We did not think Baibars could find anywhere in his empire a man who
could go to the papal court undetected. We hoped to show him his error
and send you back. But you are quite a remarkable man, David." _Show Baibars his error!_ Manfred might be a brilliant man, but he
evidently underestimated Baibars. Daoud sensed himself feeling a bit
superior and warned himself not to make the same mistake and
underestimate Manfred. "Perhaps now that you have tested my ability, Sire, you might be more
inclined to help me." "Help you to do what?" There was a note of irritation in Manfred's
voice. "Your Sultan Baibars has asked me only to help you carry out a
mission in the Papal States. What is your mission?" Daoud said, "Sire, my master chose not to entrust his plan to writing,
but sent me to tell it to you instead. I am here for one purpose, to
prevent the forming of an alliance between Christians and Tartars." Manfred looked surprised, and stared intently at Daoud. "Tartars? Those
barbarians who invaded Europe--how long ago, Lorenzo?" Lorenzo frowned. "Over twenty years, Sire." Daoud said, "Fifty years ago they were nothing. A scattering of
herdsmen, like the Bedouin. Now they are the most powerful people on
earth." Manfred nodded. "Yes, I remember now. When they rode into Poland and
Hungary I was just a boy. Everyone was in terror of them. Their emperor
sent letters to all the monarchs of Europe demanding that they
surrender. He contemptuously offered them positions in his court." He
grinned at Daoud. "My father showed me the letter he was sending back. If Tartar emperor succeeded in conquering Europe, my father said, he
would be well qualified to serve as his falconer." Daoud inclined his head. "Your family's love of falconry is well known
to your admirers in the lands of Islam. My lord the sultan considers you
an old friend and hopes that you will see fit to help him in his time of
need." Manfred held out his hands, palms up. "If I can." "Now the Tartars have fallen upon the lands of Islam," Daoud said. "They
have conquered Persia. They have a hundred thousand mounted warriors in
the field, and allies and auxiliaries. They have leveled our holy city
of Baghdad, destroyed it utterly, and killed every man, woman, and child
who lived there, even the Commander of the Faithful, our caliph himself. These are no fanciful tales, Sire. I have fought against the Tartars. I
have seen with my own eyes the ashes of Baghdad and the heaps of its
dead." The scene of desolation arose in his mind as it had so many times
before, the gray plain where a city had been, the unbelievable sight of
a landscape strewn with rotting, headless corpses as far as the eye
could see. To put it out of his mind, he hurried on with what he had to
say. "Now their armies advance through Syria, threatening the realm of my
lord, the Sultan of Cairo. We have had word that Hulagu Khan, commander
of the Tartar armies in Persia, has sent two high-ranking emissaries to
the pope. They are sailing across the Middle Sea now, from the island of
Cyprus to Venice. Hulagu Khan wants to form an alliance with the
Christian rulers of Europe to attack us from both directions at once,
east and west. Our whole people, our whole Muslim faith, could be
utterly wiped out." Manfred nodded grimly. "And all of Christian Europe would rejoice at
your destruction. Not I, certainly, but the rest of them. What do you
propose to do about these Tartar emissaries to the pope?" "For that I will need your help, Sire. I, too, will go to the pope's
court. I understand that he resides at Orvieto, a small town north of
Rome." "Yes," Lorenzo put in, "and there he will stay. He has not set foot in
Rome since he galloped in to be crowned at Saint Peter's and galloped
out again. He is terrified of the Roman mob. As well he should be, since
most of their leaders are in our pay." "Trade secrets, Celino," said Manfred, raising a cautioning finger. "So,
you will go to Orvieto. And then?" "I will present myself at the pope's court as I have here, as David, a
merchant of Trebizond. I will take up residence with--friends--who can
help me reach the ears of men of influence. I will spread stories
throughout Orvieto--true stories--of the horrors the Tartars have
perpetrated everywhere they have gone, of their determination to conquer
the entire world." Manfred shook his head. "What you plan to do is very dangerous. You've
proven to us that you are a skilled and resourceful man, but still, what
if you are discovered?" He shook his head. "Have you any idea of how
your people are _hated_ in Europe, David? If it were known that I helped
a Muslim spy to steal into the court of the pope, all the kingdoms of
Christendom would turn against me. The pope need but snap his fingers
and I and my little realm would be swept away. No, David. You ask me to
risk too much." Daoud was momentarily surprised, then angry. He had expected that
Manfred would cooperate with him. If the young king vacillated, Daoud
might have journeyed from Egypt to Italy for nothing. And then a ripple of fear crept up his spine. If he failed to persuade
Manfred, the Tartars might destroy the world he had come to love and
believe in. _God, help me to stop them. I must not go back to El Kahira a failure._

He must choose his words with care. He was dealing here with a king, and
one did not argue with kings. Better to ask questions than offer
arguments. "Does not the pope wish even now to take your throne from you, Sire?" he
said. "How can matters between you and him be any worse?" Manfred nodded. "True, Pope Urban keeps offering my crown to this prince
and that, claiming that I had no right to inherit it from my father. And
that he had no right to have it in the first place." Manfred bit his
lip, and the light pink of his cheeks reddened. "But only the French are
powerful enough to take it from me. And King Louis of France is kindly
disposed to me and will not permit any of his great barons to make war
on me. I rely on Louis's continued goodwill." "But the man who wants to join with the Tartars to annihilate Islam is
that same King Louis of France," Daoud said. "France, as you said, is
the only kingdom with the power to help the pope dethrone you. Should
the pope decide against allying with the Tartars, King Louis will
continue to prohibit his subjects from joining the pope's war against
you. Help me, and you come between King Louis and the pope." "Intrigue requires gold," said Manfred. "Does your master expect me to
pay for your activities?" "What I have brought with me will pay for all," Daoud replied. He
unbuckled his belt and undid the laces that held his hose tight around
his waist. Celino moved closer, tense, ready in case Daoud should reach
for a weapon. Daoud slipped his fingers into the breeches he wore under
his hose and found the bag tied to the drawstring. "What is the man doing?" said Manfred with a wondering smile. Celino
shook his head. Daoud pulled out a bag of heavy red silk, full and round with what it
held. He felt a childlike delight in mystifying the two men. "Pay me from your royal treasury what this is worth," said Daoud, "and I
shall have gold enough for all I need to do." He pulled apart the mouth
of the silk bag and drew out of it a globe of green fire. He held it out
to Manfred. Celino gasped. Daoud was gratified at their wonderment. "Are you not afraid I will steal this from you and dump you in an
unmarked grave?" said Manfred with a bright grin. "The Hohenstaufen family have been friends of the sultans of Egypt since
your father's day," said Daoud. "We have learned to trust you." "Just listen to that, Lorenzo," said Manfred. "The Saracens think better
of me than the pope does." Besides, Daoud thought, Manfred knew that Baibars's arm was long. Manfred, Daoud was sure, knew that Baibars would not permit anyone, even
a distant head of state, to betray him so flagrantly. His eyes wide, Manfred extended his palm, and Daoud unhesitatingly
placed the emerald in it. Manfred raised it close to his face, peering
through the dark depths into its glowing heart. The jewel, irregular in
shape but nearly spherical, reflected little spots of pale green light
on his cheeks. He shook his head. "Green, the color I love best in all the world. The color of hope." He
encircled it with thumb and forefinger. "Look, Lorenzo, I cannot get my
fingers around it. I am amazed that your master is willing to part with
such a wonder. How did he come by it?" "It has been through many hands, Sire," said Daoud. "It once belonged to
Emir Fakr ad-Din, who commanded the army of Egypt when King Louis
invaded our land." "To think Baibars let you take this emerald from him, and you came all
this way from Alexandria with it and delivered it to me. And Baibars
trusted you." "As he trusts you, Sire," Daoud put in quickly. "_You_ are like a falcon, are you not?" said Manfred, smiling into
Daoud's eyes. "Released to fly far afield for your sultan." Manfred strode to Daoud suddenly and clapped him on the shoulder. "Let
it be done as your master wishes, then. The trader from Trebizond will
go to Orvieto with my help." A surge of joy sprang up within Daoud and almost burst past his lips. He
bowed, his heart pounding. _God be thanked!_

Manfred said, "We must see about turning this jewel of yours into gold
coins. Or smaller jewels. They would be easier to carry than gold." Manfred looked lovingly at the emerald again, then carefully dropped it
into his belt pouch and smiled at Daoud. "You should not go alone into the Papal States, David. You may have
studied Europe from afar, but you do not know Italy firsthand. Lorenzo
here shall go with you. I trust Lorenzo to travel far and secretly in my
service, even as your master trusts you." Celino sighed. Daoud and Celino eyed each other. Daoud began searching for ways to dissuade Manfred. A short while
earlier he and Celino had been trying to kill each other. And Celino
would be putting Manfred's interests first, not those of Islam. Obviously aware of his hesitation, Manfred took his arm. "Listen to me,
Mameluke. You will be wise to accept every bit of help that is offered
to you. I have powerful allies in northern Italy, in Florence, Pisa,
Siena, and other cities. But you do not know them and they do not know
you. Lorenzo speaks for me. He knows who the key Ghibellini are in the
north, and they know him. Do not object to taking him with you." Manfred would not let him go, Daoud realized, unless Celino went with
him. And the argument that Celino could put him in touch with the
Ghibellini of the north was a strong one. _Lorenzo is perhaps twenty years older than I, but he is quick-witted
and quick on his feet. And, yes, I would rather not go alone. I could
easily make a mistake from ignorance. I am better off with a man like
this to guide me._

A tentative smile played under Celino's grizzled mustache. "My royal
master is determined in this. What do you say?" Daoud bowed. "I accept. With gratitude. We shall travel this road
together." "Whatever happens to the two of you," Manfred said, "no one must ever
know that I am involved." "I guarantee that, Sire," said Celino. Manfred rubbed the palms of his hands together. "There is one other
person I propose to send with you. She can be a great help to you." Celino turned quickly to Manfred. "I do not advise it, Sire." "Why not?" said Manfred. "She will be perfect." "Because she will not want to go." There was censure in Celino's dark
stare--and a boyish defiance in Manfred's answering look. "Do not question me," said Manfred. "I have no choice. For her good and
for my own, she must leave here. And she _will_ be useful to you." Instead of replying, Celino only sighed again. "A woman?" Daoud was thunderstruck. In El Kahira women left their homes
only to visit other women. He felt anxiety claw at his belly. Any
mistake in planning might wreck the mission and doom him, and Celino, to
a horrible death. And to send a woman to the court of the pope on such a
venture seemed not just a mistake, but utter madness. "A very beautiful woman," said Manfred, a grin stretching his blond
mustache. "One who has had a lifetime's schooling in intrigue. She is
from Constantinople, and her name is Sophia, which means wisdom in
Greek." _There are no more treacherous people on this earth than the
Byzantines_, Daoud thought, _and they have ever been enemies of Islam_. Argument surged up in him, but he saw a hardness in Manfred's eyes that
told him nothing he might say would sway the king. He looked at Celino,
and saw in the dark, mustached face the same reluctant acceptance he had
heard in the sigh. Whoever this Sophia might be, he would have to take her with him. IV


Sophia pressed her head back against the pillow and screamed with
pleasure. Her loins dissolved into rippling liquid gold. Her fingers dug
into the man's back and her legs clenched around his hips, trying to
crush him against her. "Oh--oh--oh--" she moaned. The warmth spread to her toes, her
fingertips, her scalp, filling her with joy. She was so happy that she
wanted to cry. As the blaze of ekstasia died down, she felt Manfred driving deep inside
her. She felt his hardness, his separateness, as she could not feel it a
moment ago when she was at her peak and they seemed to melt together,
one being. His rhythm was insistent, inexorable, like a heartbeat. His hands under
her back were tense. He was fighting for his climax. She delighted in the sight of his massive shoulders overshadowing her. It was almost like being loved by a god. Manfred's face was pressed against her shoulder, his open mouth on her
collarbone. She turned toward him and saw the light in his white-gold
hair. She slid one hand up to his hair and stroked it, while with the
other she rubbed his back in a circular motion. She felt the muscles in his body tighten against her. He drew in a
shuddering breath. "Yes--yes--good," she whispered, still stroking his hair, still
caressing his back. He relaxed, panting heavily. _He never makes much noise. Nothing like my outcries._

They lay without moving, she pleased by the warm weight of him lying
upon her, as if it protected her from floating away. The feel of him
still inside her sent wavelets of pleasure through her. Still adrift on sensations of delight, she opened her eyes to stare up
into the shadows of the canopy overhead. On the heavy bed curtains to
her left, the late afternoon sun cast an oblong of yellow light with a
pointed arch at the top, the shape of an open window nearby. She knew
well the play of light in this unoccupied bedchamber in an upper part of
the castle. Manfred and she had met here many times. They rolled together so that they lay side by side in a nest of red and
purple cushions. The down-filled silk bolster under them whispered as
they shifted their weight, and the rope netting that held it creaked. Manfred propped his head up with one arm. His free hand toyed with the
ringlets of her unbound hair. She slid her palm over his chest. She remembered an ancient sculpture she had seen in a home outside
Athens. The torso of a man, head missing, arms broken off at the
shoulders, legs gone below the knees, the magnificent body had survived
barbarian invasions, the coming of Christianity, the iconoclasts, the
Frankish conquest, to stand now on a plain pedestal in a room with
purple walls, the yellowish marble gleaming in the light of many
candles. Her host showed it only to his most trusted guests. "Which god is this?" she had asked. "I think it is just an athlete," said her host. "The old Greeks made
gods of their athletes." Manfred's naked torso, pale as marble, seemed as beautiful. And was
alive. She sighed happily. "How lucky I am that there was time for love in my
king's life this afternoon." She spoke in the Sicilian dialect,
Manfred's favorite of all his languages. How lucky, she thought, that after all her years of wandering she had at
last found a place in the world where she was loved and needed. His lips stretched in a smile, but his blue eyes were empty. Uneasiness
took hold of her. She sensed from the look on his face that he was about
to tell her something she did not want to hear. *       *       *       *       *

In memory she heard a voice say, _Italy was ours not so long ago and
might be ours again_. So Michael Paleologos, the Basileus, Emperor of
Constantinople, had introduced the suggestion that she go to Italy, and
at just such a moment as this, when they were in bed together in his
hunting lodge outside Nicaea. She had felt no distress at the idea of being parted from Michael. He
was a scrawny man with a long gray beard, and though she counted herself
enormously lucky to have attracted his attention, she felt no love for
him. She had come to Lucera acting as Michael's agent and personal emissary
to Manfred--and resenting Michael's use of her but feeling she had no
choice. She was a present from one monarch to another. She ought to be
flattered, she supposed. She had walked into Manfred's court in the embroidered jeweled mantle
Michael had given her, her hair bound up in silver netting. Lorenzo
Celino had conducted her to the throne, and she bowed and looked up. And
it was like gazing upon the sun. Manfred von Hohenstaufen's smile was brilliant, his hair white-gold, his
eyes sapphires. He stepped down from his throne, took her hand, and led her to his
eight-sided garden. First she gave him Michael's messages--news that a
Tartar army had stormed the crusader city of Sidon, leveled it, and
ridden off again--a warning that Pope Urban had secretly offered the
crown of Naples and Sicily, Manfred's crown, to Prince Edward, heir
apparent to the throne of England. "Your royal master is kind, but the pope's secret is no secret," Manfred
had said, laughing and unconcerned. "The nobility of England have flatly
told Prince Edward that they will supply neither money nor men for an
adventure in Italy. The pope must find another robber baron to steal my
crown." And then he asked her about herself, and they talked about her
and about him. She had thought all westerners were savages, but Manfred amazed her with
his cultivation. He knew more than many Byzantines, for whom
Constantinople--which they always called "the Polis," the City, as if it
were the only one--was the whole world. In the short time she and
Manfred strolled together that day, he spoke to her in Greek, Latin, and
Italian, and she later found out that he knew French, German, and Arabic
as well. He sang a song to her in a tongue she did not recognize, and he told her
it was Provencal, the language of the troubadours. He undid the clasp of her mantle and let it fall to the gravel. He
kissed her in the bright sunlight, and she forgot Michael Paleologos. She belonged altogether to Manfred von Hohenstaufen. *       *       *       *       *

Now, with a chill, she remembered that she did indeed _belong_ to
Manfred. She was not his mate but his servant. His fingertips stroked her nipple lightly, but she ignored the tingle of
pleasure. She waited for him to say what he had to say. He said, "Remember the fair-haired Muslim who came to the court today?" "The man from Egypt? You had him killed?" "I changed my mind," Manfred said. She felt relief. She was surprised at herself. She had wanted the man to
live. She remembered her astonishment when, with a gesture like a
performing magician's, Manfred threw open the doors of his audience hall
and the entire court saw the blond man with his dagger at Celino's
throat. She had been surprised when Manfred told her that this man, dressed in a
drab tunic and hose like a less-than-prosperous Italian merchant, was
the awaited Saracen from the Sultan of Egypt. The sight of him as he passed through the audience hall had left her
momentarily breathless. He looked like one of those blond men of western
Europe the people of Constantinople called Franks and had learned to
hate at sight. His hair was not as light as Manfred's; it was darker,
more the color of brass than of gold. Manfred's lips were full and red,
but this man's mouth was a down-curving line, the mouth of a man who had
endured cruelty without complaint and could himself be cruel. She
wondered what he had seen and done. As he had passed her, his eyes caught hers. Strange eyes, she could not
tell what color they were. There was a fixity in them akin to madness. The face was expressionless, rocklike. This, she was sure, was no
ordinary man, to be disposed of as an inconvenience. She was not
surprised Manfred had decided to let him live. "Why did you change your mind?" "I think this Mameluke can help me," Manfred said. "Therefore I am going
to help him. He is going to Orvieto on a mission for his sultan. I am
sending Lorenzo with him." "What did you call him?" "A Mameluke. A slave warrior. 