

E-text prepared by Charles Aldarondo, Charles Franks, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) and
revised by Rita Bailey and Joseph E. Loewenstein, M.D. CASTLE RICHMOND

by

ANTHONY TROLLOPE

With an Introduction by Algar Thorold







London & New York: MCMVI




INTRODUCTION


"Castle Richmond" was written in 1861, long after Trollope had left
Ireland. The characterization is weak, and the plot, although the
author himself thought well of it, mechanical. The value of the story is rather documentary than literary. It
contains several graphic scenes descriptive of the great Irish
famine. Trollope observed carefully, and on the whole impartially,
though his powers of discrimination were not quite fine enough to
make him an ideal annalist. Still, such as they were, he has used them here with no
inconsiderable effect. His desire to be fair has led him to lay
stress in an inverse ratio to his prepossessions, and his Priest is a
better man than his parson. The best, indeed the only piece of real characterization in the book
is the delineation of Abe Mollett. This unscrupulous blackmailer
is put before us with real art, with something of the loving
preoccupation of the hunter for his quarry. Trollope loved a rogue,
and in his long portrait gallery there are several really charming
ones. He did not, indeed, perceive the aesthetic value of sin--he did
not perceive the esthetic value of anything,--and his analysis of
human nature was not profound enough to reach the conception of sin,
crime being to him the nadir of downward possibility--but he had a
professional, a sort of half Scotland Yard, half master of hounds
interest in a criminal. "See," he would muse, "how cunningly the
creature works, now back to his earth, anon stealing an unsuspected
run across country, the clever rascal;" and his ethical disapproval
ever, as usual, with English critics of life, in the foreground,
clearly enhanced a primitive predatory instinct not obscurely
akin, a cynic might say, to those dark impulses he holds up to
our reprobation. This self-realization in his fiction is one of
Trollope's principal charms. Never was there a more subjective
writer. Unlike Flaubert, who laid down the canon that the author
should exist in his work as God in creation, to be, here or there,
dimly divined but never recognized, though everywhere latent,
Trollope was never weary of writing himself large in every man,
woman, or child he described. The illusion of objectivity which he so successfully achieves is
due to the fact that his mind was so perfectly contented with its
hereditary and circumstantial conditions, was itself so perfectly
the mental equivalent of those conditions. Thus the perfection of
his egotism, tight as a drum, saved him. Had it been a little less
complete, he would have faltered and bungled; as it was, he had the
naive certainty of a child, to whose innocent apprehension the world
and self are one, and who therefore cannot err. ALGAR THOROLD. CONTENTS

         I. THE BARONY OF DESMOND. II. OWEN FITZGERALD. III. CLARA DESMOND. IV. THE COUNTESS. V. THE FITZGERALDS OF CASTLE RICHMOND. VI. THE KANTURK HOTEL, SOUTH MAIN STREET, CORK. VII. THE FAMINE YEAR. VIII. GORTNACLOUGH AND BERRYHILL. IX. FAMILY COUNCILS. X. THE RECTOR OF DRUMBARROW AND HIS WIFE. XI. SECOND LOVE. XII. DOUBTS. XIII. MR. MOLLETT RETURNS TO SOUTH MAIN STREET. XIV. THE REJECTED SUITOR. XV. DIPLOMACY. XVI. THE PATH BENEATH THE ELMS. XVII. FATHER BARNEY. XVIII. THE RELIEF COMMITTEE. XIX. THE FRIEND OF THE FAMILY. XX. TWO WITNESSES. XXI. FAIR ARGUMENTS. XXII. THE TELLING OF THE TALE. XXIII. BEFORE BREAKFAST AT HAP HOUSE. XXIV. AFTER BREAKFAST AT HAP HOUSE. XXV. A MUDDY WALK ON A WET MORNING. XXVI. COMFORTLESS. XXVII. COMFORTED. XXVIII. FOR A' THAT AND A' THAT. XXIX. ILL NEWS FLIES FAST. XXX. PALLIDA MORS. XXXI. THE FIRST MONTH. XXXII. PREPARATIONS FOR GOING. XXXIII. THE LAST STAGE. XXXIV. FAREWELL. XXXV. HERBERT FITZGERALD IN LONDON. XXXVI. HOW THE EARL WAS WON. XXXVII. A TALE OF A TURBOT. XXXVIII. CONDEMNED. XXXIX. FOX-HUNTING IN SPINNY LANE. XL. THE FOX IN HIS EARTH. XLI. THE LOBBY OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS. XLII. ANOTHER JOURNEY. XLIII. PLAYING ROUNDERS. XLIV. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER I. THE BARONY OF DESMOND. I wonder whether the novel-reading world--that part of it, at least,
which may honour my pages--will be offended if I lay the plot of
this story in Ireland! That there is a strong feeling against things
Irish it is impossible to deny. Irish servants need not apply; Irish
acquaintances are treated with limited confidence; Irish cousins are
regarded as being decidedly dangerous; and Irish stories are not
popular with the booksellers. For myself, I may say that if I ought to know anything about any
place, I ought to know something about Ireland; and I do strongly
protest against the injustice of the above conclusions. Irish cousins
I have none. Irish acquaintances I have by dozens; and Irish friends,
also, by twos and threes, whom I can love and cherish--almost as
well, perhaps, as though they had been born in Middlesex. Irish
servants I have had some in my house for years, and never had one
that was faithless, dishonest, or intemperate. I have travelled all
over Ireland, closely as few other men can have done, and have never
had my portmanteau robbed or my pocket picked. At hotels I have
seldom locked up my belongings, and my carelessness has never been
punished. I doubt whether as much can be said for English inns. Irish novels were once popular enough. But there is a fashion in
novels, as there is in colours and petticoats; and now I fear they
are drugs in the market. It is hard to say why a good story should
not have a fair chance of success whatever may be its bent; why it
should not be reckoned to be good by its own intrinsic merits alone;
but such is by no means the case. I was waiting once, when I was
young at the work, in the back parlour of an eminent publisher,
hoping to see his eminence on a small matter of business touching
a three-volumed manuscript which I held in my hand. The eminent
publisher, having probably larger fish to fry, could not see me, but
sent his clerk or foreman to arrange the business. "A novel, is it, sir?" said the foreman. "Yes," I answered; "a novel." "It depends very much on the subject," said the foreman, with
a thoughtful and judicious frown--"upon the name, sir, and the
subject;--daily life, sir; that's what suits us; daily English life. Now your historical novel, sir, is not worth the paper it's written
on." I fear that Irish character is in these days considered almost as
unattractive as historical incident; but, nevertheless, I will make
the attempt. I am now leaving the Green Isle and my old friends, and
would fain say a word of them as I do so. If I do not say that word
now it will never be said. The readability of a story should depend, one would say, on its
intrinsic merit rather than on the site of its adventures. No
one will think that Hampshire is better for such a purpose than
Cumberland, or Essex than Leicestershire. What abstract objection can
there then be to the county Cork? Perhaps the most interesting, and certainly the most beautiful part
of Ireland is that which lies down in the extreme south-west, with
fingers stretching far out into the Atlantic Ocean. This consists of
the counties Cork and Kerry, or a portion, rather, of those counties. It contains Killarney, Glengarriffe, Bantry, and Inchigeela; and
is watered by the Lee, the Blackwater, and the Flesk. I know not
where is to be found a land more rich in all that constitutes the
loveliness of scenery. Within this district, but hardly within that portion of it which is
most attractive to tourists, is situated the house and domain of
Castle Richmond. The river Blackwater rises in the county Kerry, and
running from west to east through the northern part of the county
Cork, enters the county Waterford beyond Fermoy. In its course it
passes near the little town of Kanturk, and through the town of
Mallow: Castle Richmond stands close upon its banks, within the
barony of Desmond, and in that Kanturk region through which the
Mallow and Killarney railway now passes, but which some thirteen
years since knew nothing of the navvy's spade, or even of the
engineer's theodolite. Castle Richmond was at this period the abode of Sir Thomas
Fitzgerald, who resided there, ever and always, with his wife, Lady
Fitzgerald, his two daughters, Mary and Emmeline Fitzgerald, and,
as often as purposes of education and pleasure suited, with his son
Herbert Fitzgerald. Neither Sir Thomas nor Sir Thomas's house had
about them any of those interesting picturesque faults which are so
generally attributed to Irish landlords and Irish castles. He was
not out of elbows, nor was he an absentee. Castle Richmond had no
appearance of having been thrown out of its own windows. It was a
good, substantial, modern family residence, built not more than
thirty years since by the late baronet, with a lawn sloping down
to the river, with kitchen gardens and walls for fruit, with ample
stables, and a clock over the entrance to the stable yard. It stood
in a well-timbered park duly stocked with deer,--and with foxes also,
which are agricultural animals much more valuable in an Irish county
than deer. So that as regards its appearance Castle Richmond might
have been in Hampshire or Essex; and as regards his property, Sir
Thomas Fitzgerald might have been a Leicestershire baronet. Here, at Castle Richmond, lived Sir Thomas with his wife and
daughters; and here, taking the period of our story as being exactly
thirteen years since, his son Herbert was staying also in those hard
winter months; his Oxford degree having been taken, and his English
pursuits admitting of a temporary sojourn in Ireland. But Sir Thomas Fitzgerald was not the great man of that part of the
country--at least, not the greatest man; nor was Lady Fitzgerald by
any means the greatest lady. As this greatest lady, and the greatest
man also, will, with their belongings, be among the most prominent
of our dramatis personae, it may be well that I should not even say a
word of them. All the world must have heard of Desmond Court. It is the largest
inhabited residence known in that part of the world, where rumours
are afloat of how it covers ten acres of ground; how in hewing the
stones for it a whole mountain was cut away; how it should have cost
hundreds of thousands of pounds, only that the money was never paid
by the rapacious, wicked, bloodthirsty old earl who caused it to be
erected;--and how the cement was thickened with human blood. So goes
rumour with the more romantic of the Celtic tale-bearers. It is a huge place--huge, ungainly, and uselessly extensive; built at
a time when, at any rate in Ireland, men considered neither beauty,
aptitude, nor economy. It is three stories high, and stands round a
quadrangle, in which there are two entrances opposite to each other. Nothing can be well uglier than that great paved court, in which
there is not a spot of anything green, except where the damp has
produced an unwholesome growth upon the stones; nothing can well
be more desolate. And on the outside of the building matters are
not much better. There are no gardens close up to the house, no
flower-beds in the nooks and corners, no sweet shrubs peeping in at
the square windows. Gardens there are, but they are away, half a mile
off; and the great hall door opens out upon a flat, bleak park, with
hardly a scrap around it which courtesy can call a lawn. Here, at this period of ours, lived Clara, Countess of Desmond, widow
of Patrick, once Earl of Desmond, and father of Patrick, now Earl of
Desmond. These Desmonds had once been mighty men in their country,
ruling the people around them as serfs, and ruling them with hot iron
rods. But those days were now long gone, and tradition told little of
them that was true. How it had truly fared either with the earl, or
with their serfs, men did not well know; but stories were ever being
told of walls built with human blood, and of the devil bearing off
upon his shoulder a certain earl who was in any other way quite
unbearable, and depositing some small unburnt portion of his remains
fathoms deep below the soil in an old burying-ground near Kanturk. And there had been a good earl, as is always the case with such
families; but even his virtues, according to tradition, had been of a
useless namby-pamby sort. He had walked to the shrine of St. Finbar,
up in the little island of the Gougane Barra, with unboiled peas in
his shoes; had forgiven his tenants five years' rent all round, and
never drank wine or washed himself after the death of his lady wife. At the present moment the Desmonds were not so potent either for
good or ill. The late earl had chosen to live in London all his life,
and had sunk down to be the toadying friend, or perhaps I should
more properly say the bullied flunky, of a sensual, wine-bibbing,
gluttonous--king. Late in life, when he was broken in means and
character, he had married. The lady of his choice had been chosen as
an heiress; but there had been some slip between that cup of fortune
and his lip; and she, proud and beautiful, for such she had been--had
neither relieved nor softened the poverty of her profligate old lord. She was left at his death with two children, of whom the eldest,
Lady Clara Desmond, will be the heroine of this story. The youngest,
Patrick, now Earl of Desmond, was two years younger than his sister,
and will make our acquaintance as a lad fresh from Eton. In these days money was not plentiful with the Desmonds. Not but
that their estates were as wide almost as their renown, and that the
Desmonds were still great people in the country's estimation. Desmond
Court stood in a bleak, unadorned region, almost among the mountains,
half way between Kanturk and Maccoom, and the family had some claim
to possession of the land for miles around. The earl of the day was
still the head landlord of a huge district extending over the whole
barony of Desmond, and half the adjacent baronies of Muskerry and
Duhallow; but the head landlord's rent in many cases hardly amounted
to sixpence an acre, and even those sixpences did not always find
their way into the earl's pocket. When the late earl had attained
his sceptre, he might probably have been entitled to spend some ten
thousand a year; but when he died, and during the years just previous
to that, he had hardly been entitled to spend anything. But, nevertheless, the Desmonds were great people, and owned a great
name. They had been kings once over those wild mountains; and would
be still, some said, if every one had his own. Their grandeur was
shown by the prevalence of their name. The barony in which they lived
was the barony of Desmond. The river which gave water to their cattle
was the river Desmond. The wretched, ragged, poverty-stricken village
near their own dismantled gate was the town of Desmond. The earl was
Earl of Desmond--not Earl Desmond, mark you; and the family name was
Desmond. The grandfather of the present earl, who had repaired his
fortune by selling himself at the time of the Union, had been Desmond
Desmond, Earl of Desmond. The late earl, the friend of the most illustrious person in the
kingdom, had not been utterly able to rob his heir of everything, or
he would undoubtedly have done so. At the age of twenty-one the young
earl would come into possession of the property, damaged certainly,
as far as an actively evil father could damage it by long leases, bad
management, lack of outlay, and rack-renting;--but still into the
possession of a considerable property. In the mean time it did not
fare very well, in a pecuniary way, with Clara, the widowed countess,
or with the Lady Clara, her daughter. The means at the widow's
disposal were only those which the family trustees would allow her
as the earl's mother: on his coming of age she would have almost no
means of her own; and for her daughter no provision whatever had been
made. As this first chapter is devoted wholly to the locale of my story, I
will not stop to say a word as to the persons or characters of either
of these two ladies, leaving them, as I did the Castle Richmond
family, to come forth upon the canvas as opportunity may offer. But
there is another homestead in this same barony of Desmond, of which
and of its owner--as being its owner--I will say a word. Hap House was also the property of a Fitzgerald. It had originally
been built by an old Sir Simon Fitzgerald, for the use and behoof
of a second son, and the present owner of it was the grandson of
that man for whom it had been built. And old Sir Simon had given
his offspring not only a house--he had endowed the house with
a comfortable little slice of land, either cut from the large
patrimonial loaf, or else, as was more probable, collected together
and separately baked for this younger branch of the family. Be that
as it may, Hap House had of late years been always regarded as
conferring some seven or eight hundred a year upon its possessor, and
when young Owen Fitzgerald succeeded to this property, on the death
of an uncle in the year 1843, he was regarded as a rich man to that
extent. At that time he was some twenty-two years of age, and he came down
from Dublin, where his friends had intended that he should practise
as a barrister, to set up for himself as a country gentleman. Hap
House was distant from Castle Richmond about four miles, standing
also on the river Blackwater, but nearer to Mallow. It was a
pleasant, comfortable residence, too large no doubt for such a
property, as is so often the case in Ireland; surrounded by pleasant
grounds and pleasant gardens, with a gorse fox covert belonging to
the place within a mile of it, with a slated lodge, and a pretty
drive along the river. At the age of twenty-two, Owen Fitzgerald came
into all this; and as he at once resided upon the place, he came in
also for the good graces of all the mothers with unmarried daughters
in the county, and for the smiles also of many of the daughters
themselves. Sir Thomas and Lady Fitzgerald were not his uncle and aunt, but
nevertheless they took kindly to him;--very kindly at first, though
that kindness after a while became less warm. He was the nearest
relation of the name; and should anything happen--as the fatal
death-foretelling phrase goes--to young Herbert Fitzgerald, he would
become the heir of the family title and of the family place. When I hear of a young man sitting down by himself as the master of
a household, without a wife, or even without a mother or sister to
guide him, I always anticipate danger. If he does not go astray in
any other way, he will probably mismanage his money matters. And then
there are so many other ways. A house, if it be not made pleasant by
domestic pleasant things, must be made pleasant by pleasure. And a
bachelor's pleasures in his own house are always dangerous. There is
too much wine drunk at his dinner parties. His guests sit too long
over their cards. The servants know that they want a mistress; and,
in the absence of that mistress, the language of the household
becomes loud and harsh--and sometimes improper. Young men among us
seldom go quite straight in their course, unless they are, at any
rate occasionally, brought under the influence of tea and small talk. There was no tea and small talk at Hap House, but there were
hunting-dinners. Owen Fitzgerald was soon known for his horses
and his riding. He lived in the very centre of the Duhallow hunt;
and before he had been six months owner of his property had built
additional stables, with half a dozen loose boxes for his friends'
nags. He had an eye, too, for a pretty girl--not always in the way
that is approved of by mothers with marriageable daughters; but in
the way of which they so decidedly disapprove. And thus old ladies began to say bad things. Those pleasant
hunting-dinners were spoken of as the Hap House orgies. It was
declared that men slept there half the day, having played cards all
the night; and dreadful tales were told. Of these tales one-half was
doubtless false. But, alas, alas! what if one-half were also true? It is undoubtedly a very dangerous thing for a young man of
twenty-two to keep house by himself, either in town or country. CHAPTER II. OWEN FITZGERALD. I have tied myself down to thirteen years ago as the time of my
story; but I must go back a little beyond this for its first scenes,
and work my way up as quickly as may be to the period indicated. I
have spoken of a winter in which Herbert Fitzgerald was at home at
Castle Richmond, having then completed his Oxford doings; but I must
say something of two years previous to that, of a time when Herbert
was not so well known in the county as was his cousin of Hap House. It was a thousand pities that a bad word should ever have been spoken
of Owen Fitzgerald; ten thousand pities that he should ever have
given occasion for such bad word. He was a fine, high-spirited,
handsome fellow, with a loving heart within his breast, and
bright thoughts within his brain. It was utterly wrong that a man
constituted as he was should commence life by living alone in a large
country-house. But those who spoke ill of him should have remembered
that this was his misfortune rather than his fault. Some greater
endeavour might perhaps have been made to rescue him from evil ways. Very little such endeavour was made at all. Sir Thomas once or
twice spoke to him; but Sir Thomas was not an energetic man; and
as for Lady Fitzgerald, though she was in many things all that was
excellent, she was far too diffident to attempt the reformation of a
headstrong young man, who after all was only distantly connected with
her. And thus there was no such attempt, and poor Owen became the subject
of ill report without any substantial effort having been made to save
him. He was a very handsome man--tall, being somewhat over six feet
in height--athletic, almost more than in proportion--with short,
light chestnut-tinted hair, blue eyes, and a mouth perfect as that
of Phoebus. He was clever, too, though perhaps not educated as
carefully as might have been: his speech was usually rapid, hearty,
and short, and not seldom caustic and pointed. Had he fallen among
good hands, he might have done very well in the world's fight; but
with such a character, and lacking such advantages, it was quite as
open to him to do ill. Alas! the latter chance seemed to have fallen
to him. For the first year of his residence at Hap House, he was popular
enough among his neighbours. The Hap House orgies were not commenced
at once, nor when commenced did they immediately become a subject of
scandal; and even during the second year he was tolerated;--tolerated
by all, and still flattered by some. Among the different houses in the country at which he had become
intimate was that of the Countess of Desmond. The Countess of Desmond
did not receive much company at Desmond Court. She had not the means,
nor perhaps the will, to fill the huge old house with parties of her
Irish neighbours--for she herself was English to the backbone. Ladies
of course made morning calls, and gentlemen too, occasionally; but
society at Desmond Court was for some years pretty much confined to
this cold formal mode of visiting. Owen Fitzgerald, however, did
obtain admittance into the precincts of the Desmond barracks. He went there first with the young earl, who, then quite a boy, had
had an ugly tumble from his pony in the hunting-field. The countess
had expressed herself as very grateful for young Fitzgerald's care,
and thus an intimacy had sprung up. Owen had gone there once or twice
to see the lad, and on those occasions had dined there; and on one
occasion, at the young earl's urgent request, had stayed and slept. And then the good-natured people of Muskerry, Duhallow, and Desmond
began, of course, to say that the widow was going to marry the young
man. And why not? she was still a beautiful woman; not yet forty by a
good deal, said the few who took her part; or at any rate, not much
over, as was admitted by the many who condemned her. We, who have
been admitted to her secrets, know that she was then in truth only
thirty-eight. She was beautiful, proud, and clever; and if it would
suit her to marry a handsome young fellow with a good house and an
unembarrassed income of eight hundred a year, why should she not
do so? As for him, would it not be a great thing for him to have a
countess for his wife, and an earl for his stepson? What ideas the countess had on this subject we will not just now
trouble ourselves to inquire. But as to young Owen Fitzgerald, we
may declare at once that no thought of such a wretched alliance ever
entered his head. He was sinful in many things, and foolish in many
things. But he had not that vile sin, that unmanly folly, which would
have made a marriage with a widowed countess eligible in his eyes,
merely because she was a countess, and not more than fifteen years
his senior. In a matter of love he would as soon have thought of
paying his devotions to his far-away cousin, old Miss Barbara
Beamish, of Ballyclahassan, of whom it was said that she had set her
cap at every unmarried man that had come into the west riding of the
county for the last forty years. No; it may at any rate be said of
Owen Fitzgerald, that he was not the man to make up to a widowed
countess for the sake of the reflected glitter which might fall on
him from her coronet. But the Countess of Desmond was not the only lady at Desmond Court. I
have before said that she had a daughter, the Lady Clara, the heroine
of this coming story; and it may be now right that I should attempt
some short description of her; her virtues and faults, her merits and
defects. It shall be very short; for let an author describe as he
will, he cannot by such course paint the characters of his personages
on the minds of his readers. It is by gradual, earnest efforts that
this must be done--if it be done. Ten, nay, twenty pages of the
finest descriptive writing that ever fell from the pen of a novelist
will not do it. Clara Desmond, when young Fitzgerald first saw her, had hardly
attained that incipient stage of womanhood which justifies a mother
in taking her out into the gaieties of the world. She was then only
sixteen; and had not in her manner and appearance so much of the
woman as is the case with many girls of that age. She was shy and
diffident in manner, thin and tall in person. If I were to say that
she was angular and bony, I should disgust my readers, who, disliking
the term, would not stop to consider how many sweetest girls are
at that age truly subject to those epithets. Their undeveloped but
active limbs are long and fleshless, the contour of their face is the
same, their elbows and shoulders are pointed, their feet and hands
seem to possess length without breadth. Birth and breeding have given
them the frame of beauty, to which coming years will add the soft
roundness of form, and the rich glory of colour. The plump, rosy
girl of fourteen, though she also is very sweet, never rises to such
celestial power of feminine grace as she who is angular and bony,
whose limbs are long, and whose joints are sharp. Such was Clara Desmond at sixteen. But still, even then, to those
who were gifted with the power of seeing, she gave promise of great
loveliness. Her eyes were long and large, and wonderfully clear. There was a liquid depth in them which enabled the gazer to look down
into them as he would into the green, pellucid transparency of still
ocean water. And then they said so much--those young eyes of hers:
from her mouth in those early years words came but scantily, but from
her eyes questions rained quicker than any other eyes could answer
them. Questions of wonder at what the world contained,--of wonder as
to what men thought and did; questions as to the inmost heart, and
truth, and purpose of the person questioned. And all this was asked
by a glance now and again; by a glance of those long, shy, liquid
eyes, which were ever falling on the face of him she questioned, and
then ever as quickly falling from it. Her face, as I have said, was long and thin, but it was the longness
and thinness of growing youth. The natural lines of it were full of
beauty, of pale silent beauty, too proud in itself to boast itself
much before the world, to make itself common among many. Her hair was
already long and rich, but was light in colour, much lighter than
it grew to be when some four or five more years had passed over her
head. At the time of which I speak she wore it in simple braids
brushed back from her forehead, not having as yet learned that
majestic mode of sweeping it from her face which has in subsequent
years so generally prevailed. And what then of her virtues and her faults--of her merits and
defects? Will it not be better to leave them all to time and the
coming pages? That she was proud of her birth, proud of being an
Irish Desmond, proud even of her poverty, so much I may say of her,
even at that early age. In that she was careless of the world's
esteem, fond to a fault of romance, poetic in her temperament, and
tender in her heart, she shared the ordinary--shall I say foibles or
virtues?--of so many of her sex. She was passionately fond of her
brother, but not nearly equally so of her mother, of whom the brother
was too evidently the favoured child. She had lived much alone; alone, that is, with her governess and
with servants at Desmond Court. Not that she had been neglected by
her mother, but she had hardly found herself to be her mother's
companion; and other companions there she had had none. When she was
sixteen her governess was still with her; but a year later than that
she was left quite alone, except inasmuch as she was with her mother. She was sixteen when she first began to ask questions of Owen
Fitzgerald's face with those large eyes of hers; and she saw much
of him, and he of her, for the twelve months immediately after that. Much of him, that is, as much goes in this country of ours, where
four or five interviews in as many months between friends is supposed
to signify that they are often together. But this much-seeing
occurred chiefly during the young earl's holidays. Now and again
he did ride over in the long intervals, and when he did do so was
not frowned upon by the countess; and so, at the end of the winter
holidays subsequent to that former winter in which the earl had had
his tumble, people through the county began to say that he and the
countess were about to become man and wife. It was just then that people in the county were also beginning to
talk of the Hap House orgies; and the double scandal reached Owen's
ears, one shortly after the other. That orgies scandal did not
hurt him much. It is, alas! too true that consciousness of such a
reputation does not often hurt a young man's feelings. But the other
rumour did wound him. What! he sell himself to a widowed countess
almost old enough to be his mother; or bestow himself rather,--for
what was there in return that could be reckoned as a price? At any
rate, he had given no one cause to utter such falsehood, such calumny
as that. No; it certainly was not probable that he should marry the
countess. But this set him to ask himself whether it might or might not be
possible that he should marry some one else. Might it not be well
for him if he could find a younger bride at Desmond Court? Not for
nothing had he ridden over there through those bleak mountains;
not for nothing, nor yet solely with the view of tying flies for
the young earl's summer fishing, or preparing the new nag for
his winter's hunting. Those large bright eyes had asked him many
questions. Would it not be well that he should answer them? For many months of that year Clara Desmond had hardly spoken to
him. Then, in the summer evening, as he and her brother would lie
sprawling together on the banks of the little Desmond river, while
the lad was talking of his fish, and his school, and his cricket
club, she would stand by and listen, and so gradually she learned to
speak. And the mother also would sometimes be there; or else she would
welcome Fitzgerald in to tea, and let him stay there talking as
though they were all at home, till he would have to make a midnight
ride of it before he reached Hap House. It seemed that no fear as to
her daughter had ever crossed the mother's mind; that no idea had
ever come upon her that her favoured visitor might learn to love the
young girl with whom he was allowed to associate on so intimate a
footing. Once or twice he had caught himself calling her Clara, and
had done so even before her mother; but no notice had been taken of
it. In truth, Lady Desmond did not know her daughter, for the mother
took her absolutely to be a child, when in fact she was a child no
longer. "You take Clara round by the bridge," said the earl to his friend one
August evening, as they were standing together on the banks of the
river, about a quarter of a mile distant from the sombre old pile in
which the family lived. "You take Clara round by the bridge, and I
will get over the stepping-stones." And so the lad, with his rod in
his hand, began to descend the steep bank. "I can get over the stepping-stones, too, Patrick," said she. "Can you though, my gay young woman? You'll be over your ankles if
you do. That rain didn't come down yesterday for nothing." Clara as she spoke had come up to the bank, and now looked wistfully
down at the stepping-stones. She had crossed them scores of times,
sometimes with her brother, and often by herself. Why was it that she
was so anxious to cross them now? "It's no use your trying," said her brother, who was now half across,
and who spoke from the middle of the river. "Don't you let her, Owen. She'll slip in, and then there will be no end of a row up at the
house." "You had better come round by the bridge," said Fitzgerald. "It is
not only that the stones are nearly under water, but they are wet,
and you would slip." So cautioned, Lady Clara allowed herself to be persuaded, and turned
upwards along the river by a little path that led to a foot bridge. It was some quarter of a mile thither, and it would be the same
distance down the river again before she regained her brother. "I needn't bring you with me, you know," she said to Fitzgerald. "You
can get over the stones easily, and I can go very well by myself." But it was not probable that he would let her do so. "Why should I
not go with you?" he said. "When I get there I have nothing to do but
see him fish. Only if we were to leave him by himself he would not be
happy." "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald, how very kind you are to him! I do so often
think of it. How dull his holidays would be in this place if it were
not for you!" "And what a godsend his holidays are to me!" said Owen. "When they
come round I can ride over here and see him, and you--and your
mother. Do you think that I am not dull also, living alone at Hap
House, and that this is not an infinite blessing to me?" He had named them all--son, daughter, and mother; but there had been
a something in his voice, an almost inappreciable something in his
tone, which had seemed to mark to Clara's hearing that she herself
was not the least prized of the three attractions. She had felt this
rather than realized it, and the feeling was not unpleasant. "I only know that you are very goodnatured," she continued, "and that
Patrick is very fond of you. Sometimes I think he almost takes you
for a brother." And then a sudden thought flashed across her mind,
and she said hardly a word more to him that evening. This had been at the close of the summer holidays. After that he had
been once or twice at Desmond Court, before the return of the boy
from Eton; but on these occasions he had been more with the countess
than with her daughter. On the last of these visits, just before
the holidays commenced, he had gone over respecting a hunter he had
bought for Lord Desmond, and on this occasion he did not even see
Clara. The countess, when she had thanked him for his trouble in the matter
of the purchase, hesitated a moment, and then went on to speak of
other matters. "I understand, Mr. Fitzgerald," said she, "that you have been very
gay at Hap House since the hunting commenced." "Oh, I don't know," said Owen, half laughing and half blushing. "It's
a convenient place for some of the men, and one must be sociable." "Sociable! yes, one ought to be sociable certainly. But I am always
afraid of the sociability of young men without ladies. Do not be
angry with me if I venture as a friend to ask you not to be too
sociable." "I know what you mean, Lady Desmond. People have been accusing us
of--of being rakes. Isn't that it?" "Yes, Mr. Fitzgerald, that is it. But then I know that I have no
right to speak to you on such a--such a subject." "Yes, yes; you have every right," said he, warmly; "more right than
any one else." "Oh, no; Sir Thomas, you know--"

"Well, yes, Sir Thomas. Sir Thomas is very well, and so also is Lady
Fitzgerald; but I do not feel the same interest about them that I
do about you. And they are such humdrum, quiet-going people. As for
Herbert, I'm afraid he'll turn out a prig." "Well, Mr. Fitzgerald, if you give me the right I shall use it." And
getting up from her chair, and coming to him where he stood, she
looked kindly into his face. It was a bonny, handsome face for a
woman to gaze on, and there was much kindness in hers as she smiled
on him. Nay, there was almost more than kindness, he thought, as he
caught her eye. It was like,--almost like the sweetness of motherly
love. "And I shall scold you," she continued. "People say that for
two or three nights running men have been playing cards at Hap House
till morning." "Yes, I had some men there for a week. I could not take their candles
away, and put them to bed; could I, Lady Desmond?" "And there were late suppers, and drinking of toasts, and headaches
in the morning, and breakfast at three o'clock, and gentlemen with
very pale faces when they appeared rather late at the meet--eh, Mr. Fitzgerald?" And she held up one finger at him, as she upbraided
him with a smile. The smile was so sweet, so unlike her usual look;
that, to tell the truth, was often too sad and careworn for her age. "Such things do happen, Lady Desmond." "Ah, yes; they do happen. And with such a one as you, heaven knows
I do not begrudge the pleasure, if it were but now and then,--once
again and then done with. But you are too bright and too good for
such things to continue." And she took his hand and pressed it, as
a mother or a mother's dearest friend might have done. "It would so
grieve me to think that you should be even in danger of shipwreck. "You will not be angry with me for taking this liberty?" she
continued. "Angry! how could any man be angry for such kindness?" "And you will think of what I say. I would not have you unsociable,
or morose, or inhospitable; but--"

"I understand, Lady Desmond; but when young men are together, one
cannot always control them." "But you will try. Say that you will try because I have asked you." He promised that he would, and then went his way, proud in his heart
at this solicitude. And how could he not be proud? was she not high
in rank, proud in character, beautiful withal, and the mother of
Clara Desmond? What sweeter friend could a man have; what counsellor
more potent to avert those dangers which now hovered round his head? And as he rode home he was half in love with the countess. Where is
the young man who has not in his early years been half in love with
some woman older, much older than himself, who has half conquered his
heart by her solicitude for his welfare?--with some woman who has
whispered to him while others were talking, who has told him in such
gentle, loving tones of his boyish follies, whose tenderness and
experience together have educated him and made him manly? Young men
are so proud, proud in their inmost hearts, of such tenderness and
solicitude, as long as it remains secret and wrapt as it were in
a certain mystery. Such liaisons have the interests of intrigue,
without--I was going to say without its dangers. Alas! it may be that
it is not always so. Owen Fitzgerald as he rode home was half in love with the countess. Not that his love was of a kind which made him in any way desirous
of marrying her, or of kneeling at her feet and devoting himself to
her for ever; not that it in any way interfered with the other love
which he was beginning to feel for her daughter. But he thought with
pleasure of the tone of her voice, of the pressure of her hand, of
the tenderness which he had found in her eye. It was after that time, as will be understood, that some goodnatured
friend had told him that he was regarded in the county as the future
husband of Lady Desmond. At first he laughed at this as being--as
he himself said to himself--too good a joke. When the report
first reached him, it seemed to be a joke which he could share so
pleasantly with the countess. For men of three and twenty, though
they are so fond of the society of women older than themselves,
understand so little the hearts and feelings of such women. In his
ideas there was an interval as of another generation between him and
the countess. In her thoughts the interval was probably much less
striking. But the accusation was made to him again and again till it wounded
him, and he gave up that notion of a mutual joke with his kind friend
at Desmond Court. It did not occur to him that she could ever think
of loving him as her lord and master; but it was brought home to him
that other people thought so. A year had now passed by since those winter holidays in which Clara
Desmond had been sixteen, and during which she was described by
epithets which will not, I fear, have pleased my readers. Those
epithets were now somewhat less deserved, but still the necessity
of them had not entirely passed away. Her limbs were still thin
and long, and her shoulders pointed; but the growth of beauty had
commenced, and in Owen's eyes she was already very lovely. At Christmas-time during that winter a ball was given at Castle
Richmond, to celebrate the coming of age of the young heir. It was
not a very gay affair, for the Castle Richmond folk, even in those
days, were not very gay people. Sir Thomas, though only fifty, was
an old man for his age; and Lady Fitzgerald, though known intimately
by the poor all round her, was not known intimately by any but the
poor. Mary and Emmeline Fitzgerald, with whom we shall become better
acquainted as we advance in our story, were nice, good girls, and
handsome withal; but they had not that special gift which enables
some girls to make a party in their own house bright in spite of all
obstacles. We should have but little to do with this ball, were it not that
Clara Desmond was here first brought out, as the term goes. It was
the first large party to which she had been taken, and it was to her
a matter of much wonder and inquiry with those wondering, speaking
eyes. And Owen Fitzgerald was there;--as a matter of course, the reader
will say. By no means so. Previous to that ball Owen's sins had been
commented upon at Castle Richmond, and Sir Thomas had expostulated
with him. These expostulations had not been received quite so
graciously as those of the handsome countess, and there had been
anger at Castle Richmond. Now there was living in the house of Castle Richmond one Miss Letty
Fitzgerald, a maiden sister of the baronet's, older than her brother
by full ten years. In her character there was more of energy, and
also much more of harsh judgment, and of consequent ill-nature, than
in that of her brother. When the letters of invitation were being
sent out by the two girls, she had given a decided opinion that the
reprobate should not be asked. But the reprobate's cousins, with that
partiality for a rake which is so common to young ladies, would not
abide by their aunt's command, and referred the matter both to mamma
and papa. Mamma thought it very hard that their own cousin should be
refused admittance to their house, and very dreadful that his sins
should be considered to be of so deep a dye as to require so severe a
sentence; and then papa, much balancing the matter, gave final orders
that the prodigal cousin should be admitted. He was admitted, and dangerously he used the privilege. The countess,
who was there, stood up to dance twice, and twice only. She opened
the ball with young Herbert Fitzgerald the heir; and in about an hour
afterwards she danced again with Owen. He did not ask her twice; but
he asked her daughter three or four times, and three or four times he
asked her successfully. "Clara," whispered the mother to her child, after the last of these
occasions, giving some little pull or twist to her girl's frock as
she did so, "you had better not dance with Owen Fitzgerald again
to-night. People will remark about it." "Will they?" said Clara, and immediately sat down, checked in her
young happiness. Not many minutes afterwards, Owen came up to her again. "May we have
another waltz together, I wonder?" he said. "Not to-night, I think. I am rather tired already." And so she did
not waltz again all the evening, for fear she should offend him. But the countess, though she had thus interdicted her daughter's
dancing with the master of Hap House, had not done so through any
absolute fear. To her, her girl was still a child; a child without
a woman's thoughts, or any of a woman's charms. And then it was
so natural that Clara should like to dance with almost the only
gentleman who was not absolutely a stranger to her. Lady Desmond had
been actuated rather by a feeling that it would be well that Clara
should begin to know other persons. By that feeling,--and perhaps unconsciously by another, that it would
be well that Owen Fitzgerald should be relieved from his attendance
on the child, and enabled to give it to the mother. Whether Lady
Desmond had at that time realized any ideas as to her own interest
in this young man, it was at any rate true that she loved to have
him near her. She had refused to dance a second time with Herbert
Fitzgerald; she had refused to stand up with any other person who had
asked her; but with Owen she would either have danced again, or have
kept him by her side, while she explained to him with flattering
frankness that she could not do so lest others should be offended. And Owen was with her frequently through the evening. She was taken
to and from supper by Sir Thomas, but any other takings that were
incurred were done by him. He led her from one drawing-room to
another; he took her empty coffee-cup; he stood behind her chair,
and talked to her; and he brought her the scarf which she had left
elsewhere; and finally, he put a shawl round her neck while old Sir
Thomas was waiting to hand her to her carriage. Reader, good-natured,
middle-aged reader, remember that she was only thirty-eight, and that
hitherto she had known nothing of the delights of love. By the young,
any such hallucination on her part, at her years, will be regarded as
lunacy, or at least frenzy. Owen Fitzgerald drove home from that ball in a state of mind that
was hardly satisfactory. In the first place, Miss Letty had made a
direct attack upon his morals, which he had not answered in the most
courteous manner. "I have heard a great deal of your doings, Master Owen," she said to
him. "A fine house you're keeping." "Why don't you come and join us, Aunt Letty?" he replied. "It would
be just the thing for you." "God forbid!" said the old maid, turning up her eyes to heaven. "Oh, you might do worse, you know. With us you'd only drink and
play cards, and perhaps hear a little strong language now and again. But what's that to slander, and calumny, and bearing false witness
against one's neighbour?" and so saying he ended that interview--not
in a manner to ingratiate himself with his relative, Miss Letty
Fitzgerald. After that, in the supper-room, more than one wag of a fellow had
congratulated him on his success with the widow. "She's got some
sort of a jointure, I suppose," said one. "She's very young-looking,
certainly, to be the mother of that girl," declared another. "Upon my
word, she's a handsome woman still," said a third. "And what title
will you get when you marry her, Fitz?" asked a fourth, who was
rather ignorant as to the phases under which the British peerage
develops itself. Fitzgerald pshawed, and pished, and poohed; and then, breaking away
from them, rode home. He felt that he must at any rate put an end to
this annoyance about the countess, and that he must put an end also
to his state of doubt about the countess's daughter. Clara had been
kind and gracious to him in the first part of the evening; nay,
almost more than gracious. Why had she been so cold when he went up
to her on that last occasion? why had she gathered herself like a
snail into its shell for the rest of the evening? The young earl had also been at the party, and had exacted a promise
from Owen that he would be over at Desmond Court on the next day. It
had almost been on Owen's lips to tell his friend, not only that he
would be there, but what would be his intention when he got there. He knew that the lad loved him well; and almost fancied that, earl
as he was, he would favour his friend's suit. But a feeling that
Lord Desmond was only a boy, restrained him. It would not be well to
induce one so young to agree to an arrangement of which in after and
more mature years he would so probably disapprove. But not the less did Fitzgerald, as he drove home, determine that
on the next day he would know something of his fate: and with this
resolve he endeavoured to comfort himself as he drove up into his own
avenue, and betook himself to his own solitary home. CHAPTER III. CLARA DESMOND. It had been Clara Desmond's first ball, and on the following morning
she had much to occupy her thoughts. In the first place, had she been
pleased or had she not? Had she been most gratified or most pained? Girls when they ask themselves such questions seldom give themselves
fair answers. She had liked dancing with Owen Fitzgerald; oh, so
much! She had liked dancing with others too, though she had not known
them, and had hardly spoken to them. The mere act of dancing, with
the loud music in the room, and the gay dresses and bright lights
around her, had been delightful. But then it had pained her--she knew
not why, but it had pained her--when her mother told her that people
would make remarks about her. Had she done anything improper on this
her first entry into the world? Was her conduct to be scanned, and
judged, and condemned, while she was flattering herself that no one
had noticed her but him who was speaking to her? Their breakfast was late, and the countess sat, as was her wont, with
her book beside her tea-cup, speaking a word every now and again to
her son. "Owen will be over here to-day," said he. "We are going to have a
schooling match down on the Callows." Now in Ireland a schooling
match means the amusement of teaching your horses to jump. "Will he?" said Lady Desmond, looking up from her book for a moment. "Mind you bring him in to lunch; I want to speak to him." "He doesn't care much about lunch, I fancy," said he; "and, maybe, we
shall be half way to Millstreet by that time." "Never mind, but do as I tell you. You expect everybody to be as wild
and wayward as yourself." And the countess smiled on her son in a
manner which showed that she was proud even of his wildness and his
waywardness. Clara had felt that she blushed when she heard that Mr. Fitzgerald
was to be there that morning. She felt that her own manner became
constrained, and was afraid that her mother should look at her. Owen
had said nothing to her about love; and she, child as she was, had
thought nothing about love. But she was conscious of something, she
knew not what. He had touched her hand during those dances as it had
never been touched before; he had looked into her eyes, and her eyes
had fallen before his glance; he had pressed her waist, and she had
felt that there was tenderness in the pressure. So she blushed, and
almost trembled, when she heard that he was coming, and was glad in
her heart when she found that there was neither anger nor sunshine in
her mother's face. Not long after breakfast, the earl went out on his horse, and met
Owen at some gate or back entrance. In his opinion the old house was
stupid, and the women in it were stupid companions in the morning. His heart for the moment was engaged on the thought of making his
animal take the most impracticable leaps which he could find, and
it did not occur to him at first to give his mother's message to
his companion. As for lunch, they would get a biscuit and glass of
cherry-brandy at Wat M'Carthy's, of Drumban; and as for his mother
having anything to say, that of course went for nothing. Owen would have been glad to have gone up to the house, but in that
he was frustrated by the earl's sharpness in catching him. His next
hope was to get through the promised lesson in horse-leaping as
quickly as possible, so that he might return to Desmond Court, and
take his chance of meeting Clara. But in this he found the earl very
difficult to manage. "Oh, Owen, we won't go there," he said, when Fitzgerald proposed a
canter through some meadows down by the river-side. "There are only
a few gripes"--Irish for small ditches--"and I have ridden Fireball
over them a score of times. I want you to come away towards Drumban." "Drumban! why Drumban's seven miles from here." "What matter? Besides, it's not six the way I'll take you. I want to
see Wat M'Carthy especially. He has a litter of puppies there, out of
that black bitch of his, and I mean to make him give me one of them." But on that morning, Owen Fitzgerald would not allow himself to be
taken so far a-field as Drumban, even on a mission so important as
this. The young lord fought the matter stoutly; but it ended by
his being forced to content himself with picking out all the most
dangerous parts of the fences in the river meadows. "Why, you've hardly tried your own mare at all," said the lad,
reproachfully. "I'm going to hunt her on Saturday," said Owen; "and she'll have
quite enough to do then." "Well, you're very slow to-day. You're done up with the dancing, I
think. And what do you mean to do now?" "I'll go home with you, I think, and pay my respects to the
countess." "By-the-by, I was to bring you in to lunch. She said she wanted to
see you. By jingo, I forgot all about it! But you've all become very
stupid among you, I know that." And so they rode back to Desmond
Court, entering the demesne by one of the straight, dull, level roads
which led up to the house. But it did not suit the earl to ride on the road while the grass was
so near him; so they turned off with a curve across what was called
the park, thus prolonging their return by about double the necessary
distance. As they were cantering on, Owen saw her of whom he was in quest
walking in the road which they had left. His best chance of seeing
her alone had been that of finding her outside the house. He knew
that the countess rarely or never walked with her daughter, and that,
as the governess was gone, Clara was driven to walk by herself. "Desmond," he said, pulling up his horse, "do you go on and tell your
mother that I will be with her almost immediately." "Why, where are you off to now?" "There is your sister, and I must ask her how she is after the ball;"
and so saying he trotted back in the direction of the road. Lady Clara had seen them; and though she had hardly turned her head,
she had seen also how suddenly Mr. Fitzgerald had stopped his horse,
and turned his course when he perceived her. At the first moment she
had been almost angry with him for riding away from her, and now she
felt almost angry with him because he did not do so. He slackened his pace as he came near her, and approached her at a
walk. There was very little of the faint heart about Owen Fitzgerald
at any time, or in anything that he attempted. He had now made up
his mind fairly to tell Clara Desmond that he loved her, and to ask
for her love in return. He had resolved to do so, and there was very
little doubt but that he would carry out his resolution. But he had
in nowise made up his mind how he should do it, or what his words
should be. And now that he saw her so near him he wanted a moment to
collect his thoughts. He took off his hat as he rode up, and asked her whether she was
tired after the ball; and then dismounting, he left his mare to
follow as she pleased. "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald, won't she run away?" said Clara, as she gave him
her hand. "Oh, no; she has been taught better than that. But you don't tell me
how you are. I thought you were tired last night when I saw that you
had altogether given over dancing." And then he walked on beside her,
and the docile mare followed them like a dog. "No, I was not tired; at least, not exactly," said Clara, blushing
again and again, being conscious that she blushed. "But--but--you
know it was the first ball I was ever at." "That is just the reason why you should have enjoyed it the more,
instead of sitting down as you did, and being dull and unhappy. For
I know you were unhappy; I could see it." "Was I?" said Clara, not knowing what else to say. "Yes; and I'll tell you what. I could see more than that; it was I
that made you unhappy." "You, Mr. Fitzgerald!" "Yes, I. You will not deny it, because you are so true. I asked you
to dance with me too often. And because you refused me, you did not
like to dance with any one else. I saw it all. Will you deny that it
was so?" "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald!" Poor girl! She did not know what to say; how to
shape her speech into indifference; how to assure him that he made
himself out to be of too much consequence by far; how to make it
plain that she had not danced because there was no one there worth
dancing with. Had she been out for a year or two, instead of being
such a novice, she would have accomplished all this in half a dozen
words. As it was, her tell-tale face confessed it all, and she was
only able to ejaculate, "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald!" "When I went there last night," he continued, "I had only one
wish--one hope. That was, to see you pleased and happy. I knew it was
your first ball, and I did so long to see you enjoy it." "And so I did, till--"

"Till what? Will you not let me ask?" "Mamma said something to me, and that stopped me from dancing." "She told you not to dance with me. Was that it?" How was it possible that she should have had a chance with him;
innocent, young, and ignorant as she was? She did not tell him in
words that so it had been; but she looked into his face with a glance
of doubt and pain that answered his question as plainly as any words
could have done. "Of course she did; and it was I that destroyed it all. I that should
have been satisfied to stand still and see you happy. How you must
have hated me!" "Oh, no; indeed I did not. I was not at all angry with you. Indeed,
why should I have been? It was so kind of you, wishing to dance with
me." "No; it was selfish--selfish in the extreme. Nothing but one thing
could excuse me, and that excuse--"

"I'm sure you don't want any excuse, Mr. Fitzgerald." "And that excuse, Clara, was this: that I love you with all my heart. I had not strength to see you there, and not long to have you near
me--not begrudge that you should dance with another. I love you with
all my heart and soul. There, Lady Clara, now you know it all." The manner in which he made his declaration to her was almost fierce
in its energy. He had stopped in the pathway, and she, unconscious
of what she was doing, almost unconscious of what she was hearing,
had stopped also. The mare, taking advantage of the occasion, was
cropping the grass close to them. And so, for a few seconds, they
stood in silence. "Am I so bold, Lady Clara," said he, when those few seconds had gone
by--"Am I so bold that I may hope for no answer?" But still she
said nothing. In lieu of speaking she uttered a long sigh; and then
Fitzgerald could hear that she was sobbing. "Oh, Clara, I love you so fondly, so dearly, so truly!" said he in an
altered voice and with sweet tenderness. "I know my own presumption
in thus speaking. I know and feel bitterly the difference in our
rank." "I--care--nothing--for rank," said the poor girl, sobbing through her
tears. He was generous, and she at any rate would not be less so. No;
at that moment, with her scanty seventeen years of experience, with
her ignorance of all that the world had in it of grand and great, of
high and rich, she did care nothing for rank. That Owen Fitzgerald
was a gentleman of good lineage, fit to mate with a lady, that
she did know; for her mother, who was a proud woman, delighted to
have him in her presence. Beyond this she cared for none of the
conventionalities of life. Rank! If she waited for rank, where was
she to look for friends who would love her? Earls and countesses,
barons and their baronesses, were scarce there where fate had placed
her, under the shadow of the bleak mountains of Muskerry. Her want,
her undefined want, was that some one should love her. Of all men
and women whom she had hitherto known, this Owen Fitzgerald was the
brightest, the kindest, the gentlest in his manner, the most pleasant
to look on. And now he was there at her feet, swearing that he loved
her;--and then drawing back as it were in dread of her rank. What did
she care for rank? "Clara, Clara, my Clara! Can you learn to love me?" She had made her one little effort at speaking when she attempted to
repudiate the pedestal on which he affected to place her; but after
that she could for a while say no more. But she still sobbed, and
still kept her eyes fixed upon the ground. "Clara, say one word to me. Say that you do not hate me." But just at
that moment she had not one word to say. "If you will bid me do so, I will leave this country altogether. I
will go away, and I shall not much care whither. I can only stay now
on condition of your loving me. I have thought of this day for the
last year past, and now it has come." Every word that he now spoke was gospel to her. Is it not always
so,--should it not be so always, when love first speaks to loving
ears? What! he had loved her for that whole twelvemonth that she had
known him; loved her in those days when she had been wont to look up
into his face, wondering why he was so nice, so much nicer than any
one else that came near her! A year was a great deal to her; and had
he loved her through all those days? and after that should she banish
him from her house, turn him away from his home, and drive him forth
unhappy and wretched? Ah, no! She could not be so unkind to him;--she
could not be so unkind to her own heart. But still she sobbed; and
still she said nothing. In the mean time they had turned, and were now walking back towards
the house, the gentle-natured mare still following at their heels. They were walking slowly--very slowly back--just creeping along the
path, when they saw Lady Desmond and her son coming to meet them on
the road. "There is your mother, Clara. Say one word to me before we meet
them." "Oh, Mr. Fitzgerald; I am so frightened. What will mamma say?" "Say about what? As yet I do not know what she may have to say. But
before we meet her, may I not hope to know what her daughter will
say? Answer me this, Clara. Can you, will you love me?" There was still a pause, a moment's pause, and then some sound did
fall from her lips. But yet it was so soft, so gentle, so slight,
that it could hardly be said to reach even a lover's ear. Fitzgerald,
however, made the most of it. Whether it were Yes, or whether it were
No, he took it as being favourable, and Lady Clara Desmond gave him
no sign to show that he was mistaken. "My own, own, only loved one," he said, embracing her as it were with
his words, since the presence of her approaching mother forbade him
even to take her hand in his, "I am happy now, whatever may occur;
whatever others may say; for I know that you will be true to me. And
remember this--whatever others may say, I also will be true to you. You will think of that, will you not, love?" This time she did answer him, almost audibly. "Yes," she said. And
then she devoted herself to a vain endeavour to remove the traces of
her tears before her mother should be close to them. Fitzgerald at once saw that such endeavour must be vain. At one time
he had thought of turning away, and pretending that they had not seen
the countess. But he knew that Clara would not be able to carry out
any such pretence; and he reflected also that it might be just as
well that Lady Desmond should know the whole at once. That she would
know it, and know it soon, he was quite sure. She could learn it
not only from Clara, but from himself. He could not now be there at
the house without showing that he both loved and knew that he was
beloved. And then why should Lady Desmond not know it? Why should he
think that she would set herself against the match? He had certainly
spoken to Clara of the difference in their rank; but, after all, it
was no uncommon thing for an earl's daughter to marry a commoner. And in this case the earl's daughter was portionless, and the lover
desired no portion. Owen Fitzgerald at any rate might boast that he
was true and generous in his love. So he plucked up his courage, and walked on with a smiling face to
meet Lady Desmond and her son; while poor Clara crept beside him with
eyes downcast, and in an agony of terror. Lady Desmond had not left the house with any apprehension that there
was aught amiss. Her son had told her that Owen had gone off "to do
the civil to Clara;" and as he did not come to the house within some
twenty minutes after this, she had proposed that they would go and
meet him. "Did you tell him that I wanted him?" said the countess. "Oh, yes, I did; and he is coming, only he would go away to Clara." "Then I shall scold him for his want of gallantry," said Lady
Desmond, laughing, as they walked out together from beneath the huge
portal. But as soon as she was near enough to see the manner of their gait,
as they slowly came on towards her, her woman's tact told her that
something was wrong;--and whispered to her also what might too
probably be the nature of that something. Could it be possible, she
asked herself, that such a man as Owen Fitzgerald should fall in love
with such a girl as her daughter Clara? "What shall I say to mamma?" whispered Clara to him, as they all drew
near together. "Tell her everything." "But, Patrick--"

"I will take him off with me if I can." And then they were all
together, standing in the road. "I was coming to obey your behests, Lady Desmond," said Fitzgerald,
trying to look and speak as though he were at his ease. "Coming rather tardily, I think," said her ladyship, not altogether
playfully. "I told him you wanted him, as we were crossing to the house," said
the earl. "Didn't I, Owen?" "Is anything the matter with Clara?" said Lady Desmond, looking at
her daughter. "No, mamma," said Clara; and she instantly began to sob and cry. "What is it, sir?" And as she asked she turned to Fitzgerald; and her
manner now at least had in it nothing playful. "Lady Clara is nervous and hysterical. The excitement of the ball has
perhaps been too much for her. I think, Lady Desmond, if you were to
take her in with you it would be well." Lady Desmond looked up at him; and he then saw, for the first time,
that she could if she pleased look very stern. Hitherto her face had
always worn smiles, had at any rate always been pleasing when he had
seen it. He had never been intimate with her, never intimate enough
to care what her face was like, till that day when he had carried her
son up from the hall door to his room. Then her countenance had been
all anxiety for her darling; and afterwards it had been all sweetness
for her darling's friend. From that day to this present one, Lady
Desmond had ever given him her sweetest smiles. But Fitzgerald was not a man to be cowed by any woman's looks. He met
hers by a full, front face in return. He did not allow his eye for a
moment to fall before hers. And yet he did not look at her haughtily,
or with defiance, but with an aspect which showed that he was ashamed
of nothing that he had done,--whether he had done anything that he
ought to be ashamed of or no. "Clara," said the countess, in a voice which fell with awful severity
on the poor girl's ears, "you had better return to the house with
me." "Yes, mamma." "And shall I wait on you to-morrow, Lady Desmond?" said Fitzgerald,
in a tone which seemed to the countess to be, in the present state of
affairs, almost impertinent. The man had certainly been misbehaving
himself; and yet there was not about him the slightest symptom of
shame. "Yes; no," said the countess. "That is, I will write a note to you if
it be necessary. Good morning." "Good-bye, Lady Desmond," said Owen. And as he took off his hat with
his left hand, he put out his right to shake hands with her, as was
customary with him. Lady Desmond was at first inclined to refuse the
courtesy; but she either thought better of such intention, or else
she had not courage to maintain it; for at parting she did give him
her hand. "Good-bye, Lady Clara;" and he also shook hands with her, and it need
hardly be said that there was a lover's pressure in the grasp. "Good-bye," said Clara, through her tears, in the saddest, soberest
tone. He was going away, happy, light hearted, with nothing to
trouble him. But she had to encounter that fearful task of telling
her own crime. She had to depart with her mother;--her mother, who,
though never absolutely unkind, had so rarely been tender with her. And then her brother--! "Desmond," said Fitzgerald, "walk as far as the lodge with me like a
good fellow. I have something that I want to say to you." The mother thought for a moment that she would call her son back; but
then she bethought herself that she also might as well be without
him. So the young earl, showing plainly by his eyes that he knew that
much was the matter, went back with Fitzgerald towards the lodge. "What is it you have done now?" said the earl. The boy had some sort
of an idea that the offence committed was with reference to his
sister; and his tone was hardly as gracious as was usual with him. This want of kindliness at the present moment grated on Owen's ears;
but he resolved at once to tell the whole story out, and then leave
it to the earl to take it in dudgeon or in brotherly friendship as he
might please. "Desmond," said he, "can you not guess what has passed between me and
your sister?" "I am not good at guessing," he answered, brusquely. "I have told her that I loved her, and would have her for my wife;
and I have asked her to love me in return." There was an open manliness about this which almost disarmed the
earl's anger. He had felt a strong attachment to Fitzgerald, and was
very unwilling to give up his friendship; but, nevertheless, he had
an idea that it was presumption on the part of Mr. Fitzgerald of Hap
House to look up to his sister. Between himself and Owen the earl's
coronet never weighed a feather; he could not have abandoned his
boy's heart to the man's fellowship more thoroughly had that man
been an earl as well as himself. But he could not get over the
feeling that Fitzgerald's worldly position was beneath that of
his sister;--that such a marriage on his sister's part would be a
mesalliance. Doubting, therefore, and in some sort dismayed--and in
some sort also angry--he did not at once give any reply. "Well, Desmond, what have you to say to it? You are the head of her
family, and young as you are, it is right that I should tell you." "Tell me! of course you ought to tell me. I don't see what youngness
has to do with it. What did she say?" "Well, she said but little; and a man should never boast that a lady
has favoured him. But she did not reject me." He paused a moment, and
then added, "After all, honesty and truth are the best. I have reason
to think that she loves me." The poor young lord felt that he had a double duty, and hardly knew
how to perform it. He owed a duty to his sister which was paramount
to all others; but then he owed a duty also to the friend who had
been so kind to him. He did not know how to turn round upon him and
tell him that he was not fit to marry his sister. "And what do you say to it, Desmond?" "I hardly know what to say. It would be a very bad match for her. You, you know, are a capital fellow; the best fellow going. There is
nobody about anywhere that I like so much." "In thinking of your sister, you should put that out of the
question." "Yes; that's just it. I like you for a friend better than any one
else. But Clara ought--ought--ought--"

"Ought to look higher, you would say." "Yes; that's just what I mean. I don't want to offend you, you know." "Desmond, my boy, I like you the better for it. You are a fine
fellow, and I thoroughly respect you. But let us talk sensibly about
this. Though your sister's rank is high--"

"Oh, I don't want to talk about rank. That's all bosh, and I don't
care about it. But Hap House is a small place, and Clara wouldn't be
doing well; and what's more, I am quite sure the countess will not
hear of it." "You won't approve then?" "No, I can't say I will." "Well, that is honest of you. I am very glad that I have told you at
once. Clara will tell her mother, and at any rate there will be no
secrets. Good-bye, old fellow." "Good-bye," said the earl. Then they shook hands, and Fitzgerald rode
off towards Hap House. Lord Desmond pondered over the matter some
time, standing alone near the lodge; and then walked slowly back
towards the mansion. He had said that rank was all bosh; and in so
saying had at the moment spoken out generously the feelings of his
heart. But that feeling regarded himself rather than his sister; and
if properly analyzed would merely have signified that, though proud
enough of his own rank, he did not require that his friends should be
of the same standing. But as regarded his sister, he certainly would
not be well pleased to see her marry a small squire with a small
income. CHAPTER IV. THE COUNTESS. The countess, as she walked back with her daughter towards the house,
had to bethink herself for a minute or two as to how she should act,
and what she would say. She knew, she felt that she knew, what had
occurred. If her daughter's manner had not told her, the downcast
eyes, the repressed sobs, the mingled look of shame and fear;--if she
had not read the truth from these, she would have learned it from the
tone of Fitzgerald's voice, and the look of triumph which sat upon
his countenance. And then she wondered that this should be so, seeing that she had
still regarded Clara as being in all things a child; and as she
thought further, she wondered at her own fatuity, in that she had
allowed herself to be so grossly deceived. "Clara," said she, "what is all this?" "Oh, mamma!" "You had better come on to the house, my dear, and speak to me there. In the mean time, collect your thoughts, and remember this, Clara,
that you have the honour of a great family to maintain." Poor Clara! what had the great family done for her, or how had she
been taught to maintain its honour? She knew that she was an earl's
daughter, and that people called her Lady Clara; whereas other young
ladies were only called Miss So-and-So. But she had not been taught
to separate herself from the ordinary throng of young ladies by any
other distinction. Her great family had done nothing special for her,
nor placed before her for example any grandly noble deeds. At that
old house at Desmond Court company was scarce, money was scarce,
servants were scarce. She had been confided to the care of a very
ordinary governess; and if there was about her anything that was
great or good, it was intrinsically her own, and by no means due to
intrinsic advantages derived from her grand family. Why should she
not give what was so entirely her own to one whom she loved, to one
by whom it so pleased her to be loved? And then they entered the house, and Clara followed her mother to the
countess's own small up-stairs sitting-room. The daughter did not
ordinarily share this room with her mother, and when she entered it,
she seldom did so with pleasurable emotion. At the present moment she
had hardly strength to close the door after her. "And now, Clara, what is all this?" said the countess, sitting down
in her accustomed chair. "All which, mamma?" Can any one blame her in that she so far
equivocated? "Clara, you know very well what I mean. What has there been between
you and Mr. Fitzgerald?" The guilt-stricken wretch sat silent for a while, sustaining the
scrutiny of her mother's gaze; and then falling from her chair on to
her knees, she hid her face in her mother's lap, exclaiming, "Oh,
mamma, mamma, do not look at me like that!" Lady Desmond's heart was somewhat softened by this appeal; nor would
I have it thought that she was a cruel woman, or an unnatural mother. It had not been her lot to make an absolute, dearest, heartiest
friend of her daughter, as some mothers do; a friend between whom
and herself there should be, nay could be, no secrets. She could not
become young again in sharing the romance of her daughter's love, in
enjoying the gaieties of her daughter's balls, in planning dresses,
amusements, and triumphs with her child. Some mothers can do this;
and they, I think, are the mothers who enjoy most fully the delights
of maternity. This was not the case with Lady Desmond; but yet she
loved her child, and would have made any reasonable sacrifice for
what she regarded as that child's welfare. "But, my dear," she said, in a softened tone, "you must tell me what
has occurred. Do you not know that it is my duty to ask, and yours
to tell me? It cannot be right that there should be any secret
understanding between yourself and Mr. Fitzgerald. You know that,
Clara, do you not?" "Yes, mamma," said Clara, remembering that her lover had bade her
tell her mother everything. "Well, my love?" Clara's story was very simple, and did not, in fact, want any
telling. It was merely the old well-worn tale, so common through all
the world. "He had laughed on the lass with his bonny black eye!" and she,--she was ready to go "to the mountain to hear a love-tale!" One may say that an occurrence so very common could not want much
telling. "Mamma; he says--"

"Well, my dear?" "He says--. Oh, mamma! I could not help it." "No, Clara; you certainly could not help what he might say to you. You could not refuse to listen to him. A lady in such a case, when
she is on terms of intimacy with a gentleman, as you were with Mr.
Fitzgerald, is bound to listen to him, and to give him an answer. You
could not help what he might say, Clara. The question now is, what
answer did you give to what he said?" Clara, who was still kneeling, looked up piteously into her mother's
face, sighed bitterly, but said nothing. "He told you that he loved you, I suppose?" "Yes, mamma." "And I suppose you gave him some answer? Eh! my dear?" The answer to this was another long sigh. "But, Clara, you must tell me. It is absolutely necessary that I
should know whether you have given him any hope, and if so, how much. Of course the whole thing must be stopped at once. Young as you are,
you cannot think that a marriage with Mr. Owen Fitzgerald would be a
proper match for you to make. Of course the whole thing must cease
at once--at once." Here there was another piteous sigh. "But before
I take any steps, I must know what you have said to him. Surely you
have not told him that you have any feeling for him warmer than
ordinary regard?" Lady Desmond knew what she was doing very well. She was perfectly
sure that her daughter had pledged her troth to Owen Fitzgerald. Indeed, if she made any mistake in the matter, it was in thinking
that Clara had given a more absolute assurance of love than had in
truth been extracted from her. But she calculated, and calculated
wisely, that the surest way of talking her daughter out of all hope,
was to express herself as unable to believe that a child of hers
would own to love for one so much beneath her, and to speak of such
a marriage as a thing absolutely impossible. Her method of acting
in this manner had the effect which she desired. The poor girl was
utterly frightened, and began to fear that she had disgraced herself,
though she knew that she dearly loved the man of whom her mother
spoke so slightingly. "Have you given him any promise, Clara?" "Not a promise, mamma." "Not a promise! What then? Have you professed any regard for him?" But upon this Clara was again silent. "Then I suppose I must believe that you have professed a regard for
him--that you have promised to love him?" "No, mamma; I have not promised anything. But when he asked me, I--I
didn't--I didn't refuse him." It will be observed that Lady Desmond never once asked her daughter
what were her feelings. It never occurred to her to inquire, even
within her own heart, as to what might be most conducive to her
child's happiness. She meant to do her duty by Clara, and therefore
resolved at once to put a stop to the whole affair. She now desisted
from her interrogatories, and sitting silent for a while, looked out
into the extent of flat ground before the house. Poor Clara the while
sat silent also, awaiting her doom. "Clara," said the mother at last, "all this must of course be made to
cease. You are very young, very young indeed, and therefore I do not
blame you. The fault is with him--with him entirely." "No, mamma." "But I say it is. He has behaved very badly, and has betrayed the
trust which was placed in him when he was admitted here so intimately
as Patrick's friend." "I am sure he has not intended to betray any trust," said Clara,
through her sobs. The conviction was beginning to come upon her that
she would be forced to give up her lover; but she could not bring
herself to hear so much evil spoken of him. "He has not behaved like a gentleman," continued the countess,
looking very stern. "And his visits here must of course be altogether
discontinued. I am sorry on your brother's account, for Patrick was
very fond of him--"

"Not half so fond as I am," thought Clara to herself. But she did not
dare to speak her thoughts out loud. "But I am quite sure that your brother, young as he is, will not
continue to associate with a friend who has thought so slightly of
his sister's honour. Of course I shall let Mr. Fitzgerald know that
he can come here no more; and all I want from you is a promise that
you will on no account see him again, or hold any correspondence with
him." That was all she wanted. But Clara, timid as she was, hesitated
before she could give a promise so totally at variance with the
pledge which she felt that she had given, hardly an hour since, to
Fitzgerald. She knew and acknowledged to herself that she had given
him a pledge, although she had given it in silence. How then was she
to give this other pledge to her mother? "You do not mean to say that you hesitate?" said Lady Desmond,
looking as though she were thunderstruck at the existence of such
hesitation. "You do not wish me to suppose that you intend to
persevere in such insanity? Clara, I must have from you a distinct
promise,--or--"

What might be the dreadful alternative the countess did not at that
minute say. She perhaps thought that her countenance might be more
effective than her speech, and in thinking so she was probably right. It must be remembered that Clara Desmond was as yet only seventeen,
and that she was young even for that age. It must be remembered also,
that she knew nothing of the world's ways, of her own privileges as
a creature with a soul and heart of her own, or of what might be
the true extent of her mother's rights over her. She had not in her
enough of matured thought to teach her to say that she would make no
promise that should bind her for ever; but that for the present, in
her present state, she would obey her mother's orders. And thus the
promise was exacted and given. "If I find you deceiving me, Clara," said the countess, "I will never
forgive you." Hitherto, Lady Desmond may probably have played her part well;--well,
considering her object. But she played it very badly in showing that
she thought it possible that her daughter should play her false. It
was now Clara's turn to be proud and indignant. "Mamma!" she said, holding her head high, and looking at her mother
boldly through her tears, "I have never deceived you yet." "Very well, my dear. I will take steps to prevent his intruding on
you any further. There may be an end of the matter now. I have no
doubt that he has endeavoured to use his influence with Patrick; but
I will tell your brother not to speak of the matter further." And so
saying, she dismissed her daughter. Shortly afterwards the earl came in, and there was a conference
between him and his mother. Though they were both agreed on the
subject, though both were decided that it would not do for Clara to
throw herself away on a county Cork squire with eight hundred a year,
a cadet in his family, and a man likely to rise to nothing, still the
earl would not hear him abused. "But, Patrick, he must not come here any more," said the countess. "Well, I suppose not. But it will be very dull, I know that. I wish
Clara hadn't made herself such an ass;" and then the boy went away,
and talked kindly over the matter to his poor sister. But the countess had another task still before her. She must make
known the family resolution to Owen Fitzgerald. When her children
had left her, one after the other, she sat at the window for an hour,
looking at nothing, but turning over her own thoughts in her mind. Hitherto she had expressed herself as being very angry with her
daughter's lover; so angry that she had said that he was faithless,
a traitor, and no gentleman. She had called him a dissipated
spendthrift, and had threatened his future wife, if ever he should
have one, with every kind of misery that could fall to a woman's lot;
but now she began to think of him perhaps more kindly. She had been very angry with him;--and the more so because she had
such cause to be angry with herself;--with her own lack of judgment,
her own ignorance of the man's character, her own folly with
reference to her daughter. She had never asked herself whether she
loved Fitzgerald--had never done so till now. But now she knew that
the sharpest blow she had received that day was the assurance that he
was indifferent to herself. She had never thought herself too old to be on an equality with
him,--on such an equality in point of age as men and women feel when
they learn to love each other; and therefore it had not occurred to
her that he could regard her daughter as other than a child. To Lady
Desmond, Clara was a child; how then could she be more to him? And
yet now it was too plain that he had looked on Clara as a woman. In
what light then must he have thought of that woman's mother? And so,
with saddened heart, but subdued anger, she continued to gaze through
the window till all without was dusk and dark. There can be to a woman no remembrance of age so strong as that of
seeing a daughter go forth to the world a married woman. If that does
not tell the mother that the time of her own youth has passed away,
nothing will ever bring the tale home. It had not quite come to this
with Lady Desmond;--Clara was not going forth to the world as a
married woman. But here was one now who had judged her as fit to
be so taken; and this one was the very man of all others in whose
estimation Lady Desmond would have wished to drop a few of the years
that encumbered her. She was not, however, a weak woman, and so she performed her task. She had candles brought to her, and sitting down, she wrote a note to
Owen Fitzgerald, saying that she herself would call at Hap House at
an hour named on the following day. She had written three or four letters before she had made up her mind
exactly as to the one she would send. At first she had desired him
to come to her there at Desmond Court; but then she thought of the
danger there might be of Clara seeing him;--of the danger, also, of
her own feelings towards him when he should be there with her, in her
own house, in the accustomed way. And she tried to say by letter all
that it behoved her to say, so that there need be no meeting. But in
this she failed. One letter was stern and arrogant, and the next was
soft-hearted, so that it might teach him to think that his love for
Clara might yet be successful. At last she resolved to go herself to
Hap House; and accordingly she wrote her letter and despatched it. Fitzgerald was of course aware of the subject of the threatened
visit. When he determined to make his proposal to Clara, the matter
did not seem to him to be one in which all chances of success were
desperate. If, he thought, he could induce the girl to love him,
other smaller difficulties might be made to vanish from his path. He had now induced the girl to own that she did love him; but not
the less did he begin to see that the difficulties were far from
vanishing. Lady Desmond would never have taken upon herself to make a
journey to Hap House, had not a sentence of absolute banishment from
Desmond Court been passed against him. "Mr. Fitzgerald," she began, as soon as she found herself alone with
him, "you will understand what has induced me to seek you here. After
your imprudence with Lady Clara Desmond, I could not of course ask
you to come to Desmond Court." "I may have been presumptuous, Lady Desmond, but I do not think that
I have been imprudent. I love your daughter dearly, and I told her
so. Immediately afterwards I told the same to her brother; and she,
no doubt, has told the same to you." "Yes, she has, Mr. Fitzgerald. Clara, as you are well aware, is a
child, absolutely a child; much more so than is usual with girls of
her age. The knowledge of this should, I think, have protected her
from your advances." "But I absolutely deny any such knowledge. And more than that, I
think that you are greatly mistaken as to her character." "Mistaken, sir, as to my own daughter?" "Yes, Lady Desmond; I think you are. I think--"

"On such a matter, Mr. Fitzgerald, I need not trouble you for an
expression of your thoughts. Nor need we argue that subject any
further. You must of course be aware that all ideas of any such
marriage as this must be laid aside." "On what grounds, Lady Desmond?" Now this appeared to the countess to be rather impudent on the part
of the young squire. The reasons why he, Owen Fitzgerald of Hap
House, should not marry a daughter of an Earl of Desmond, seemed to
her to be so conspicuous and conclusive, that it could hardly be
necessary to enumerate them. And such as they were, it might not be
pleasant to announce them in his hearing. But though Owen Fitzgerald
was so evidently an unfit suitor for an earl's daughter, it might
still be possible that he should be acceptable to an earl's widow. Ah! if it might be possible to teach him the two lessons at the same
time! "On what grounds, Mr. Fitzgerald!" she said, repeating his question;
"surely I need hardly tell you. Did not my son say the same thing to
you yesterday, as he walked with you down the avenue?" "Yes; he told me candidly that he looked higher for his sister; and I
liked him for his candour. But that is no reason that I should agree
with him; or, which is much more important, that his sister should do
so. If she thinks that she can be happy in such a home as I can give
her, I do not know why he, or why you should object." "You think, then, that I might give her to a blacksmith, if she
herself were mad enough to wish it?" "I thank you for the compliment, Lady Desmond." 