



Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team. THE CINEMA MURDER

BY E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

1917




BOOK I



CHAPTER I

With a somewhat prolonged grinding of the brakes and an unnecessary
amount of fuss in the way of letting off steam, the afternoon train from
London came to a standstill in the station at Detton Magna. An elderly
porter, putting on his coat as he came, issued, with the dogged aid of
one bound by custom to perform a hopeless mission, from the small,
redbrick lamp room. The station master, occupying a position of vantage
in front of the shed which enclosed the booking office, looked up and
down the lifeless row of closed and streaming windows, with an expectancy
dulled by daily disappointment, for the passengers who seldom alighted. On this occasion no records were broken. A solitary young man stepped out
on to the wet and flinty platform, handed over the half of a third-class
return ticket from London, passed through the two open doors and
commenced to climb the long ascent which led into the town. He wore no overcoat, and for protection against the inclement weather
he was able only to turn up the collar of his well-worn blue serge coat. The damp of a ceaselessly wet day seemed to have laid its cheerless
pall upon the whole exceedingly ugly landscape. The hedges, blackened
with smuts from the colliery on the other side of the slope, were
dripping also with raindrops. The road, flinty and light grey in colour,
was greasy with repellent-looking mud--there were puddles even in the
asphalt-covered pathway which he trod. On either side of him stretched
the shrunken, unpastoral-looking fields of an industrial neighbourhood. The town-village which stretched up the hillside before him presented
scarcely a single redeeming feature. The small, grey stone houses, hard
and unadorned, were interrupted at intervals by rows of brand-new,
red-brick cottages. In the background were the tall chimneys of several
factories; on the left, a colliery shaft raised its smoke-blackened
finger to the lowering clouds. After his first glance around at these familiar and unlovely objects,
Philip Romilly walked with his head a little thrown back, his eyes lifted
as though with intent to the melancholy and watery skies. He was a young
man well above medium height, slim, almost inclined to be angular, yet
with a good carriage notwithstanding a stoop which seemed more the
result of an habitual depression than occasioned by any physical
weakness. His features were large, his mouth querulous, a little
discontented, his eyes filled with the light of a silent and rebellious
bitterness which seemed, somehow, to have found a more or less permanent
abode in his face. His clothes, although they were neat, had seen better
days. He was ungloved, and he carried under his arm a small parcel,
which appeared to contain a book, carefully done up in brown paper. As he reached the outskirts of the village he slackened his pace. Standing a little way back from the road, from which they were separated
by an ugly, gravelled playground, were the familiar school buildings,
with the usual inscription carved in stone above the door. He laid his
hand upon the wooden gate and paused. From inside he could catch the
drone of children's voices. He glanced at his watch. It was barely twenty
minutes past four. For a moment he hesitated. Then he strolled on, and,
turning at the gate of an adjoining cottage, the nearest to the schools
of a little unlovely row, he tried the latch, found it yield to his
touch, and stepped inside. He closed the door behind him and turned, with
a little weary sigh of content, towards a large easy-chair drawn up in
front of the fire. For a single moment he seemed about to throw himself
into its depths--his long fingers, indeed, a little blue with the cold,
seemed already on their way towards the genial warmth of the flames. Then
he stopped short. He stood perfectly still in an attitude of arrested
motion, his eyes, wonderingly at first, and then with a strange,
unanalysable expression, seeming to embark upon a lengthened, a
scrupulous, an almost horrified estimate of his surroundings. To the ordinary observer there would have been nothing remarkable in the
appearance of the little room, save its entirely unexpected air of luxury
and refinement. There was a small Chippendale sideboard against the wall,
a round, gate-legged table on which stood a blue china bowl filled with
pink roses, a couple of luxurious easy-chairs, some old prints upon the
wall. On the sideboard was a basket, as yet unpacked, filled with
hothouse fruit, and on a low settee by the side of one of the easy-chairs
were a little pile of reviews, several volumes of poetry, and a couple of
library books. In the centre of the mantelpiece was a photograph, the
photograph of a man a little older, perhaps, than this newly-arrived
visitor, with rounder face, dressed in country tweeds, a flower in his
buttonhole, the picture of a prosperous man, yet with a curious, almost
disturbing likeness to the pale, over-nervous, loose-framed youth whose
eye had been attracted by its presence, and who was gazing at it,
spellbound. "Douglas!" he muttered. "Douglas!" He flung his hat upon the table and for a moment his hand rested upon his
forehead. He was confronted with a mystery which baffled him, a mystery
whose sinister possibilities were slowly framing themselves in his mind. While he stood there he was suddenly conscious of the sound of the
opening gate, brisk footsteps up the tiled way, the soft swirl of a
woman's skirt. The latch was raised, the door opened and closed. The
newcomer stood upon the threshold, gazing at him. "Philip!" she exclaimed. "Why, Philip!" There was a curious change in the girl's tone, from almost glad welcome
to a note of abrupt fear in that last pronouncement of his name. She
stood looking at him, the victim, apparently, of so many emotions that
there was nothing definite to be drawn either from her tone or
expression. She was a young woman of medium height and slim, delicate
figure, attractive, with large, discontented mouth, full, clear eyes and
a wealth of dark brown hair. She was very simply dressed and yet in a
manner which scarcely suggested the school-teacher. To the man who
confronted her, his left hand gripping the mantelpiece, his eyes filled
with a flaming jealousy, there was something entirely new in the hang of
her well-cut skirt, the soft colouring of her low-necked blouse, the
greater animation of her piquant face with its somewhat dazzling
complexion. His hand flashed out towards her as he asked his question. "What does it mean, Beatrice?" She showed signs of recovering herself. With a little shrug of the
shoulders she turned towards the door which led into an inner room. "Let me get you some tea, Philip," she begged. "You look so cold and
wet." "Stay here, please," he insisted. She paused reluctantly. There was a curious lack of anything peremptory
in his manner, yet somehow, although she would have given the world
to have passed for a few moments into the shelter of the little kitchen
beyond, she was impelled to do as he bade her. "Don't be silly, Philip," she said petulantly. "You know you want some
tea, and so do I. Sit down, please, and make yourself comfortable. Why
didn't you let me know you were coming?" "Perhaps it would have been better," he agreed quietly. "However, since I
am here, answer my question." She drew a little breath. After all, although she was lacking in any real
strength of character, she was filled with a certain compensatory
doggedness. His challenge was there to be faced. There was no way out of
it. She would have lied willingly enough but for the sheer futility of
falsehood. She commenced the task of bracing herself for the struggle. "You had better," she said, "frame your question a little more exactly. I
will then try to answer it." He was stung by her altered demeanour, embarrassed by an avalanche of
words. A hundred questions were burning upon his lips. It was by a great
effort of self-control that he remained coherent. "The last time I visited you," he began, "was three months ago. Your
cottage then was furnished as one would expect it to be furnished. You
had a deal dresser, a deal table, one rather hard easy-chair and a very
old wicker one. You had, if I remember rightly, a strip of linoleum upon
the floor, and a single rug. Your flowers were from the hedges and your
fruit from the one apple tree in the garden behind. Your clothes--am I
mistaken about your clothes or are you dressed more expensively?" "I am dressed more expensively," she admitted. "You and I both know the value of these things," he went on, with a
little sweep of the hand. "We know the value of them because we were once
accustomed to them, because we have both since experienced the passionate
craving for them or the things they represent. Chippendale furniture, a
Turkey carpet, roses in January, hothouse fruit, Bartolozzi prints, do
not march with an income of fifty pounds a year." "They do not," she assented equably. "All the things which you see here
and which you have mentioned, are presents." His forefinger shot out with a sudden vigour towards the photograph. "From him?" "From Douglas," she admitted, "from your cousin." He took the photograph into his hand, looked at it for a moment, and
dashed it into the grate. The glass of the frame was shivered into a
hundred pieces. The girl only shrugged her shoulders. She was holding
herself in reserve. As for him, his eyes were hot, there was a dry
choking in his throat. He had passed through many weary and depressed
days, struggling always against the grinding monotony of life and his
surroundings. Now for the first time he felt that there was something
worse. "What does it mean?" he asked once more. She seemed almost to dilate as she answered him. Her feet were firmly
planted upon the ground. There was a new look in her face, a look of
decision. She was more or less a coward but she felt no fear. She even
leaned a little towards him and looked him in the face. "It means," she pronounced slowly, "exactly what it seems to mean." The words conveyed horrible things to him, but he was speechless. He
could only wait. "You and I, Philip," she continued, "have been--well, I suppose we should
call it engaged--for three years. During those three years I have earned,
by disgusting and wearisome labour, just enough to keep me alive in a
world which has had nothing to offer me but ugliness and discomfort and
misery. You, as you admitted last time we met, have done no better. You
have lived in a garret and gone often hungry to bed. For three years this
has been going on. All that time I have waited for you to bring something
human, something reasonable, something warm into my life, and you have
failed. I have passed, in those three years, from twenty-three to
twenty-six. In three more I shall be in my thirtieth year--that is to
say, the best time of my life will have passed. You see, I have been
thinking, and I have had enough." He stood quite dumb. The girl's newly-revealed personality seemed to fill
the room. He felt crowded out. She was, at that stage, absolutely
mistress of the situation.... She passed him carelessly by, flung herself
into the easy-chair and crossed her legs. As though he were looking at
some person in another world, he realized that she was wearing shoes of
shapely cut, and silk stockings. "Our engagement," she went on, "was at first the dearest thing in life to
me. It could have been the most wonderful thing in life. I am only an
ordinary person with an ordinary character, but I have the capacity to
love unselfishly, and I am at heart as faithful and as good as any other
woman. But there is my birthright. I have had three years of sordid and
utterly miserable life, teaching squalid, dirty, unlovable children
things they had much better not know. I have lived here, here in Detton
Magna, among the smuts and the mists, where the flowers seem withered and
even the meadows are stony, where the people are hard and coarse as their
ugly houses, where virtue is ugly, and vice is ugly, and living is ugly,
and death is fearsome. And now you see what I have chosen--not in a
moment's folly, mind, because I am not foolish; not in a moment's
passion, either, because until now the only real feeling I have had in
life was for you. But I have chosen, and I hold to my choice." "They won't let you stay here," he muttered. "They needn't," she answered calmly. "There are other ways in which I can
at least earn as much as the miserable pittance doled out to me here. I
have avoided even considering them before. Shall I tell you why? Because
I didn't want to face the temptation they might bring with them. I always
knew what would happen if escape became hopeless. It's the ugliness I
can't stand--the ugliness of cheap food, cheap clothes, uncomfortable
furniture, coarse voices, coarse friends if I would have them. How do you
suppose I have lived here these last three years, a teacher in the
national schools? Look up and down this long, dreary street, at the names
above the shops, at the villas in which the tradespeople live, and ask
yourself where my friends were to come from? The clergyman, perhaps? He
is over seventy, a widower, and he never comes near the place. Why, I'd
have been content to have been patronized if there had been anyone here
to do it, who wore the right sort of clothes and said the right sort of
thing in the right tone. But the others--well, that's done with." He remained curiously dumb. His eyes were fixed upon the fragments of the
photograph in the grate. In a corner of the room an old-fashioned clock
ticked wheezily. A lump of coal fell out on the hearth, which she
replaced mechanically with her foot. His silence seemed to irritate and
perplex her. She looked away from him, drew her chair a little closer
to the fire, and sat with her head resting upon her hands. Her tone had
become almost meditative. "I knew that this would come one day," she went on. "Why don't you speak
and get it over? Are you waiting to clothe your phrases? Are you afraid
of the naked words? I'm not. Let me hear them. Don't be more melodramatic
than you can help because, as you know, I am cursed with a sense of
humour, but don't stand there saying nothing." He raised his eyes and looked at her in silence, an alternative which she
found it hard to endure. Then, after a moment's shivering recoil into her
chair, she sprang to her feet. "Listen," she cried passionately, "I don't care what you think! I tell
you that if you were really a man, if you had a man's heart in your body,
you'd have sinned yourself before now--robbed some one, murdered them,
torn the things that make life from the fate that refuses to give them. What is it they pay you," she went on contemptuously, "at that miserable
art school of yours? Sixty pounds a year! How much do you get to eat and
drink out of that? What sort of clothes have you to wear? Are you
content? Yet even you have been better off than I. You have always your
chance. Your play may be accepted or your stories published. I haven't
even had that forlorn hope. But even you, Philip, may wait too long. There are too many laws, nowadays, for life to be lived naturally. If I
were a man, a man like you, I'd break them." Her taunts apparently moved him no more than the inner tragedy which her
words had revealed. He did not for one moment give any sign of abandoning
the unnatural calm which seemed to have descended upon him. He took up
his hat from the table, and thrust the little brown paper parcel which he
had been carrying, into his pocket. His eyes for a single moment met the
challenge of hers, and again she was conscious of some nameless,
inexplicable fear. "Perhaps," he said, as he turned away, "I may do that." His hand was upon the latch before she realized that he was actually
going. She sprang to her feet. Abuse, scorn, upbraidings, even
violence--she had been prepared for all of these. There was something
about this self-restraint, however, this strange, brooding silence, which
terrified her more than anything she could have imagined. "Philip!" she shrieked. "You're not going? You're not going like this? You haven't said anything!" He closed the door with firm fingers. Her knees trembled, she was
conscious of an unexpected weakness. She abandoned her first intention of
following him, and stood before the window, holding tightly to the sash. He had reached the gate now and paused for a moment, looking up the long,
windy street. Then he crossed to the other side of the road, stepped over
a stile and disappeared, walking without haste, with firm footsteps,
along a cindered path which bordered the sluggish-looking canal. He had
come and gone, and she knew what fear was! CHAPTER II

The railway station at Detton Magna presented, if possible, an even
more dreary appearance than earlier in the day, as the time drew near
that night for the departure of the last train northwards. Its long strip
of flinty platform was utterly deserted. Around the three flickering
gas-lamps the drizzling rain fell continuously. The weary porter came
yawning out of his lamp room into the booking office, where the station
master sat alone, his chair turned away from the open wicket window to
the smouldering embers of the smoky fire. "No passengers to-night, seemingly," the latter remarked to his
subordinate. "Not a sign of one," was the reply. "That young chap who came down from
London on a one-day return excursion, hasn't gone back, either. That'll
do his ticket in." The outside door was suddenly opened and closed. The sound of footsteps
approaching the ticket window was heard. A long, white hand was thrust
through the aperture, a voice was heard from the invisible outside. "Third to Detton Junction, please." The station-master took the ticket from a little rack, received the exact
sum he demanded, swept it into the till, and resumed his place before the
fire. The porter, with the lamp in his hand, lounged out into the
booking-hall. The prospective passenger, however, was nowhere in sight. He looked back into the office. "Was that Jim Spender going up to see his barmaid again?" he asked his
superior. The station master yawned drowsily. "Didn't notice," he answered. "What an old woman you're getting, George! Want to know everybody's business, don't you?" The porter withdrew, a little huffed. When, a few minutes later, the
train drew in, he even avoided ostentatiously a journey to the far end of
the platform to open the door for the solitary passenger who was standing
there. He passed up the train and slammed the door without even glancing
in at the window. Then he stood and watched the red lights disappear. "Was it Jim?" the station master asked him, on their way out. "Didn't notice," his subordinate replied, a little curtly. "Maybe it was
and maybe it wasn't. Good night!" *       *       *       *       *

Philip Romilly sat back in the corner of his empty third-class carriage,
peering out of the window, in which he could see only the reflection of
the feeble gas-lamp. There was no doubt about it, however--they were
moving. The first stage of his journey had commenced. The blessed sense
of motion, after so long waiting, at first soothed and then exhilarated
him. In a few moments he became restless. He let down the rain-blurred
window and leaned out. The cool dampness of the night was immensely
refreshing, the rain softened his hot cheeks. He sat there, peering away
into the shadows, struggling for the sight of definite objects--a tree, a
house, the outline of a field--anything to keep the other thoughts away,
the thoughts that came sometimes like the aftermath of a grisly,
unrealisable nightmare. Then he felt chilly, drew up the window, thrust
his hands into his pockets from which he drew out a handsome cigarette
case, struck a match, and smoked with vivid appreciation of the quality
of the tobacco, examined the crest on the case as he put it away, and
finally patted with surreptitious eagerness the flat morocco letter case
in his inside pocket. At the Junction, he made his way into the refreshment room and ordered
a long whisky and soda, which he drank in a couple of gulps. Then he
hastened to the booking office and took a first-class ticket to
Liverpool, and a few minutes later secured a seat in the long,
north-bound express which came gliding up to the side of the platform. He
spent some time in the lavatory, washing, arranging his hair,
straightening his tie, after which he made his way into the elaborate
dining-car and found a comfortable corner seat. The luxury of his
surroundings soothed his jagged nerves. The car was comfortably warmed,
the electric light upon his table was softly shaded. The steward who
waited upon him was swift-footed and obsequious, and seemed entirely
oblivious of Philip's shabby, half-soaked clothes. He ordered champagne a
little vaguely, and the wine ran through his veins with a curious
potency. He ate and drank now and then mechanically, now and then with
the keenest appetite. Afterwards he smoked a cigar, drank coffee, and
sipped a liqueur with the appreciation of a connoisseur. A fellow
passenger passed him an evening paper, which he glanced through with
apparent interest. Before he reached his journey's end he had ordered and
drunk another liqueur. He tipped the steward handsomely. It was the first
well-cooked meal which he had eaten for many months. Arrived at Liverpool, he entered a cab and drove to the Adelphi Hotel. He
made his way at once to the office. His clothes were dry now and the rest
and warmth had given him more confidence. "You have a room engaged for me, I think," he said, "Mr. Douglas Romilly. I sent some luggage on." The man merely glanced at him and handed him a ticket. "Number sixty-seven, sir, on the second floor," he announced. A porter conducted him up-stairs into a large, well-furnished bedroom. A
fire was blazing in the grate; a dressing-case, a steamer trunk and a
hatbox were set out at the foot of the bedstead. "The heavier luggage, labelled for the hold, sir," the man told him, "is
down-stairs, and will go direct to the steamer to-morrow morning. That
was according to your instructions, I believe." "Quite right," Philip assented. "What time does the boat sail?" "Three o'clock, sir." Philip frowned. This was his first disappointment. He had fancied himself
on board early in the day. The prospect of a long morning's inaction
seemed already to terrify him. "Not till the afternoon," he muttered. "Matter of tide, sir," the man explained. "You can go on board any time
after eleven o'clock in the morning, though. Very much obliged to you,
sir." The porter withdrew, entirely satisfied with his tip. Philip Romilly
locked the door after him carefully. Then he drew a bunch of keys from
his pocket and, after several attempts, opened both the steamer trunk and
the dressing-case. He surveyed their carefully packed contents with a
certain grim and fantastic amusement, handled the silver brushes, shook
out a purple brocaded dressing-gown, laid out a suit of clothes for the
morrow, even selected a shirt and put the links in it. Finally he
wandered into the adjoining bathroom, took a hot bath, packed away at the
bottom of the steamer trunk the clothes which he had been wearing, went
to bed--and slept. CHAPTER III

The sun was shining into his bedroom when Philip Romilly was awakened the
next morning by a discreet tapping at the door. He sat up in bed and
shouted "Come in." He had no occasion to hesitate for a moment. He knew
perfectly well where he was, he remembered exactly everything that had
happened. The knocking at the door was disquieting but he faced it
without a tremor. The floor waiter appeared and bowed deferentially. "There is a gentleman on the telephone wishes to speak to you, sir," he
announced. "I have connected him with the instrument by your side." "To speak with me?" Philip repeated. "Are you quite sure?" "Yes, sir. Mr. Douglas Romilly he asked for. He said that his name was
Mr. Gayes, I believe." The man left the room and Philip took up the receiver. For a moment he
sat and thought. The situation was perplexing, in a sense ominous, yet
it had to be faced. He held the instrument to his ear. "Hullo? Who's that?" he enquired. "That Mr. Romilly?" was the reply, in a man's pleasant voice. "Mr.
Douglas Romilly?" "Yes!" "Good! I'm Gayes--Mr. Gayes of Gayes Brothers. My people wrote me last
night from Leicester that you would be here this morning. You are
crossing, aren't you, on the _Elletania_?" Philip remained monosyllabic. "Yes," he admitted cautiously. "Can't you come round and see us this morning?" Mr. Gayes invited. "And
look here, Mr. Romilly, in any case I want you to lunch with me at the
club. My car shall come round and fetch you at any time you say." "Sorry," Philip replied. "I am very busy this morning, and I am engaged
for lunch." "Oh, come, that's too bad," the other protested, "I really want to have a
chat with you on business matters, Mr. Romilly. Will you spare me half an
hour if I come round?" "Tell me exactly what it is you want?" Philip insisted. "Oh! just the usual thing," was the cheerful answer. "We hear you are off
to America on a buying tour. Our last advices don't indicate a very easy
market over there. I am not at all sure that we couldn't do better for
you here, and give you better terms." Philip began to feel more sure of himself. The situation, after all, he
realized, was not exactly alarming. "Very kind of you," he said. "My arrangements are all made now, though,
and I can't interfere with them." "Well, I'm going to bother you with a few quotations, anyway. See here,
I'll just run round to see you. My car is waiting at the door now. I
won't keep you more than a few minutes." "Don't come before twelve," Philip begged. "I shall be busy until then." "At twelve o'clock precisely, then," was the reply. "I shall hope to
induce you to change your mind about luncheon. It's quite a long time
since we had you at the club. Good-by!" Philip set down the telephone. He was still in his pajamas and the
morning was cold, but he suddenly felt a great drop of perspiration on
his forehead. It was the sort of thing, this, which he had expected--had
been prepared for, in fact--but it was none the less, in its way,
gruesome. There was a further knock at the door, and the waiter
reappeared. "Can I bring you any breakfast, sir?" he enquired. "What time is it?" "Half-past nine, sir." "Bring me some coffee and rolls and butter," Philip ordered. He sprang out of bed, bathed, dressed, and ate his breakfast. Then he lit
a cigarette, repacked his dressing-case, and descended into the hall. He
made his way to the hall porter's enquiry office. "I am going to pay some calls in the city," he announced--"Mr. Romilly is
my name--and I may not be able to get back here before my boat sails. I am going on the _Elletania_. Can I have my luggage sent there direct?" "By all means, sir." "Every article is properly labelled," Philip continued. "Those in my
bedroom--number sixty-seven--are for the cabin, and those you have in
your charge are for the hold." "That will be quite all right, sir," the man assured him pocketing his
liberal tip. "I will see to the matter myself." Philip paid his bill at the office and breathed a little more freely as
he left the hotel. Passing a large, plate-glass window he stopped
suddenly and stared at his own reflection. There was something unfamiliar
in the hang of his well-cut clothes and fashionable Homburg hat. It was
like the shadow of some one else passing--some one to whom those clothes
belonged. Then he remembered, remembered with a cold shiver which
blanched his cheeks and brought a little agonised murmur to his lips. The
moment passed, however, crushed down, stifled as he had sworn that he
would stifle all such memories. He turned in at a barber's shop, had his
hair cut, and yielded to the solicitations of a fluffy-haired young lady
who was dying to go to America if only somebody would take her, and who
was sure that he ought to have a manicure before his voyage. Afterwards
he entered a call office and rang up the hotel on the telephone. "Mr. Romilly speaking," he announced. "Will you kindly tell Mr. Gayes, if
he calls to see me, that I have been detained in the city, and shall not
be back." The man took down the message. Philip strolled out once more into the
streets, wandering aimlessly about for an hour or more. By this time it
was nearly one o'clock, and, selecting a restaurant, he entered and
ordered luncheon. Once more it came over him, as he looked around the
place, that he had, after all, only a very imperfect hold upon his own
identity. It seemed impossible that he, Philip Romilly, should be there,
ordering precisely what appealed to him most, without thought or care of
the cost. He ate and drank slowly and with discrimination, and when he
left the place he felt stronger. He sought out a first-class
tobacconist's, bought some cigarettes, and enquired his way to the dock. At a few minutes after two, he passed up the gangway and boarded the
great steamer. One of the little army of linen-coated stewards enquired
the number of his room and conducted him below. "Anything I can do for you, sir, before your luggage comes on?" the man
asked civilly. Philip shook his head and wandered up on deck again, where there were
already a fair number of passengers in evidence. He leaned over the side,
watching the constant stream of porters bearing supplies, and the
steerage passengers passing into the forepart of the ship. With every
moment his impatience grew. He looked at his watch sometimes half a dozen
times in ten minutes, changed his position continually, started violently
whenever he heard an unexpected footstep behind him. Finally he broke a
promise he had made to himself. He bought newspapers, took them into a
sheltered corner, and tore them open. Column by column he searched them
through feverishly, running his finger down one side and up the next. It
seemed impossible to find nowhere the heading he dreaded to see, to
realize that they were entirely empty of any exciting incident. He
satisfied himself at last, however. The disappearance of a half-starved
art teacher had not yet blazoned out to a sympathetic world. It was so
much to the good.... There was a touch upon his shoulder, and he felt a
chill of horror. When he turned around, it was the steward who had
conducted him below, holding out a telegram. "I beg your pardon, sir," he said. "Telegram just arrived for you." He passed on almost at once, in search of some one else. Philip stood for
several moments perfectly still. He looked at the inscription--_Douglas
Romilly_--set his teeth and tore open the envelope:

Understood you were returning to factory before leaving. Am posting a few
final particulars to Waldorf Hotel, New York. Staff joins me in wishing
you bon voyage. Philip felt his heart cease its pounding, felt an immense sense of
relief. It was a wonderful thing, this message. It cleared up one point
on which he had been anxious and unsettled. It was taken for granted at
the Works, then, that he had come straight to Liverpool. He walked up and
down the deck on the side remote from the dock, driving this into his
mind. Everything was wonderfully simplified. If only he could get across, once
reach New York! Meanwhile, he looked at his watch again and discovered
that it wanted but ten minutes to three. He made his way back down to his
stateroom, which was already filled with his luggage. He shook out an
ulster from a bundle of wraps, and selected a tweed cap. Already there
was a faint touch of the sea in the river breeze, and he was impatient
for the immeasurable open spaces, the salt wind, the rise and fall of the
great ship. Then, as he stood on the threshold of his cabin, he heard
voices. "Down in number 110, eh?" "Yes, sir," he heard his steward's voice reply. "Mr. Romilly has just
gone down. You've only a minute, sir, before the last call for
passengers." "That's all right," the voice which had spoken to him over the telephone
that morning replied. "I'd just like to shake hands with him and wish him
bon voyage." Philip's teeth came together in a little fury of anger. It was maddening,
this, to be trapped when only a few minutes remained between him and
safety! His brain worked swiftly. He took his chance of finding the next
stateroom empty, as it happened to be, and stepped quickly inside. He
kept his back to the door until the footsteps had passed. He heard the
knock at his stateroom, stepped back into the corridor, and passed along
a little gangway to the other side of the ship. He hurried up the stairs
and into the smoking-room. The bugle was sounding now, and hoarse voices
were shouting:

"Every one for the shore! Last call for the shore!" "Give me a brandy and soda," he begged the steward, who was just opening
the bar. The man glanced at the clock and obeyed. Philip swallowed half of it at a
gulp, then sat down with the tumbler in his hand. All of a sudden
something disappeared from in front of one of the portholes. His heart
gave a little jump. They were moving! He sprang up and hurried to the
doorway. Slowly but unmistakably they were gliding away from the dock. Already a lengthening line of people were waving their handkerchiefs and
shouting farewells. Around them in the river little tugs were screaming,
and the ropes from the dock had been thrown loose. Philip stepped to the
rail, his heart growing lighter at every moment. His ubiquitous steward,
laden with hand luggage, paused for a moment. "I sent a gentleman down to your stateroom just before the steamer
started, sir," he announced, "gentleman of the name of Gayes, who wanted
to say good-by to you." "Bad luck!" Philip answered. "I must have just missed him." The steward turned around and pointed to the quay. "There he is, sir--elderly gentleman in a grey suit, and a bunch of
violets in his buttonhole. He's looking straight at you." Philip raised his cap and waved it with enthusiasm. After a moment's
hesitation, the other man did the same. The steward collected his
belongings and shuffled off. "He picked you out, sir, all right," he remarked as he disappeared in the
companionway. Philip turned away with a little final wave of the hand. "Glad I didn't miss him altogether," he observed cheerfully. "Good-afternoon, Mr. Gayes! Good-by, England!" CHAPTER IV

Mr. Raymond Greene, very soon after the bugle had sounded for dinner that
evening, took his place at the head of one of the small tables in the
saloon and wished every one good evening. It was perfectly apparent that
he meant to enjoy the trip, that he was prepared to like his fellow
passengers and that he wished them to know it. Even the somewhat
melancholy-looking steward, who had been waiting for his arrival, cheered
up at the sight of his beaming face, and the other four occupants of the
table returned his salutation according to their lights. "Two vacant places, I am sorry to see," Mr. Greene observed. "One of them
I can answer for, though. The young lady who is to sit on my right will
be down directly--Miss Elizabeth Dalstan, the great actress, you know. She is by way of being under my charge. Very charming and talented
young lady she is. Let us see who our other absentee is." He stretched across and glanced at the name upon the card. "Mr. Douglas Romilly," he read out. "Quite a good name--English, without
a doubt. I have crossed with you before, haven't I, sir?" he went on
affably, turning to his nearest neighbour on the left. A burly, many-chinned American signified his assent. "Why, I should say so," he admitted, "and I'd like a five-dollar bill,
Mr. Greene, for every film I've seen of yours in the United States." Mr. Greene beamed with satisfaction. "Well, I am glad to hear you've come across my stuff," he declared. "I've
made some name for myself on the films and I am proud of it. Raymond
Greene it is, at your service." "Joseph P. Hyam's mine," the large American announced, watching the
disappearance of his soup plate with an air of regret. "I'm in the
clothing business. If my wife were here, she'd say you wouldn't think it
to look at me. Never was faddy about myself, though," he added, with a
glance at Mr. Greene's very correct dinner attire. "You ought to remember me, Mr. Greene," one of the two men remarked from
the right-hand side of the table. "I've played golf with you at Baltusrol
more than once." Mr. Greene glanced surreptitiously at the card and smiled. "Why, it's James P. Busby, of course!" he exclaimed. "Your father's the
Busby Iron Works, isn't he?" The young man nodded. "And this is Mr. Caroll, one of our engineers," he said, indicating a
rather rough-looking personage by his side. "Delighted to meet you both," Mr. Greene assured them. "Say, I remember
your golf, Mr. Busby! You're some driver, eh? And those long putts of
yours--you never took three on any green that I can remember!" "Been playing in England?" the young man asked. Mr. Raymond Greene shook his head. "When I am on business," he explained, "I don't carry my sticks about
with me, and I tell you this last fortnight has been a giddy whirl for
me. I was in Berlin Wednesday night, and I did business in Vienna last
Monday. Ah! here comes Miss Dalstan." He rose ceremoniously to his feet. A young lady who was still wearing her
travelling clothes smiled at him delightfully and sank into the chair by
his side. During the little stir caused by her arrival, no one paid any
attention to the man who had slipped into the other vacant place
opposite. Mr. Greene, however, when he had finished making known his
companion's wants to the steward, welcomed Philip Romilly genially. "Now we're a full table," he declared. "That's what I like. I only hope
we'll keep it up all the voyage. Mind, there'll be a forfeit for the
first one that misses a meal. Mr. Romilly, isn't it?" he went on,
glancing at his left-hand neighbour's card once more. "My name's Raymond
Greene. I am an old traveller and there's nothing I enjoy more, outside
my business, than these little ocean trips, especially when they come
after a pretty strenuous time on shore. Crossed many times, sir?" "Never before," Philip answered. "First trip, eh?" Mr. Greene remarked, mildly interested. "Well, well,
you've some surprises in store for you, then. Let me make you acquainted
with your opposite neighbour, Miss Elizabeth Dalstan. I dare say, even if
you haven't been in the States, you know some of our principal actresses
by name." Philip raised his head and caught a glimpse of a rather pale face, a mass
of deep brown hair, a pleasant smile from a very shapely mouth, and the
rather intense regard of a pair of wonderfully soft eyes, whose colour at
that moment he was not able to determine. "I have had the pleasure of seeing Miss Dalstan on the stage," he
observed. "Capital!" Mr. Raymond Greene exclaimed. "We haven't met before, have we,
Mr. Romilly? Something kind of familiar in your face. You are not by way
of being in the Profession, are you?" Romilly shook his head. "I am a manufacturer," he acknowledged. "That so?" his neighbour remarked, a trifle surprised. "Queer! I had a
fancy that we'd met, and quite lately, too. I am in the cinema business. You may have heard of me--Raymond Greene?" "I have seen some of your films," Philip told him. "Very excellent
productions, if you will allow me to say so." "That's pleasant hearing at any time," Mr. Greene admitted, with a
gratified smile. "Well, I can see that we are going to be quite a
friendly party. That's Mr. Busby on your right, Mr. Romilly--some
golfer, I can tell you!--and his friend Mr. Caroll alongside. The lady
next you--"

"My name is Miss Pinsent," the elderly lady indicated declared
pleasantly, replying to Mr. Greene's interrogative glance. "It is my
first trip to America, too. I am going out to see a nephew who has
settled in Chicago." "Capital!" Mr. Raymond Greene repeated. "Now we are all more or less a
family party. What did you say your line of business was, Mr. Romilly?" "I don't remember mentioning it," Philip observed, "but I am a
manufacturer of boots and shoes." Elizabeth Dalstan looked across at him a little curiously. One might have
surmised that she was in some way disappointed. "Coming over to learn a thing or two from us, eh?" Mr. Greene went on. "You use all our machinery, don't you? Well, there's Paul Lawton on
board, from Brockton. I should think he has one of the biggest plants in
Massachusetts. I must make you acquainted with him." Philip frowned slightly. "That is very kind of you, Mr. Greene," he acknowledged, "but do you know
I would very much rather not talk business with any one while I am on
the steamer? I am a little overworked and I need the rest." Elizabeth Dalstan looked at her vis-a-vis with some renewal of her former
interest. She saw a young man who was, without doubt, good-looking,
although he certainly had an over-tired and somewhat depressed
appearance. His cheeks were colourless, and there were little dark
lines under his eyes as though he suffered from sleeplessness. He was
clean-shaven and he had the sensitive mouth of an artist. His forehead
was high and exceptionally good. His air of breeding was unmistakable. "You do look a little fagged," Mr. Raymond Greene observed
sympathetically. "Well, these are strenuous days in business. We all have
to stretch out as far as we can go, and keep stretched out, or else some
one else will get ahead of us. Business been good with you this fall, Mr. Romilly?" "Very fair, thank you," Philip answered a little vaguely. "Tell me, Miss
Dalstan," he went on, leaning slightly towards her, and with a note of
curiosity in his tone, "I want to know your candid opinion of the last
act of the play I saw you in--'Henderson's Second Wife'? I made up my
mind that if ever I had the privilege of meeting you, I would ask you
that question." "I know exactly why," she declared, with a quick little nod of
appreciation. "Listen." They talked together for some time, earnestly. Mr. Greene addressed his
conversation to his neighbours lower down the table. It was not until the
arrival of dessert that Philip and his vis-a-vis abandoned their
discussion. "Tell me, have you written yourself, Mr. Romilly?" Elizabeth Dalstan
asked him with interest. "I have made an attempt at it," he confessed. "Most difficult thing in the whole world to write a play," Mr. Raymond
Greene intervened, seeing an opportunity to join once more in the
conversation. "Most difficult thing in the world, I should say. Now with
pictures it's entirely different. The slightest little happening in
everyday life may give you the start, and then, there you are--the whole
thing unravels itself. Now let me give you an example," he went on,
helping himself to a little more whisky and soda. "Only yesterday
afternoon, on our way up to Liverpool, the train got pulled up somewhere
in Derbyshire, and I sat looking out of the window. It was a dreary
neighbourhood, a miserable afternoon, and we happened to be crossing a
rather high viaduct. Down below were some meadows and a canal, and by
the side of the canal, a path. At a certain point--I should think about
half a mile from where the train was standing--this path went underneath
a rude bridge, built of bricks and covered over with turf. Well, as I sat
there I could see two men, both approaching the bridge along the path
from opposite directions. One was tall, dressed in light tweeds, a
good-looking fellow--looked like one of your country squires except that
he was a little on the thin side. The other was a sombre-looking person,
dressed in dark clothes, about your height and build, I should say, Mr.
Romilly. Well, they both disappeared under that bridge at the same
moment, and I don't know why, but I leaned forward to see them come out. The train was there for quite another two minutes, perhaps more. There
wasn't another soul anywhere in sight, and it was raining as it only can
rain in England." Mr. Raymond Greene paused. Every one at the table had been listening
intently. He glanced around at their rapt faces with satisfaction. He was
conscious of the artist's dramatic touch. Once more it had not failed
him. He had excited interest. In Philip Romilly's eyes there was
something even more than interest. It seemed almost as though he were
trying to project his thoughts back and conjure up for himself the very
scene which was being described to him. The young man was certainly in a
very delicate state of health, Mr. Greene decided. "You are keeping us in suspense, sir," the elderly lady complained,
leaning forward in her place. "Please go on. What happened when they came
out?" "That," Mr. Raymond Greene said impressively, "is the point of the
story. The train remained standing there, as I have said, for several
minutes--as many minutes, in fact, as it would have taken them seconds to
have traversed that tunnel. Notwithstanding that, they neither of them
appeared again. I sat there, believe me, with my eyes fastened upon that
path, and when the train started I leaned out of the window until we had
rounded the curve and we were out of sight, but I never saw either of
those two men again. Now there's the beginning of a film story for you! What do you want more than that? There's dramatic interest, surprise, an
original situation." "After all, I suppose the explanation was quite a simple one," Mr. Busby
remarked. "They were probably acquaintances, and they stayed to have a
chat." Mr. Raymond Greene shook his head doubtfully. "All I can say to that is that it was a queer place to choose for a
little friendly conversation," he pronounced. "They were both tall
men--about the same height, I should say--and it would have been
impossible for them to have even stood upright." "You mentioned the fact, did you not," the lady who called herself Miss
Pinsent observed, "that it was raining heavily at the time? Perhaps they
stayed under the bridge to shelter." "That's something I never thought of," Mr. Greene admitted, "perhaps for
the reason that they both of them seemed quite indifferent to the rain. The young man in the dark clothes hadn't even an umbrella. I must admit
that I allowed my thoughts to travel in another direction. Professional
instinct, you see. It was a fairly broad canal, and the water was nearly
up to the towing-path. I'd lay a wager it was twelve or fifteen feet
deep. Supposing those two men had met on that narrow path and quarrelled! Supposing--"

"Don't!" Mr. Raymond Greene stopped short. He gazed in amazement at Elizabeth
Dalstan, who had suddenly clutched his hand. There was something in her
face which puzzled as well as startled him. She had been looking at her
opposite neighbour but she turned back towards the narrator of this
thrilling story as the monosyllable broke from her lips. "Please stop," she begged. "You are too dramatic, Mr. Greene. You really
frighten me." "Frighten you?" he repeated. "My dear Miss Dalstan!" "I suppose it is very absurd of me," she went on, smiling appealingly at
him, "but your words were altogether too graphic. I can't bear to think
of what might have taken place underneath that tunnel! You must remember
that I saw it, too. Don't go on. Don't talk about it any more. I am going
upstairs for my cigarette. Are you coming to get my chair for me, Mr.
Greene, or must I rely upon the deck steward?" Mr. Raymond Greene was a very gallant man, and he did not hesitate for a
moment. He sprang to his feet and escorted the young lady from the
saloon. He glanced back, as he left the table, to nod his adieux to the
little company whom he had taken under his charge. Philip Romilly was
gazing steadfastly out of the porthole. "Kind of delicate young fellow, that," he remarked. "Nice face, too. Can't help thinking that I've met or seen some one like him lately." CHAPTER V

Philip Romilly found himself alone at last with the things which he had
craved--darkness, solitude, the rushing of the salt wind, the sense of
open spaces. On the other, the sheltered side of the steamer, long lines
of passengers were stretched in wicker chairs, smoking and drinking their
coffee, but where he was no one came save an occasional promenader. Yet
even here was a disappointment. He had come for peace, for a brief escape
from the thrall of memories which during the last few hours had become
charged with undreamed-of horrors--and there was to be no peace. In the
shadowy darkness which rested upon the white-churned sea flying past him,
he saw again, with horrible distinctness, the face, the figure of the man
who for those few brief minutes he had hated with a desperate and
passionate hatred. He saw the broken photograph, the glass splintered
into a thousand pieces. He saw the man himself, choking, sinking down
beneath the black waters; heard the stifled cry from his palsied lips,
saw the slow dawning agony of death in his distorted features. Some one
was playing a mandolin down in the second class. He heard the feet of a
dancer upon the deck, the little murmur of applause. Well, after all,
this was life. It was a rebuke of fate to his own illogical and useless
vapourings. Men died every second whilst women danced, and no one who
knew life had any care save for the measure of their own days. Some
freakish thought pleaded stridently his own justification. His mind
travelled back down the gloomy avenues of his past, along those last
aching years of grinding and undeserved poverty. He remembered his
upbringing, his widowed mother, a woman used to every luxury, struggling
to make both ends meet in a suburban street, in a hired cottage filled
with hired furniture. He remembered his schooldays, devoid of pocket
money, unable to join in the sports of others, slaving with melancholy
perseverance for a scholarship to lighten his mother's burden. Always
there was the same ghastly, crushing penuriousness, the struggle to make
a living before his schooldays were well over, the unbought books he had
fingered at the bookstalls and let drop again, the coarse clothes he had
been compelled to wear, the scanty food he had eaten, the narrow, driving
ways of poverty, culminating in his mother's death and his own fear--he,
at the age of nineteen years--lest the money for her funeral should not
be forthcoming. If there were any hell, surely he had lived in it! This
other, whose flames mocked him now, could be no worse. Sin! Crime! He
remembered the words of the girl who during these latter years had
represented to him what there might have been of light in life. He
remembered, and it seemed to him that he could meet that ghostly image
which had risen from the black waters, without shrinking, almost
contemptuously. Fate had mocked him long enough. It was time, indeed,
that he helped himself. He swung away from the solitude to the other side of the steamer, paused
in a sheltered spot while he lit a cigarette, and paced up and down the
more frequented ways. A soft voice from an invisible mass of furs and
rugs, called to him. "Mr. Romilly, please come and talk to me. My rug has slipped--thank you
so much. Take this chair next mine for a few minutes, won't you? Mr.
Greene has rushed off to the smoking room. I think he has just been told
that there is a rival cinema producer on board, and he is trying to run
him to ground." Philip settled himself without hesitation in the vacant place. "One is forced to envy Mr. Raymond Greene," he sighed. "To have work in
life which one loves as he does his is the rarest form of happiness." "What about your own?" she asked him. "But you are a manufacturer, are
you not? Somehow or other, that surprises me." "And me," he acknowledged frankly. "I mean that I wonder I have
persevered at it so long." "But you are a very young man!" "Young or old," he answered, "I am one of those who have made a false
start in life. I am on my way to new things. Do you think, Miss Dalstan,
that your country is a good place for one to visit who seeks new things?" She turned in her chair a little more towards him. Against the background
of empty spaces, the pale softness of her face seemed to gain a new
attractiveness. "Well, that depends," she said reflectively, "upon what these new things
might be which you desire. For an ambitious business man America is a
great country." "But supposing one had finished with business?" he persisted. "Supposing
one wanted to develop tastes and a gift for another method of life?" "Then I should say that New York is the one place in the world," she told
him. "You are speaking of yourself?" "Yes!" "You have ambitions, I am sure," she continued. "Tell me, are they
literary?" "I would like to call them so," he admitted. "I have written a play and
three stories, so bad that no one would produce the play or publish the
stories." "You have brought them with you?" He shook his head. "No! They are where I shall never see them again." "Never see them again?" she repeated, puzzled. "I mean that I have left them at home. I have left them there, perhaps,
to a certain extent deliberately," he went on. "You see, the idea is
still with me. I think that I shall rewrite them when I have settled down
in America. I fancy that I shall find myself in an atmosphere more
conducive to the sort of work I want to do. I would rather not be
handicapped by the ghosts of my old failures." "One's ghosts are hard sometimes to escape from," she whispered. He clutched nervously at the end of his rug. She looked up and down along
the row of chairs. There were one or two slumbering forms, but most were
empty. There were no promenaders in sight. "You know," she asked, her voice still very low, "why I left the saloon a
little abruptly this evening?" "Why?" he demanded. "Because," she went on, "I could see the effect which Mr. Raymond
Greene's story had upon you; because I, also, was in that train, and I
have better eyesight than Mr. Greene. You were one of the two men who
were walking along the towpath." "Well?" he muttered. "You have nothing to tell me?" "Nothing!" She waited for a moment. "At least you have not attempted to persuade me that you lingered
underneath that bridge to escape from the rain," she remarked. "If I cannot tell you the truth," he promised, "I am not going to tell
you a lie, but apart from that I admit nothing. I do not even admit that
it was I whom you saw." She laid her hand upon his. The touch of her fingers was wonderful, cool
and soft and somehow reassuring. He felt a sense of relaxation, felt the
strain of living suddenly grow less. "You know," she said, "all my friends tell me that I am a restful person. You are living at high pressure, are you not? Try and forget it. Fate
makes queer uses of all of us sometimes. She sends her noblest sons down
into the shadows and pitchforks her outcasts into the high places of
life. Those do best who learn to control themselves, to live and think
for the best." "Go on talking to me," he begged. "Is it your voice, I wonder, that is so
soothing, or just what you say?" She smiled reassuringly. "You are glad because you have found a friend," she told him, "and a
friend who, even if she does not understand, does not wish to understand. Do you see?" "I wish I felt that I deserved it," he groaned. She laughed almost gaily. "What a sorting up there would be of our places in life," she declared,
"if we all had just what we deserved!... Now give me your arm. I want to
walk a little. While we walk, if you like, I will try to tell you what I
can about New York. It may interest you." They walked up and down the deck, and by degrees their conversation
drifted into a discussion of such recent plays as were familiar to both
of them. At the far end of the ship she clung to him once or twice as the
wind came booming over the freshening waves. She weighed and measured his
criticisms of the plays they spoke of, and in the main approved of them. When at last she stopped outside the companionway and bade him good
night, the deck was almost deserted. They were near one of the electric
lights, and he saw her face more distinctly than he had seen it at all,
realised more adequately its wonderful charm. The large, firm mouth,
womanly and tender though it was, was almost the mouth of a protector. She smiled at him as one might smile at a boy. "You are to sleep well," she said firmly. "Those are my orders. Good
night!" She gave him her hand--a woman's soft and delicate fingers, yet clasping
his with an almost virile strength and friendliness. She left him with
just that feeling about her--that she was expansive, in her heart, her
sympathies, even her brain and peculiar gifts of apprehension. She left
him, too, with a curious sense of restfulness, as though suddenly he
had become metamorphosed into the woman and had found a sorely-needed
guardian. He abandoned without a second thought his intention of going to
the smoking-room and sitting up late. The thought of his empty stateroom,
a horror to him a few hours ago, seemed suddenly almost alluring, and he
made his way there cheerfully. He felt the sleep already upon his eyes. CHAPTER VI

All the physical exhilaration of his unlived youth seemed to be dancing
in Philip Romilly's veins when he awoke the next morning to find an open
porthole, the blue sea tossing away to infinity, and his steward's
cheerful face at his bedside. "Bathroom steward says if you are ready, sir, he can arrange for your
bath now," the man announced. Philip sprang out of bed and reached for his Bond Street dressing-gown. "I'll bring you a cup of tea when you get back, sir," the steward
continued. "The bathrooms are exactly opposite." The sting of the salt water seemed to complete his new-found
light-heartedness. Philip dressed and shaved, whistling softly all the
time to himself. He even found a queer sort of interest in examining his
stock of ties and other garments. The memory of Elizabeth Dalstan's words
was still in his brain. They had become the text of his life. This, he
told himself, was his birthday. He even accepted without a tremor a
letter and telegram which the steward brought him. "These were in the rack for you, sir," he said. "I meant to bring them
down last night but we had a busy start off." Philip took them up on deck to read. He tore open the telegram first and
permitted himself a little start when he saw the signature. It was sent
off from Detton Magna,--

"Why did you not come as promised? What am I to do? BEATRICE." The envelope of the letter he opened with a little more compunction. It
was written on the printed notepaper of the Douglas Romilly Shoe Company,
and was of no great length,--

"Dear Mr. Romilly,

"I understood that you would return to the factory this evening for a few
minutes, before taking the train to Liverpool. There were one or two
matters upon which I should like some further information, but as time is
short I am writing to you at the Waldorf Hotel at New York. "I see that the acceptances due next 4th are unusually heavy, but I think
I understood you to say that you had spoken to Mr. Henshaw at the bank
concerning these, and in any case I presume there would be no difficulty. "Wishing you every success on the other side, and a safe return,

"I am,

"Your obedient servant,

"J.L. POTTS." "There is not the slightest doubt," Philip said to himself, as he tore
both communications into pieces and watched them flutter away downwards,
"that I am on my way to New York. If only one knew what had become of
that poor, half-starved art master!" He went down to breakfast and afterwards strolled aimlessly about the
deck. His sense of enjoyment was so extraordinarily keen that he found it
hard to settle down to any of the usual light occupations of idle
travellers. He was content to stand by the rail and gaze across the sea,
a new wonder to him; or to lie about in his steamer chair and listen,
with half-closed eyes, to the hissing of the spray and the faint music of
the wind. His mind turned by chance to one of those stories of which he
had spoken. A sudden new vigour of thought seemed to rend it inside out
almost in those first few seconds. He thought of the garret in which it
had been written, the wretched surroundings, the odoriferous food, the
thick crockery, the smoke-palled vista of roofs and chimneys. The genius
of a Stevenson would have become dwarfed in such surroundings. A phrase,
a happy idea, suddenly caught his fancy. He itched for a pencil and
paper. Then he looked up to find the one thing wanting. Elizabeth
Dalstan, followed by a maid carrying rugs and cushions, had paused,
smiling, by his side. "You have slept and you are better," she said pleasantly. "Now for the
next few minutes you must please devote yourself to making me
comfortable. Put everything down, Phoebe. Mr. Romilly will look after
me." For a moment he paused before proceeding to his task. "I want to look at you," he confessed. "Remember I have only seen you
under the electric lights of the saloon, or in that queer, violet gloom
of last night. Why, you have quite light hair, and I thought it was
dark!" She laughed good-humouredly and turned slowly around. "Here I am," she announced, "a much bephotographed person. Almost plain,
some journalists have dared to call me, but for my expression. On flowing
lines, as you see, because I always wear such loose clothes, and yet,
believe me, slim. As a matter of fact," she went on pensively, "I am
rather proud of my figure. A little journalist who had annoyed me, and to
whom I was rude, once called it ample. No one has ever ventured to say
more. The critics who love me, and they most of them love me because I am
so exceptionally polite to them, and tell them exactly what to say about
every new play, allude to my physique as Grecian." "But your eyes!" he exclaimed. "Last night I thought they were grey. This
morning--why, surely they are brown?" "You see, that is all according to the light," she confided. "If any one
does try to write a description of me, they generally evade the point by
calling them browny-grey. A young man who was in love with me," she
sighed, "but that was long ago, used to say that they reminded him of
fallen leaves in a place where the sunlight sometimes is and sometimes
isn't. And now, if you please, I want to be made exceedingly comfortable. I want you to find the deck steward and see that I have some beef tea as
quickly as possible. I want my box of cigarettes on one side and my
vanity case on the other, and I should like to listen to the plot of your
play." He obeyed her behests with scrupulous care, leaned back in his chair and
brought into the foreground of his mind the figures of those men and
women who had told his story, finding them, to his dismay, unexpectedly
crude and unlifelike. And the story itself. Was unhappiness so necessary,
after all? They suddenly seemed to crumble away into insignificance,
these men and women of his creation. In their place he could almost fancy
a race of larger beings, a more extensive canvas, a more splendid, a
riper and richer vocabulary. "Nothing that I have ever done," he sighed, "is worth talking to you
about. But if you are going to be my friend--"

"Well?" "If you are going to be my friend," he went on, with almost inspired
conviction, "I shall write something different." "One can rebuild," she murmured. "One can sometimes use the old pieces. Life and chess are both like that." "Would you help me, I wonder?" he asked impulsively. She looked away from him, out across the steamer rail. She seemed to be
measuring with her eyes the roll of the ship as it rose and fell in the
trough of the sea. "You are a strange person," she said. "Tell me, are you in the habit of
becoming suddenly dependent upon people?" "Not I," he assured her. "If I were to tell you how my last ten years
have been spent, you would not believe me. You couldn't. If I were to
speak of a tearing, unutterable loneliness, if I were to speak of
poverty--not the poverty you know anything about, but the poverty of bare
walls, of coarse food and little enough of it, of everything cheap and
miserable and soiled and second-hand--nothing fresh, nothing
real--"

He stopped abruptly. "But I forgot," he muttered. "I can't explain." "Is one to understand," she asked, a little puzzled, "that you have had
difficulties in your business?" "I have never been in business," he answered quickly. "My name is
Romilly, but I am not Romilly the manufacturer. For the last eight years
I have lived in a garret in London, teaching false art in a third-rate
school some of the time, doing penny-a-line journalistic work when I got
the chance; clerk for a month or two in a brewer's office and sacked for
incapacity--those are a few of the real threads in my life." "At the present moment, then," she observed, "you are an impostor." "Exactly," he admitted, "and I should probably have been repenting it by
now but for your words last night." She smiled at him and the sun shone once more. It wasn't an ordinary
smile at all. It was just as though she were letting him into the light
of her understanding, as though some one from the world, entrance into
which he had craved, had stooped down to understand and was telling him
that all was well. He drew his chair a little closer to hers. "We are all more or less impostors," she said. "Does any one, I wonder,
go about the world telling everybody what they really are, how they
really live? Dear me, how unpleasant and uncomfortable it would be! You
are so wise, my new friend. You know the value of impulses. You tell me
the truth, and I am your friend. I do not need facts, because facts count
for little. I judge by what lies behind, and I understand. Do not weary
me with explanations. I like what you have told me. Only, of course, your
work must have suffered from surroundings like that. Will it be better
for you now?" "I shall land in New York," he told her, "with at least a thousand
pounds. That is about as much as I have spent in ten years. There is the
possibility of other money. Concerning that--well, I can't make up my
mind. The thousand pounds, of course, is stolen." "So I gathered," she remarked. "Do you continue, may I ask, to be Douglas
Romilly, the manufacturer?" He shook his head a little vaguely. "I haven't thought," he confessed. "But of course I don't. I have risked
everything for the chance of a new life. I shall start it in a new way
and under a new name." He was suddenly conscious of her pity, of a moistness in her eyes as she
looked at him. "I think," she said, "that you must have been very miserable. Above all
things, now, whatever you may have done for your liberty, don't be
fainthearted. If you are in trouble or danger you must come to me. You
promise?" "If I may," he assented fervently. "Now I must hear the play as it stood in your thoughts when you wrote
it," she insisted. "I have a fancy that it will sound a little gloomy. Am
I right?" He laughed. "Of course you are! How could I write in any other way except through the
darkened spectacles? However, there's a way out--of altering it, I mean. I feel flashes of it already. Listen." The story expanded with relation. He no longer felt confined to its
established lines. Every now and then he paused to tell her that this or
that was new, and she nodded appreciatively. They walked for a time,
watched the seagulls, and bade their farewell to the Irish coast. "You will have to re-write that play for me," she said, a little
abruptly, as she paused before the companionway. "I am going down to my
room for a few minutes before lunch now. Afterwards I shall bring up a
pencil and paper. We will make some notes together." Philip walked on to the smoking room. He could scarcely believe that the
planks he trod were of solid wood. Raymond Greene met him at the entrance
and slapped him on the back:

"Just in time for a cocktail before lunch!" he exclaimed. "I was looking
everywhere for a pal. Two Martinis, dry as you like, Jim," he added,
turning round to the smoking room steward. "Sure you won't join us,
Lawton?" "Daren't!" was the laconic answer from the man whom he had addressed. "By-the-bye," Mr. Raymond Greene went on, "let me make you two
acquainted. This is Mr. Douglas Romilly, an English boot
manufacturer--Mr. Paul Lawton of Brockton. Mr. Lawton owns one of the
largest boot and shoe plants in the States," the introducer went on. "You
two ought to find something to talk about." Philip held out his hand without a single moment's hesitation. He was
filled with a new confidence. "I should be delighted to talk with Mr. Lawton on any subject in the
world," he declared, "except our respective businesses." "I am very glad to meet you, sir," the other replied, shaking hands
heartily. "I don't follow that last stipulation of yours, though." "It simply means that I am taking seven days' holiday," Philip explained
gaily, "seven days during which I have passed my word to myself to
neither talk business nor think business. Your very good health, Mr.
Raymond Greene," he went on, drinking his cocktail with relish. "If we
meet on the other side, Mr. Lawton, we'll compare notes as much as you
like." "That's all right, sir," the other agreed. "I don't know as you're not
right. We Americans do hang round our businesses, and that's a fact. Still, there's a little matter of lasts I should like to have a word or
two with you about some time." "A little matter of what?" Philip asked vaguely. "Lasts," the other repeated. "That's where your people and ours look
different ways chiefly, that and a little matter of manipulation of our
machinery." "Just so," Philip assented, swallowing the rest of his cocktail. "What
about luncheon? There's nothing in the world to give you an appetite like
this sea air." "I'm with you," Mr. Raymond Greene chimed in. "You two can have your
trade talk later on." He took his young friend's arm, and they descended the stairs together. "What the mischief is a last?" he inquired. "I haven't the least idea," Philip replied carelessly. "Something to do
with boots and shoes, isn't it?" His questioner stared at him for a moment and then laughed. "Say, you're a young man of your word!" he remarked appreciatively. CHAPTER VII

Philip Romilly was accosted, late that afternoon, by two young women
whose presence on board he had noticed with a certain amount of
disapproval. They were obviously of the chorus-girl type, a fact which
they seemed to lack the ambition to conceal. After several would-be
ingratiating giggles, they finally pulled up in front of him whilst he
was promenading the deck. "You are Mr. Romilly, aren't you?" one of them asked. "Bob Millet told us
you were going to be on this steamer. You know Bob, don't you?" Philip for a moment was taken aback. "Bob Millet," he repeated thoughtfully. "Of course! Good old Bob! I don't mind confessing," the young woman went
on, "that though we were all out one night together--Trocadero, Empire,
and Murray's afterwards--I should never have recognised you. Seems to me
you've got thinner and more serious-looking." "I am afraid my own memory is also at fault," Philip remarked, a little
stiffly. "I am Violet Fox," the young woman who had accosted him continued. "This
my friend, Hilda Mason. She's a dear girl but a little shy, aren't you,
Hilda?" "That's just because I told her that we ought to wait until you
remembered us," the slighter young woman, with the very obvious
peroxidised hair, protested. "Didn't seem to be any use waiting for that," her friend retorted
briskly. "Hilda and I are dying for a cocktail, Mr. Romilly." He led them with an unwillingness of which they seemed frankly unaware,
towards the lounge. They drank two cocktails and found themselves
unfortunately devoid of cigarettes, a misfortune which it became his
privilege to remedy. They were very friendly young ladies, if a little
slangy, invited him around to their staterooms, and offered to show him
the runs around New York. Philip escaped after about an hour and made his
way to where Elizabeth was reclining in her deck chair. "That fellow Romilly," he declared irritably, "the other one, I mean,
seems to have had the vilest tastes. If I am to be landed with any more
of his ridiculous indiscretions, I think I shall have to go overboard. There was an enterprising gentleman named Gayes in Liverpool, who nearly
drove me crazy, then there's this Mr. Lawton who wants to talk about
lasts, and finally it seems that I dined at the Trocadero and spent the
evening at the Empire and Murray's with the two very obvious-looking
young ladies who accosted me just now. I am beginning to believe that
Douglas' life was not above suspicion." She smiled at him tolerantly. An unopened book lay by her side. She
seemed to have been spending the last quarter of an hour in thought. "I am rather relieved to hear," she confessed, "that those two young
people are a heritage from the other Mr. Romilly. No, don't sit down,"
she went on. "I want you to do something for me. Go into the library, and
on the left-hand side as you enter you will see all the wireless news. Read the bottom item and then come back to me." He turned slowly away. All his new-found buoyancy of spirits had
suddenly left him. 