

E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team. THE DOUBLE TRAITOR

BY E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

1915






CHAPTER I


The woman leaned across the table towards her companion. "My friend," she said, "when we first met--I am ashamed, considering that
I dine alone with you to-night, to reflect how short a time ago--you
spoke of your removal here from Paris very much as though it were a
veritable exile. I told you then that there might be surprises in store
for you. This restaurant, for instance! We both know our Paris, yet do we
lack anything here which you find at the Ritz or Giro's?" The young man looked around him appraisingly. The two were dining at one
of the newest and most fashionable restaurants in Berlin. The room
itself, although a little sombre by reason of its oak panelling, was
relieved from absolute gloom by the lightness and elegance of its
furniture and appointments, the profusion of flowers, and the soft grey
carpet, so thickly piled that every sound was deadened. The delicate
strains of music came from an invisible orchestra concealed behind a
canopy of palms. The head-waiters had the correct clerical air, half
complacent, half dignified. Among the other diners were many beautiful
women in marvellous toilettes. A variety of uniforms, worn by the
officers at different tables, gave colour and distinction to a _tout
ensemble_ with which even Norgate could find no fault. "Germany has changed very much since I was here as a boy," he confessed. "One has heard of the growing wealth of Berlin, but I must say that I
scarcely expected--"

He hesitated. His companion laughed softly at his embarrassment. "Do not forget," she interrupted, "that I am Austrian--Austrian, that is
to say, with much English in my blood. What you say about Germans does
not greatly concern me." "Of course," Norgate resumed, as he watched the champagne poured into his
glass, "one is too much inclined to form one's conclusions about a nation
from the types one meets travelling, and you know what the Germans have
done for Monte Carlo and the Riviera--even, to a lesser extent, for Paris
and Rome. Wherever they have been, for the last few years, they seem to
have left the trail of the _nouveaux riches_. It is not only their
clothes but their manners and bearing which affront." The woman leaned her head for a moment against the tips of her slim and
beautifully cared for fingers. She looked steadfastly across the table at
her vis-a-vis. "Now that you are here," she said softly, "you must forget those things. You are a diplomatist, and it is for you, is it not, outwardly, at any
rate, to see only the good of the country in which your work lies." Norgate flushed very slightly. His companion's words had savoured almost
of a reproof. "You are quite right," he admitted. "I have been here for a month,
though, and you are the first person to whom I have spoken like this. And
you yourself," he pointed out, "encouraged me, did you not, when you
insisted upon your Austro-English nationality?" "You must not take me too seriously," she begged, smiling. "I spoke
foolishly, perhaps, but only for your good. You see, Mr. Francis Norgate,
I am just a little interested in you and your career." "And I, dear Baroness," he replied, smiling across at her, "am more than
a little interested in--you." She unfurled her fan. "I believe," she sighed, "that you are going to flirt with me." "I should enter into an unequal contest," Norgate asserted. "My methods
would seem too clumsy, because I should be too much in earnest." "Whatever the truth may be about your methods," she declared, "I rather
like them, or else I should not be risking my reputation in this still
prudish city by dining with you alone and without a chaperon. Tell me a
little about yourself. We have met three times, is it not--once at the
Embassy, once at the Palace, and once when you paid me that call. How old
are you? Tell me about your people in England, and where else you have
served besides Paris?" "I am thirty years old," he replied. "I started at Bukarest. From there
I went to Rome. Then I was second attache at Paris, and finally, as you
see, here." "And your people--they are English, of course?" "Naturally," he answered. "My mother died when I was quite young, and my
father when I was at Eton. I have an estate in Hampshire which seems to
get on very well without me." "And you really care about your profession? You have the real feeling for
diplomacy?" "I think there is nothing else like it in the world," he assured her. "You may well say that," she agreed enthusiastically. "I think you might
almost add that there has been no time in the history of Europe so
fraught with possibilities, so fascinating to study, as the present." He looked at her keenly. It is the first instinct of a young diplomatist
to draw in his horns when a beautiful young woman confesses herself
interested in his profession. "You, too, think of these things, then?" he remarked. She shrugged her shoulders. "But naturally! What is there to do for a woman but think? We cannot act,
or rather, if we do, it is in a very insignificant way. We are lookers-on
at most of the things in life worth doing." "I will spare you all the obvious retorts," he said, "if you will tell me
why you are gazing into that mirror so earnestly?" "I was thinking," she confessed, "what a remarkably good-looking
couple we were." He followed the direction of her eyes. He himself was of a recognised
type. His complexion was fair, his face clean-shaven and strong almost to
ruggedness. His mouth was firm, his nose thin and straight, his grey eyes
well-set. He was over six feet and rather slim for his height. But if his
type, though attractive enough, was in its way ordinary, hers was
entirely unusual. She, too, was slim, but so far from being tall, her
figure was almost petite. Her dark brown hair was arranged in perfectly
plain braids behind and with a slight fringe in front. Her complexion was
pale. Her features were almost cameo-like in their delicacy and
perfection, but any suggestion of coldness was dissipated at once by the
extraordinary expressiveness of her mouth and the softness of her deep
blue eyes. Norgate looked from the mirror into her face. There was a
little smile upon his lips, but he said nothing. "Some day," she said, "not in the restaurant here but when we are
alone and have time, I should so much like to talk with you on really
serious matters." "There is one serious matter," he assured her, "which I should like to
discuss with you now or at any time." She made a little grimace at him. "Let it be now, then," she suggested, leaning across the table. "We will
leave my sort of serious things for another time. I am quite certain
that I know where your sort is going to lead us. You are going to make
love to me." "Do you mind?" he asked earnestly. She became suddenly grave. "Not yet," she begged. "Let us talk and live nonsense for a few more
weeks. You see, I really have not known you very long, have I, and this
is a very dangerous city for flirtations. At Court one has to be so
careful, and you know I am already considered far too much of a Bohemian
here. I was even given to understand, a little time ago, by a very great
lady, that my position was quite precarious." "Does that--does anything matter if--"

"It is not of myself alone that I am thinking. Everything matters to one
in your profession," she reminded him pointedly. "I believe," he exclaimed, "that you think more of my profession than you
do of me!" "Quite impossible," she retorted mockingly. "And yet, as I dare say you
have already realised, it is not only the things you say to our statesmen
here, and the reports you make, which count. It is your daily life among
the people of the nation to which you are attached, the friends you make
among them, the hospitality you accept and offer, which has all the time
its subtle significance. Now I am not sure, even, that I am, a very good
companion for you, Mr. Francis Norgate." "You are a very bad one for my peace of mind," he assured her. She shook her head. "You say those things much too glibly," she declared. "I am afraid that you have served a very long apprenticeship." "If I have," he replied, leaning a little across the table, "it has been
an apprenticeship only, a probationary period during which one struggles
towards the real thing." "You think you will know when you have found it?" she murmured. He drew a little breath. His voice even trembled as he answered her. "I
know now," he said softly. Their heads were almost touching. Suddenly she drew apart. He glanced at
her in some surprise, conscious of an extraordinary change in her face,
of the half-uttered exclamation strangled upon her lips. He turned his
head and followed the direction of her eyes. Three young men in the
uniform of officers had entered the room, and stood there as though
looking about for a table. Before them the little company of head-waiters
had almost prostrated themselves. The manager, summoned in breathless
haste, had made a reverential approach. "Who are these young men?" Norgate enquired. His companion made no reply. Her fine, silky eyebrows were drawn a
little closer together. At that moment the tallest of the three
newcomers seemed to recognise her. He strode at once towards their
table. Norgate, glancing up at his approach, was simply conscious of the
coming of a fair young man of ordinary German type, who seemed to be in
a remarkably bad temper. "So I find you here, Anna!" The Baroness rose as though unwillingly to her feet. She dropped the
slightest of curtseys and resumed her place. "Your visit is a little unexpected, is it not, Karl?" she remarked. "Apparently!" the young man answered, with an unpleasant laugh. He turned and stared at Norgate, who returned his regard with
half-amused, half-impatient indifference. The Baroness leaned
forward eagerly. "Will you permit me to present Mr. Francis Norgate to you, Karl?" Norgate, who had suddenly recognised the newcomer, rose to his feet,
bowed and remained standing. The Prince's only reply to the introduction
was a frown. "Kindly give me your seat," he said imperatively. "I will conclude your
entertainment of the Baroness." For a moment there was a dead silence. In the background several of
the _maitres d'hotel_ had gathered obsequiously around. For some
reason or other, every one seemed to be looking at Norgate as though
he were a criminal. "Isn't your request a little unusual, Prince?" he remarked drily. The colour in the young man's face became almost purple. "Did you hear what I said, sir?" he demanded. "Do you know who I am?" "Perfectly," Norgate replied. "A prince who apparently has not learnt how
to behave himself in a public place." The young man took a quick step forward. Norgate's fists were clenched
and his eyes glittering. The Baroness stepped between them. "Mr. Norgate," she said, "you will please give me your escort home." The Prince's companions had seized him, one by either arm. An older man
who had been dining in a distant corner of the room, and who wore the
uniform of an officer of high rank, suddenly approached. He addressed the
Prince, and they all talked together in excited whispers. Norgate with
calm fingers arranged the cloak around his companion and placed a hundred
mark note upon his plate. "I will return for my change another evening," he said to the dumbfounded
waiter. "If you are ready, Baroness." They left the restaurant amid an intense hush. Norgate waited
deliberately whilst the door was somewhat unwillingly held open for him
by a _maitre d'hotel,_ but outside the Baroness's automobile was summoned
at once. She placed her fingers upon Norgate's arm, and he felt that she
was shivering. "Please do not take me home," she faltered. "I am so sorry--so
very sorry." He laughed. "But why?" he protested. "The young fellow behaved like a
cub, but no one offered him any provocation. I should think by this time
he is probably heartily ashamed of himself. May I come and see you
to-morrow?" "Telephone me," she begged, as she gave him her hand through the window. "You don't quite understand. Please telephone to me." She suddenly clutched his hand with both of hers and then fell back out
of sight among the cushions. Norgate remained upon the pavement until the
car had disappeared. Then he looked back once more into the restaurant
and strolled across the brilliantly-lit street towards the Embassy. CHAPTER II


Norgate, during his month's stay in Berlin, had already adopted regular
habits. On the following morning he was called at eight o'clock and rode
for two hours in the fashionable precincts of the city. The latter
portion of the time he spent looking in vain for a familiar figure in a
green riding-habit. The Baroness, however, did not appear. At ten o'clock
Norgate returned to the Embassy, bathed and breakfasted, and a little
after eleven made his way round to the business quarters. One of his
fellow-workers there glanced up and nodded at his arrival. "Where's the Chief?" Norgate enquired. "Gone down to the Palace," the other young man, whose name was Ansell,
replied; "telephoned for the first thing this morning. Ghastly habit
William has of getting up at seven o'clock and suddenly remembering that
he wants to talk diplomacy. The Chief will be furious all day now." Norgate lit a cigarette and began to open his letters. Ansell, however,
was in a discoursive mood. He swung around from his desk and leaned back
in his chair. "How can a man," he demanded, "see a question from the same point of view
at seven o'clock in the morning and seven o'clock in the evening? Absolutely impossible, you know. That's what's the matter with our
versatile friend up yonder. He gets all aroused over some scheme or other
which comes to him in the dead of night, hops out of bed before any one
civilised is awake, and rings up for ambassadors. Then at night-time he
becomes normal again and takes everything back. The consequence is that
this place is a regular diplomatic see-saw. Settling down in Berlin
pretty well, aren't you, Norgate?" "Very nicely, thanks," the latter replied. "Dining alone with the Baroness von Haase!" his junior continued. "A
Court favourite, too! Never been seen alone before except with her young
princeling. What honeyed words did you use, Lothario--"

"Oh, chuck it!" Norgate interrupted. "Tell me about the Baroness von
Haase! She is Austrian, isn't she?" Ansell nodded. "Related to the Hapsburgs themselves, I believe," he said. "Very old
family, anyhow. They say she came to spend a season here because she was
a little too go-ahead for the ladies of Vienna. I must say that I've
never seen her out without a chaperon before, except with Prince Karl. They say he'd marry her--morganatically, of course--if they'd let him,
and if the lady were willing. If you want to know anything more about
her, go into Gray's room." Norgate looked up from his letters. "Why Gray's room? How does she come into his department?" Ansell shook his head. "No idea. I fancy she is there, though." Norgate left the room a few minutes later, and, strolling across the
hall of the Embassy, made his way to an apartment at the back of the
house. It was plainly furnished, there were bars across the window, and
three immense safes let into the wall. An elderly gentleman, with
gold-rimmed spectacles and a very benevolent expression, was busy with
several books of reference before him, seated at a desk. He raised his
head at Norgate's entrance. "Good morning, Norgate," he said. "Good morning, sir," Norgate replied. "Anything in my way?" Norgate shook his head. "Chief's gone to the Palace--no one knows why. I just looked in because I
met a woman the other day whom Ansell says you know something
about--Baroness von Haase." "Well?" "Is there anything to be told about her?" Norgate asked bluntly. "I dined
with her last night." "Then I don't think I would again, if I were you," the other advised. "There is nothing against her, but she is a great friend of certain
members of the Royal Family who are not very well disposed towards us,
and she is rather a brainy little person. They use her a good deal, I
believe, as a means of confidential communication between here and
Vienna. She has been back and forth three or four times lately, without
any apparent reason." Norgate stood with his hands in his pockets, frowning slightly. "Why, she's half an Englishwoman," he remarked. "She may be," Mr. Gray admitted drily. "The other half's Austrian all
right, though. I can't tell you anything more about her, my dear fellow. All I can say is that she is in my book, and so long as she is there, you
know it's better for you youngsters to keep away. Be off now. I am
decoding a dispatch." Norgate retraced his steps to his own room. Ansell glanced up from a mass
of passports as he entered. "How's the Secret Service Department this morning?" he enquired. "Old Gray seems much as usual," Norgate grumbled. "One doesn't get much
out of him." "Chief wants you in his room," Ansell announced. "He's just come in from
the Palace, looking like nothing on earth." "Wants me?" Norgate muttered. "Righto!" He went to the looking-glass, straightened his tie, and made his way
towards the Ambassador's private apartments. The latter was alone when he
entered, seated before his table. He was leaning back in his chair,
however, and apparently deep in thought. He watched Norgate sternly as he
crossed the room. "Good morning, sir," the latter said. The Ambassador nodded. "What have you been up to, Norgate?" he asked abruptly. "Nothing at all that I know of, sir," was the prompt reply. "This afternoon," the Ambassador continued slowly, "I was to have taken
you, as you know, to the Palace to be received by the Kaiser. At seven
o'clock this morning I had a message. I have just come from the Palace. The Kaiser has given me to understand that your presence in Berlin is
unwelcome." "Good God!" Norgate exclaimed. "Can you offer me any explanation?" For a moment Norgate was speechless. Then he recovered himself. He forgot
altogether his habits of restraint. There was an angry note in his tone. "It's that miserable young cub of a Prince Karl!" he exclaimed. "Last night I was dining, sir, with the Baroness von Haase at the
Cafe de Berlin." "Alone?" "Alone," Norgate admitted. "It was not for me to invite a chaperon if the
lady did not choose to bring one, was it, sir? As we were finishing
dinner, the Prince came in. He made a scene at our table and ordered me
to leave." "And you?" the Ambassador asked. "I simply treated him as I would any other young ass who forgot
himself," Norgate replied indignantly. "I naturally refused to go, and
the Baroness left the place with me." "And you did not expect to hear of this again?" "I honestly didn't. I should have thought, for his own sake, that the
young man would have kept his mouth shut. He was hopelessly in the wrong,
and he behaved like a common young bounder." The Ambassador shook his head slowly. "Mr. Norgate," he said, "I am very sorry for you, but you are under a
misapprehension shared by many young men. You believe that there is a
universal standard of manners and deportment, and a universal series of
customs for all nations. You have our English standard of manners in your
mind, manners which range from a ploughboy to a king, and you seem to
take it for granted that these are also subscribed to in other countries. In my position I do not wish to say too much, but let me tell you that in
Germany they are not. If a prince here chooses to behave like a
ploughboy, he is right where the ploughboy would be wrong." There was a moment's silence. Norgate was looking a little dazed. "Then you mean to defend--" he began. "Certainly not," the Ambassador interrupted. "I am not speaking to you as
one of ourselves. I am speaking as the representative of England in
Berlin. You are supposed to be studying diplomacy. You have been guilty
of a colossal blunder. You have shown yourself absolutely ignorant of the
ideals and customs of the country in which you are. It is perfectly
correct for young Prince Karl to behave, as you put it, like a bounder. The people expect it of him. He conforms entirely to the standard
accepted by the military aristocracy of Berlin. It is you who have been
in the wrong--diplomatically." "Then you mean, sir," Norgate protested, "that I should have taken it
sitting down?" "Most assuredly you should," the Ambassador replied, "unless you were
willing to pay the price. Your only fault--your personal fault, I
mean--that I can see is that it was a little indiscreet of you to dine
alone with a young woman for whom the Prince is known to have a
foolish passion. Diplomatically, however, you have committed every
fault possible, I am very sorry, but I think that you had better
report in Downing Street as soon as possible. The train leaves, I
think, at three o'clock." Norgate for a moment was unable to speak or move. He was struggling with
a sort of blind fury. "This is the end of me, then," he muttered at last. "I am to be disgraced
because I have come to a city of boors." "You are reprimanded and in a sense, no doubt, punished," the Ambassador
explained calmly, "because you have come to--shall I accept your term?--a
city of boors and fail to adapt yourself. The true diplomatist adapts
himself wherever he may be. My personal sympathies remain with you. I
will do what I can in my report." Norgate had recovered himself. "I thank you very much, sir," he said. "I shall catch the three
o'clock train." The Ambassador held out his hand. The interview had finished. He
permitted himself to speak differently. "I am very sorry indeed, Norgate, that this has happened," he declared. "We all have our trials to bear in this city, and you have run up
against one of them rather before your time. I wish you good luck,
whatever may happen." Norgate clasped his Chief's hand and left the apartment. Then he made his
way to his rooms, gave his orders and sent a messenger to secure his seat
in the train. Last of all he went to the telephone. He rang up the number
which had become already familiar to him, almost with reluctance. He
waited for the reply without any pleasurable anticipations. He was filled
with a burning sense of resentment, a feeling which extended even to the
innocent cause of it. Soon he heard her voice. "That is Mr. Norgate, is it not?" "Yes," he replied. "I rang up to wish you good-by." "Good-by! But you are going away, then?" "I am sent away--dismissed!" He heard her little exclamation of grief. Its complete genuineness broke
down a little the wall of his anger. "And it is my fault!" she exclaimed. "If only I could do anything! Will
you wait--please wait? I will go to the Palace myself." His expostulation was almost a shock to her. "Baroness," he replied, "if I permitted your intervention, I could never
hold my head up in Berlin again! In any case, I could not stay here. The
first thing I should do would be to quarrel with that insufferable young
cad who insulted us last night. I am afraid, at the first opportunity, I
should tell--"

"Hush!" she interrupted. "Oh, please hush! You must not talk like
this, even over the telephone. Cannot you understand that you are not
in England?" "I am beginning to realise," he answered gruffly, "what it means not to
be in a free country. I am leaving by the three o'clock train, Baroness. Farewell!" "But you must not go like this," she pleaded. "Come first and see me." "No! It will only mean more disgrace for you. Besides--in any case, I
have decided to go away without seeing you again." Her voice was very soft. He found himself gripping the pages of the
telephone book which hung by his side. "But is that kind? Have I sinned, Mr. Francis Norgate?" "Of course not," he answered, keeping his tone level, almost indifferent. "I hope that we shall meet again some day, but not in Berlin." There was a moment's silence. He thought, even, that she had gone away. Then her reply came back. "So be it," she murmured. "Not in Berlin. Au revoir!" CHAPTER III


Faithful to his insular prejudices, Norgate, on finding that the other
seat in his coupe was engaged, started out to find the train attendant
with a view to changing his place. His errand, however, was in vain. The
train, it seemed, was crowded. He returned to his compartment to find
already installed there one of the most complete and absolute types of
Germanism he had ever seen. A man in a light grey suit, the waistcoat of
which had apparently abandoned its efforts to compass his girth, with a
broad, pink, good-humoured face, beardless and bland, flaxen hair
streaked here and there with grey, was seated in the vacant place. He had
with him a portmanteau covered with a linen case, his boots were a bright
shade of yellow, his tie was of white satin with a design of lavender
flowers. A pair of black kid gloves lay by his side. He welcomed Norgate
with the bland, broad smile of a fellow-passenger whose one desire it is
to make a lifelong friend of his temporary companion. "We have the compartment to ourselves, is it not so? You are English?" Some queer chance founded upon his ill-humour, his disgust of Germany and
all things in it, induced Norgate to tell a deliberate falsehood. "Sorry," he replied in English. "I don't speak German." The man's satisfaction was complete. "But I--I speak the most wonderful English. It pleases me always to speak
English. I like to do so. It is practice for me. We will talk English
together, you and I. These comic papers, they do not amuse. And books in
the train, they make one giddy. What I like best is a companion and a
bottle of Rhine wine." "Personally," Norgate confessed gruffly, "I like to sleep." The other seemed a little taken aback but remained, apparently, full of
the conviction that his overtures could be nothing but acceptable. "It is well to sleep," he agreed, "if one has worked hard. Now I myself
am a hard worker. My name is Selingman. I manufacture crockery which I
sell in England. That is why I speak the English language so wonderful. For the last three nights I have been up reading reports of my English
customers, going through their purchases. Now it is finished. I am well
posted. I am off to sell crockery in London, in Manchester, in Leeds, in
Birmingham. I have what the people want. They will receive me with open
arms, some of them even welcome me at their houses. Thus it is that I
look forward to my business trip as a holiday." "Very pleasant, I'm sure," Norgate remarked, curling himself up in his
corner. "Personally, I can't see why we can't make our own crockery. I
get tired of seeing German goods in England." Herr Selingman was apparently a trifle hurt, but his efforts to make
himself agreeable were indomitable. "If you will," he said, "I can explain why my crockery sells in England
where your own fails. For one thing, then, I am cheaper. There is a
system at my works, the like of which is not known in England. From the
raw material to the finished article I can produce forty per cent. cheaper than your makers, and, mind you, that is not because I save in
wages. It is because of the system in the various departments. I do not
like to save in wages," he went on. "I like to see my people healthy and
strong and happy. I like to see them drink beer after work is over, and
on feast days and Sundays I like to see them sit in the gardens and
listen to the band, and maybe change their beer for a bottle of wine. Industrially, Mr. Englishman, ours is a happy country." "Well, I hope you won't think I am rude," Norgate observed, "but from the
little I have seen of it I call it a beastly country, and if you don't
mind I am going to sleep." Herr Selingman sat for several moments with his mouth still open. Then he
gave a little grunt. There was not the slightest ill-humour in the
ejaculation or in his expression. He was simply pained. "I am sorry if I have talked too much," he said. "I forgot that you,
perhaps, are tired. You have met with disappointments, maybe. I am sorry. I will read now and not disturb you." For an hour or so Norgate tried in vain to sleep. All this time the man
opposite turned the pages of his book with the utmost cautiousness,
moved on tiptoe once to reach down more papers, and held out his finger
to warn the train attendant who came with some harmless question. "The English gentleman," Norgate heard him whisper, "is tired. Let
him sleep." Soon after five o'clock, Norgate gave it up. He rose to his feet,
stretched himself, and was welcomed with a pleasant smile from his
companion. "You have had a refreshing nap," the latter remarked, "and now, is it not
so, you go to take a cup of English tea?" "You are quite right," Norgate admitted. "Better come with me." Herr Selingman smiled a smile of triumph. It was the reward of geniality,
this! He was forming a new friendship! "I come with great pleasure," he decided, "only while you drink the tea,
I drink the coffee or some beer. I will see. I like best the beer," he
explained, turning sidewise to get out of the door, "but it is not the
best for my figure. I have a good conscience and a good digestion, and I
eat and drink much. But it is good to be happy." They made their way down to the restaurant car and seated themselves at a
table together. "You let me do the ordering," Herr Selingman insisted. "The man here,
perhaps, does not speak English. So! You will drink your tea with me,
sir. It is a great pleasure to me to entertain an Englishman. I make many
friends travelling. I like to make friends. I remember them all, and
sometimes we meet again. _Kellner_, some tea for the gentleman--English
tea with what you call bread and butter. So! And for me--" Selingman
paused for a moment and drew a deep sigh of resignation--"some coffee." "Very kind of you, I'm sure," Norgate murmured. Herr Selingman beamed. "It is a great pleasure," he said, "but many times I wonder why you
Englishmen, so clever, so world-conquering, do not take the trouble to
make yourselves with the languages of other nations familiar. It means
but a little study. Now you, perhaps, are in business?" "Not exactly," Norgate replied grimly. "To tell you the truth, at the
present moment I have no occupation." "No occupation!" Herr Selingman paused in the act of conveying a huge portion of rusk to
his mouth, and regarded his companion with wonder. "So!" he repeated. "No occupation! Well, that is what in Germany we know
nothing of. Every one must work, or must take up the army as a permanent
profession. You are, perhaps, one of those Englishmen of whom one reads,
who give up all their time to sport?" Norgate shook his head. "As a matter of fact," he said, "I have worked rather hard during the
last five or six years. It is only just recently that I have lost my
occupation." Herr Selingman's curiosity was almost childlike in its transparency, but
Norgate found himself unable to gratify it. In any case, after his
denial of any knowledge of the German language, he could scarcely lay
claim to even the most indirect connection with the diplomatic service. "Ah, well," Herr Selingman declared, "opportunities will come. You have
perhaps lost some post. Well, there are others. I should not, I think, be
far away from the truth, sir, if I were to surmise that you had held some
sort of an official position?" "Perhaps," Norgate assented. "That is interesting," Herr Selingman continued. "Now with the English of
commerce I talk often, and I know their views of me and my country. But
sometimes I have fancied that among your official classes those who are
ever so slightly employed in Government service, there is--I do not love
the word, but I must use it--a distrust of Germany and her peace-loving
propensities." "I have met many people," Norgate admitted, "who do not look upon Germany
as a lover of peace." "They should come and travel here," Herr Selingman insisted eagerly. "Look out of the windows. What do you see? Factory chimneys, furnaces
everywhere. And further on--what? Well-tilled lands, clean, prosperous
villages, a happy, domestic people. I tell you that no man in the world
is so fond of his wife and children, his simple life, his simple
pleasures, as the German." "Very likely," Norgate assented, "but if you look out of the windows
continually you will also see that every station-master on the line wears
a military uniform, that every few miles you see barracks. These simple
peasants you speak of carry themselves with a different air from ours. I
don't know much about it, but I should call it the effect of their
military training. I know nothing about politics. Very likely yours is a
nation of peace-loving men. As a casual observer, I should call you more
a nation of soldiers." "But that," Herr Selingman explained earnestly, "is for defence only." "And your great standing army, your wonderful artillery, your Zeppelins
and your navy," Norgate asked, "are they for defence only?" "Absolutely and entirely," Herr Selingman declared, with a new and
ponderous gravity. "There is nothing the most warlike German desires more
fervently than to keep the peace. We are strong only because we desire
peace, peace under which our commerce may grow, and our wealth increase." "Well, it seems to me, then," Norgate observed, "that you've gone to a
great deal of expense and taken a great deal of trouble for nothing. I
don't know much about these things, as I told you before, but there is no
nation in the world who wants to attack Germany." Herr Selingman laid his finger upon his nose. "That may be," he said. "Yet there are many who look at us with envious
eyes. I am a good German. I know what it is that we want. We want peace,
and to gain peace we need strength, and to be strong we arm. That is
everything. It will never be Germany who clenches her fist, who draws
down the black clouds of war over Europe. It will never be Germany, I
tell you. Why, a war would ruin half of us. What of my crockery? I sell
it all in England. Believe me, young gentleman, war exists only in the
brains of your sensational novelists. It does not come into the world of
real purpose." "Well, it's very interesting to hear you say so," Norgate admitted. "I
wish I could wholly agree with you." Herr Selingman caught him by the sleeve. "You are just a little," he confided, "just a little suspicious, my young
friend, you in your little island. Perhaps it is because you live upon an
island. You do not expand. You have small thoughts. You are not great
like we in Germany, not broad, not deep. But we will talk later of these
things. I must tell you about our Kaiser." Norgate opened his lips and closed them again. "Presently," he muttered. "See you later on." He strolled to his coupe, tried in vain to read, walked up and down the
length of the train, smoked a cigarette, and returned to his compartment
to find Herr Selingman immersed in the study of many documents. "Records of my customers and my transactions," the latter announced
blandly. "I have a great fondness for detail. I know everything. I carry
with me particulars of everything. That is where we Germans are so
thorough. See, I place them now all in my bag." He did so and locked it with great care. "We go to dinner, is it not so?" he suggested. "I suppose we may as well," Norgate assented indifferently. They found places in the crowded restaurant car. The manufacturer of
crockery made a highly satisfactory and important meal. Norgate, on the
other hand, ate little. Herr Selingman shook his head. "My young English friend," he declared, "all is not well with you that
you turn away from good food. Come. Afterwards, over a cigar, you shall
tell me what troubles you have, and I will give you sound advice. I have
a very wide knowledge of life. I have a way of seeing the truth, and I
like to help people." Norgate shook his head. "I am afraid," he said, "that my case is
hopeless." "Presently we will see," Herr Selingman continued, rubbing the window
with his cuff. "We are arrived, I think, at Lesel. Here will board the
train one of my agents. He will travel with us to the next station. It is
my way of doing business, this. It is better than alighting and wasting a
day in a small town. You will not mind, perhaps," he added, "if I bring
him into the carriage and talk? You do not understand German, so it will
not weary you." "Certainly not," Norgate replied. "I shall probably drop off to sleep." "He will be in the train for less than an hour," Herr Selingman
explained, "but I have many competitors, and I like to talk in private. In here some one might overhear." "How do you know that I am not an English crockery manufacturer?" Norgate remarked. Herr Selingman laughed heartily. His stomach shook, and tears rolled
down his eyes. "That is good!" he exclaimed. "An English crockery manufacturer! No, I do
not think so! I cannot see you with your sleeves turned up, walking
amongst the kilns. I cannot see you, even, studying the designs for pots
and basins." "Well, bring your man in whenever you want to," Norgate invited, as he
turned away. "I can promise, at least, that I shall not understand what
you are saying, and that I won't sneak your designs." There was a queer little smile on Herr Selingman's broad face. It almost
seemed as though he had discovered some hidden though unsuspected meaning
in the other's words. CHAPTER IV


Norgate dozed fitfully as the train sped on through the darkness. He woke
once to find Herr Selingman in close confabulation with his agent on the
opposite side of the compartment. They had a notebook before them and
several papers spread out upon the seat. Norgate, who was really weary,
closed his eyes again, and it seemed to him that he dreamed for a few
moments. Then suddenly he found himself wide-awake. Although he remained
motionless, the words which Selingman had spoken to his companion were
throbbing in his ears. "I do not doubt your industry, Meyer, but it is your discretion which is
sometimes at fault. These plans of the forts of Liege--they might as well
be published in a magazine. We had them when they were made. We have
received copies of every alteration. We know to a metre how far the guns
will carry, how many men are required to man them, what stocks of
ammunition are close at hand. Understand, therefore, my friend, that the
sight of these carefully traced plans, which you hint to have obtained at
the risk of your life, excites me not at all." The other man's reply was inaudible. In a moment or two Selingman
spoke again. "The information which I am lacking just at present in your sphere of
operations, is civilian in character. Take Ghent, for instance. What I
should like here, what our records need at present, is a list of the
principal inhabitants with their approximate income, and, summarising it
all, the rateable value of the city. With these bases it would be easy to
fix a reasonable indemnity." Norgate was wide-awake now. He was curled up on his seat, underneath his
rug, and though his eyelids had quivered with a momentary excitement, he
was careful to remain as near as possible motionless. Again Selingman's
agent spoke, this time more distinctly. "The young man opposite," he whispered. "He is English, surely?" "He is English indeed," Selingman admitted, "but he speaks no German. That I have ascertained. Give me your best attention, Meyer. Here is
again an important commission for you. Within the next few days, hire an
automobile and visit the rising country eastwards from Antwerp. At some
spot between six and eight miles from the city, on a slight incline and
commanding the River Scheldt, we desire to purchase an acre of land for
the erection of a factory. You can say that we have purchased the
concession for making an American safety razor. The land is wanted, and
urgently. See to this yourself and send plans and price to me in London. On my return I shall call and inspect the sites and close the bargain." "And the Antwerp forts?" The other pursed his lips. "Pooh! Was it not the glorious firm of Krupp who fitted the guns there? Do you think the men who undertook that task were idle? I tell you that
our plans of the Antwerp fortifications are more carefully worked out in
detail than the plans held by the Belgians themselves. Here is good work
for you to do, friend Meyer. That and the particulars from Brussels which
you know of, will keep you busy until we meet again." Herr Selingman began to collect his papers, but was suddenly thrown back
into his seat by the rocking of the train, which came, a few moments
later, to a standstill. The sound of the opening of windows from the
other side of the corridor was heard all down the train. Selingman and
his companion followed the general example, opening the door of the
carriage and the window opposite. A draught blew through the compartment. One of the small folded slips of paper from Selingman's pocket-book
fluttered along the seat. It came within reach of Norgate. Cautiously he
stretched out his fingers and gripped it. In a moment it was in his
pocket. He sat up in his place. Selingman had turned around. "Anything the matter?" Norgate asked sleepily. "Not that one can gather," Selingman replied. "You have slept well. I am
glad that our conversation has not disturbed you. This is my agent from
Brussels--Mr. Meyer. He sells our crockery in that city--not so much as
he should sell, perhaps, but still he does his best." Mr. Meyer was a dark little man who wore gold-rimmed spectacles, neat
clothes, and a timid smile. Norgate nodded to him good-humouredly. "You should get Herr Selingman to come oftener and help you," he
remarked, yawning. "I can imagine that he would be able to sell anything
he tried to." "It is what I often tell him, sir," Mr. Meyer replied, "but he is too
fond of the English trade." "English money is no better than Belgian," Herr Selingman declared, "but
there is more of it. Let us go round to the restaurant car and drink a
bottle of wine together while the beds are prepared." "Certainly," Norgate assented, stretching himself. "By-the-by, you
had better look after your papers there, Herr Selingman. Just as I
woke up I saw a small slip fluttering along the seat. You made a most
infernal draught by opening that door, and I almost fancy it went out
of the window." Herr Selingman's face became suddenly grave. He went through the papers
one by one, and finally locked them up in his bag. "Nothing missing, I hope?" Norgate asked. Herr Selingman's face was troubled. "I am not sure," he said. "It is my belief that I had with me here a
list of my agents in England. I cannot find it. In a sense it is
unimportant, yet if a rival firm should obtain possession of it, there
might be trouble." Norgate looked out into the night and smiled. "Considering that it is blowing half a hurricane and commencing to rain,"
he remarked, "the slip of paper which I saw blowing about will be of no
use to any one when it is picked up." They called the attendant and ordered him to prepare the sleeping
berths. Then they made their way down to the buffet car, and Herr
Selingman ordered a bottle of wine. "We will drink," he proposed, "to our three countries. In our way we
represent, I think, the industrial forces of the world--Belgium, England,
and Germany. We are the three countries who stand for commerce and peace. We will drink prosperity to ourselves and to each other." Norgate threw off, with apparent effort, his sleepiness. "What you have said about our three countries is very true," he remarked. "Perhaps as you, Mr. Meyer, are a Belgian, and you, Mr. Selingman, know
Belgium well and have connections with it, you can tell me one thing
which has always puzzled me. Why is it that Belgium, which is, as you
say, a commercial and peace-loving country, whose neutrality is
absolutely guaranteed by three of the greatest Powers in Europe, should
find it necessary to have spent such large sums upon fortifications?" "In which direction do you mean?" Selingman asked, his eyes narrowing a
little as he looked across at Norgate. "The forts of Liege and Namur," Norgate replied, "and Antwerp. I know
nothing more about it than I gathered from an article which I read not
long ago in a magazine. I had always looked upon Belgium as being outside
the pale of possible warfare, yet according to this article it seems to
be bristling to the teeth with armaments." Herr Selingman cleared his throat. "I will tell you the reason," he said. "You have come to the right man
to know. I am a civilian, but there are few things in connection with my
country which I do not understand. Mr. Meyer here, who is a citizen of
Brussels, will bear me out. It is the book of a clever, intelligent, but
misguided German writer which has been responsible for Belgium's
unrest--Bernhardi's _Germany and the Next War_--that and articles of a
similar tenor which preceded it." "Never read any of them," Norgate remarked. "It was erroneously supposed," Selingman continued, "that Bernhardi
represented the dominant military opinion of Germany when he wrote that
if Germany ever again invaded France, it would be, notwithstanding her
guarantees of neutrality, through Belgium. Bernhardi was a clever writer,
but he was a soldier, and soldiers do not understand the world policy of
a great nation such as Germany. Germany will make no war upon any one,
save commercially. She will never again invade France except under the
bitterest provocation, and if ever she should be driven to defend
herself, it will assuredly not be at the expense of her broken pledges. The forts of Belgium might just as well be converted into apple-orchards. They stand there to-day as the proof of a certain lack of faith in
Germany on the part of Belgium, ministered to by that King of the
Jingoes, as you would say in English, Bernhardi. How often it is that a
nation suffers most from her own patriots!" "Herr Selingman has expressed the situation admirably," Mr. Meyer
declared approvingly. "Very interesting, I'm sure," Norgate murmured. "There is one thing
about you foreigners," he added, with an envious sigh. "The way you all
speak the languages of other countries is wonderful. Are you a Belgian,
Mr. Meyer?" "Half Belgian and half French." "But you speak English almost without accent," Norgate remarked. "In commerce," Herr Selingman insisted, "that is necessary. All my agents
speak four languages." "You deserve to capture our trade," Norgate sighed. "To a certain extent, my young friend," Selingman declared, "we mean to
do it. We are doing it. And yet there is enough for us both. There is
trade enough for your millions and for mine. So long as Germany and
England remain friends, they can divide the commerce of the world between
them. It is our greatest happiness, we who have a business relying upon
the good-will of the two nations, to think that year by year the clouds
of discord are rolling away from between us. Young sir, as a German
citizen, I will drink a toast with you, an English one. I drink to
everlasting peace between my country and yours!" Norgate drained his glass. Selingman threw back his head as he followed
suit, and smacked his lips appreciatively. "And now," the former remarked, rising to his feet, "I think I'll go and
turn in. I dare say you two still have some business to talk about,
especially if Mr. Meyer is leaving us shortly." Norgate made his way back to his compartment, undressed leisurely and
climbed into the upper bunk. For an hour or two he indulged in the fitful
slumber usually engendered by night travelling. At the frontier he sat up
and answered the stereotyped questions. Herr Selingman, in sky-blue
pyjamas, and with face looking more beaming and florid than ever, poked
his head cheerfully out of the lower bunk. "Awake?" he enquired. "Very much so," Norgate yawned. "I have a surprise," Herr Selingman announced. "Wait." Almost as he spoke, an attendant arrived from the buffet car with some
soda-water. Herr Selingman's head vanished for a moment or two. When he
reappeared, he held two glasses in his hand. "A whisky soda made in real English fashion," he proclaimed triumphantly. "A good nightcap, is it not? Now we are off again." Norgate held out his hand for the tumbler. "Awfully good of you," he murmured. "I myself," Selingman continued, seated on the edge of the bunk, with his
legs far apart to steady himself, "I myself enjoy a whisky soda. It will
be indeed a nightcap, so here goes." He drained his glass and set it down. Norgate followed suit. Selingman's
hand came up for the tumbler and Norgate was conscious of a curious
mixture of sensations which he had once experienced before in the
dentist's chair. He could see Selingman distinctly, and he fancied that
he was watching him closely, but the rest of the carriage had become
chaos. The sound of the locomotive was beating hard upon the drums of
his ears. His head fell back. It was broad daylight when he awoke. Selingman, fully dressed and
looking more beaming than ever, was seated upon a ridiculously
inadequate camp-stool upon the floor, smoking a cigarette. Norgate
stared at him stupidly. "My young friend," Herr Selingman declared impressively, "if there is one
thing in the world I envy you, it is that capacity for sleep. You all
have it, you English. Your heads touch the pillow, and off you go. Do you
know that the man is waiting for you to take your coffee?" Norgate lay quite still for several moments. Beyond a slight headache, he
was feeling as usual. He leaned over the side of the bunk. "How many whiskies and soda did I have last night?" he asked. Herr Selingman smiled. "But one only," he announced. "There was only one to be had. I found a
little whisky in my flask. I remembered that I had an English travelling
companion, and I sent for some soda-water. You drank yours, and you did
sleep. I go now and sit in the corridor while you dress." Norgate swung round in his bunk and slipped to the floor. "Jolly good of you," he muttered sleepily, "but it was very strong
whisky." CHAPTER V


There was a babel of voices as the long train came to a stand-still in
the harbour station at Ostend. Selingman, with characteristic
forcefulness, pushed his way down the narrow corridor, driving before him
passengers of less weight and pertinacity, until finally he descended on
to the platform itself. Norgate, who had followed meekly in his wake,
stood listening for a moment to the confused stream of explanations. He
understood well enough what had happened, but with Selingman at his elbow
he assumed an air of non-comprehension. "It is extraordinary!" the latter exclaimed. "Never do I choose this
route but I am visited with some mishap. You hear what has happened?" "Fellow's trying to tell me," Norgate replied, "but his Flemish is worse
to understand than German." "The steamer," Selingman announced, "has met with an accident entering
the harbour. There will be a delay of at least six hours--possibly more. It is most annoying. My appointments in London have been fixed for days." "Bad luck!" Norgate murmured. "You do not seem much distressed." "Why should I be? I really came this way because I was not sure whether
I would not stay here for a few days." "That is all very well for you," Selingman declared, as they followed
their porters into the shed. "For me, I am a man of affairs. It is
different. My business goes by clockwork. All is regulated by rule, with
precision, with punctuality. Now I shall be many hours behind my
schedule. I shall be compelled to alter my appointments--I, who pride
myself always upon altering nothing. But behold! One must make the best
of things. What a sunshine! What a sea! We shall meet, without a doubt,
upon the Plage. I have friends here. I must seek them. Au revoir, my
young travelling companion. To the good fortune!" They drifted apart, and Norgate, having made arrangements about his
luggage, strolled through the town and on to the promenade. It was early
for the full season at Ostend, but the sands were already crowded with an
immense throng of children and holiday-makers. The hotels were all open,
and streams of people were passing back and forth along the front,
Norgate, who had no wish to meet acquaintances, passed the first period
of his enforced wait a little wearily. He took a taxicab and drove as far
as Knocke. Here he strolled across the links and threw himself down
finally amongst a little wave of sandy hillocks close to the sea. The
silence, and some remains of the sleepiness of the previous night, soon
began to have their natural effect. He closed his eyes and began to doze. When he awoke, curiously enough, it was a familiar voice which first fell
upon his ears. He turned his head cautiously. Seated not a dozen yards
away from him was a tall, thin man with a bag of golf clubs by his side. He was listening with an air of engrossed attention to his companion's
impressive remarks. Norgate, raising himself upon his elbow, no longer
had any doubts. The man stretched upon his back on the sand, partly
hidden from sight by a little grass-grown undulation, was his late
travelling companion. "You do well, my dear Marquis, believe me!" the latter exclaimed. "Property in Belgium is valuable to-day. Take my advice. Sell. There are
so many places where one may live, where the climate is better for a man
of your constitution." "That is all very well," his companion replied querulously, "but remember
that Belgium, after all, is my country. My chateau and estates came to me
by inheritance. Notwithstanding the frequent intermarriages of my family
with the aristocracy of your country, I am still a Belgian." "Ah! but, my dear friend," Selingman protested, "you are more than a
Belgian, more than a man of local nationality. You are a citizen of the
world of intelligence. You are able to see the truth. The days are coming
when small states may exist no longer without the all-protecting arm of a
more powerful country. I say no more than this. The position of Belgium
is artificial. Of her own will, or of necessity, she must soon become
merged in the onward flow of mightier nations." "What about Holland, then?" "Holland, too," Selingman continued, "knows the truth. She knows very
well that the limit of her days as an independent kingdom is almost
reached. The Power which has absorbed the states of Prussia into one
mighty empire, pauses only to take breath. There are many signs--"

"But, my worthy friend," the other man interrupted irritably, "you must
take into consideration the fact that Belgium is in a different position. Our existence as a separate kingdom might certainly be threatened by
Germany, but all that has been foreseen. Our neutrality is guaranteed. Your country has pledged its honour to maintain it, side by side with
France and England. What have we to fear, then?" "You have to fear, Marquis," Selingman replied ponderously, "the
inevitable laws which direct the progress of nations. Treaties solemnly
subscribed to in one generation become worthless as time passes and
conditions change." "But I do not understand you there!" the other man exclaimed. "What you
say sounds to me like a reflection upon the honour of your country. Do
you mean to insinuate that she would possibly--that she would ever for a
moment contemplate breaking her pledged and sealed word?" "My friend," Selingman pronounced drily, "the path of honour and glory,
the onward progress of a mighty, struggling nation, carrying in its hand
culture and civilisation, might demand even such a sacrifice. Germany
recognises, is profoundly imbued with the splendour of her own ideals,
the matchlessness of her own culture. She feels justified in spreading
herself out wherever she can find an outlet--at any cost, mind, because
the end must be good." There was a moment's silence. Then the tall man stood upright. "If you came out to find me, my friend Selingman, to bring me this
warning, I suppose I should consider myself your debtor. As a matter of
fact, I do not. You have inspired me with nameless misgivings. Your voice
sounds in my ears like the voice of an ugly fate. I am, as you have often
reminded me, half German, and I have shown my friendship for Germany many
times. Unlike most of the aristocracy of my country, I look more often
northwards than towards the south. But I tell you frankly that there are
limits to my Germanism. I will play no more golf. I will walk with you to
the club-house." "All that I have to say," Selingman went on, "is not yet said. This
opportunity of meeting you is too precious to be wasted. Come. As we walk
there are certain questions I wish to put to you." They passed within a few feet of where Norgate was lying. He closed his
eyes and held his breath. It was not until their figures were almost
specks in the distance that he rose cautiously to his feet. He made his
way back to the club-house by another angle, gained his taxicab
unobserved, and drove back to Ostend. *       *       *       *       *

Towards evening Norgate strolled into one of the cosmopolitan bars at the
back of the Casino. The first person he saw as he handed over his hat to
a waiter, was Selingman, spread out upon a cushioned seat with a young
lady upon either side of him. He at once summoned Norgate to his table. "An _aperitif_," he insisted. "Come, you must not refuse me. In two hours
we start. We tear ourselves away from this wonderful atmosphere. In
atmosphere, mademoiselle," he added, bowing to the right and the left,
"all is included." "It is not," Norgate admitted, "an invitation to be disregarded. On the
other hand, I have already an appetite." Selingman thundered out an order. "Here," he remarked, "we dwell for a few brief moments in Bohemia. I do
not introduce you. You sit down and join us. You are one of us. That you
speak only English counts for nothing. Mademoiselle Alice here is
American. Now tell us at once, how have you spent this afternoon? You
have bathed, perhaps, or walked upon the sands?" Norgate was on the point of speaking of his excursion to Knocke but was
conscious of Selingman's curiously intent gaze. The spirit of duplicity
seemed to grow upon him. "I walked for a little way," he said. "Afterwards I lay upon the sands
and slept. When I found that the steamer was still further delayed, I
had a bath. That was half an hour ago. I asked a man whom I met on the
promenade where one might dine in travelling clothes, lightly but
well, and he sent me here--the Bar de Londres--and here, for my good
fortune, I am." "It is a pity that monsieur does not speak French," one of Selingman's
companions murmured. "But, mademoiselle," Norgate protested, "I have spoken French all my
life. Herr Selingman here has misunderstood me. It is German of which I
am ignorant." The young lady, who immediately introduced herself as Mademoiselle
Henriette, passed her arm through Selingman's. "We dine here all together, my friend, is it not so?" she begged. "He
will not be in the way, and for myself, I am _triste_. You talk all the
time to Mademoiselle l'Americaine, perhaps because she is the friend of
some one in whom you are interested. But for me, it is dull. Monsieur
l'Anglais shall talk with me, and you may hear all the secrets that Alice
has to tell. We," she murmured, looking up at Norgate, "will speak of
other things, is it not so?" For a moment Selingman hesitated. Norgate would have moved on with a
little farewell nod, but Selingman's companions were insistent. "It shall be a _partie carree_," they both declared, almost in unison. "You need have no fear," Mademoiselle Henriette continued. "I will talk
all the time to monsieur. He shall tell me his name, and we shall be
very great friends. I am not interested in the things of which they
talk, those others. You shall tell me of London, monsieur, and how you
live there." "Join us, by all means," Selingman invited. "On condition that you dine with me," Norgate insisted, as he took
up the menu. "Impossible!" Selingman declared firmly. "Oh! it matters nothing," Mademoiselle Henriette exclaimed, "so long
as we dine." "So long," Mademoiselle Alice intervened, "as we have this brief glimpse
of Mr. Selingman, let us make the best of it. We see him only because of
a _contretemps_. I think we must be very nice to him and persuade him to
take us to London to-night." Selingman's shake of the head was final. "Dear young ladies," he said, "it was delightful to find you here. I came
upon the chance, I admit, but who in Ostend would not be here between six
and eight? We dine, we walk down to the quay, and if you will, you shall
wave your hands and wish us _bon voyage,_ but London just now is
_triste_. It is here you may live the life the _bon Dieu_ sends, where
the sun shines all the time and the sea laps the sands like a great blue
lake, and you, mademoiselle, can wear those wonderful costumes and charm
all hearts. There is nothing like that for you in London." They ordered dinner and walked afterwards down to the quay. Mademoiselle
Henriette lingered behind with Norgate. "Let them go on," she whispered. "They have much to talk about. It is but
a short distance, and your steamer will not start before ten. We can walk
slowly and listen to the music. You are not in a hurry, monsieur, to
depart? Your stay here is too short already." Norgate's reply, although gallant enough, was a little vague. He was
watching Selingman with his companion. They were talking together with
undoubted seriousness. "Who is Mr. Selingman?" he enquired. "I know him only as a travelling
companion." Mademoiselle Henriette extended her hands. She shrugged her little
shoulders and looked with wide-open eyes up into her companion's
grave face. "But who, indeed, can answer that question?" she exclaimed. "Twice he has
been here for flying visits. Once Alice has been to see him in Berlin. He
is, I believe, a very wealthy manufacturer there. He crosses often to
England. He has money, and he is always gay." "And Mademoiselle Alice?" "Who knows?" was the somewhat pointless reply. "She came from America. She arrived here this season with Monsieur le General." "What General?" Norgate asked. "A Belgian?" "But no," his companion corrected. "All the world knows that Alice is the
friend of General le Foys, chief of the staff in Paris. He is a very
great soldier. He spends eleven months working and one month here." "And she is also," Norgate observed meditatively, "the friend of Herr
Selingman. Tell me, mademoiselle, what do you suppose those two are
talking of now? See how close their heads are together. I don't think
that Herr Selingman is a Don Juan." "They speak, perhaps, of serious matters," his companion surmised, "but
who can tell? Besides, is it for us to waste our few moments wondering? You will come back to Ostend, monsieur?" Norgate looked back at the streaming curve of lights flashing across the
dark waters. "One never knows," he answered. "That is what Monsieur Selingman himself says," she remarked, with a
little sigh. "'Enjoy your Ostend to-day, my little ones,' he said, when
he first met us this evening. 'One never knows how long these days will
last.' So, monsieur, we must indeed part here?" They had all come to a standstill at the gangway of the steamer. Selingman had apparently finished his conversation with his companion. He
hurried Norgate off, and they waved their hands from the deck as a few
minutes later the steamer glided away. "A most delightful interlude," Selingman declared. "I have thoroughly
enjoyed these few hours. I trust, that every time this steamer meets with
a little accident, it will be at this time of the year and when I am on
my way to England." "You seem to have friends everywhere," Norgate observed, as he lit a
cigar. "Young ladies, yes," Selingman admitted. "It chanced that they were both
well-known to me. But who else?" Norgate made no reply. He felt that his companion was watching him. "It is something," he remarked, "to find charming young ladies in a
strange place to dine with one." Selingman smiled broadly. "If we travelled together often, my young friend," he said, "you would
discover that I have friends everywhere. 