



Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sankar Viswanathan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                               Works of
                           ARTHUR GRIFFITHS

          *       *       *       *       *

                   The Passenger from Calais $1.25
                   The Rome Express           1.25

          *       *       *       *       *

                          L.C. PAGE & COMPANY
                  New England Building, Boston, Mass. The Passenger
                              from Calais


                          By Arthur Griffiths

                  Author of "The Rome Express," etc. Boston--L.C. Page and
                          Company--Publishers


                   _First Impression, January, 1906
                    Second Impression, February, 1906
                    Third Impression, February, 1906
                    Fourth Impression, March, 1908_

                            Colonial Press
                         _C.H. Simonds & Co.
                            Boston, U.S.A._





FOREWORD


_I desire to state that the initial
fact upon which I have founded
this story is within my own experience. I travelled from Calais to
Basle by the Engadine Express in
the latter end of July, 1902, when
my wife and myself were the only
passengers. The rest is pure fiction._

A.G.








CHAPTER I. [_Colonel Annesley's Story_]


The crossing from Dover to Calais had been rough; a drizzling rain
fell all the time, and most of the passengers had remained below. Strange to say, they were few enough, as I saw on landing. It was a
Sunday in late July, and there ought to have been a strong stream
setting towards Central Europe. I hardly expected to find much room in
the train; not that it mattered, for my place was booked through in
the Lucerne sleeping-car of the Engadine express. Room! When I reached the siding where this train de luxe was drawn up,
I saw that I was not merely the first but the only passenger. Five
sleeping-cars and a dining-car attached, with the full staff,
attendants, chef, waiters--all lay there waiting for me, and me
alone. "Not very busy?" I said, with a laugh to the conductor. "_Parbleu_," replied the man, polyglot and cosmopolitan, like most of
his class, but a Frenchman, or, more likely from his accent, a Swiss. "I never saw the like before." "I shall have a compartment to myself, then?" "Monsieur may have the whole carriage if he wishes--the whole five
carriages. It is but to arrange." His eyes glistened at the prospect
of something special in this obvious scarcity of coming tips. "The train will run, I hope? I am anxious to get on." "But assuredly it will run. Even without monsieur it would run. The
carriages are wanted at the other end for the return journey. Stay,
what have we here?" We stood talking together on the platform, and at some little distance
from the railway station, the road to which was clear and open all the
way, so that I could see a little party of four approaching us, and
distinguish them. Two ladies, an official, probably one of the guards,
and a porter laden with light luggage. As they came up I discreetly withdrew to my own compartment, the
window of which was open, so that I could hear and see all that
passed. "Can we have places for Lucerne?" It was asked in an eager, anxious,
but very sweet voice, and in excellent French. "Places?" echoed the conductor. "Madame can have fifty." "What did I tell madame?" put in the official who had escorted her. "I don't want fifty," she replied, pettishly, crossly, "only two. A
separate compartment for myself and maid; the child can come in with
us." Now for the first time I noticed that the maid was carrying a bundle
in her arms, the nature of which was unmistakable. The way in which
she swung it to and fro rhythmically was that of a nurse and child. "If madame prefers, the maid and infant can be accommodated apart,"
suggested the obliging conductor. But this did not please her. "No, no, no," she answered with much
asperity. "I wish them to be with me. I have told you so already; did
you not hear?" "_Parfaitement_, as madame pleases. Only, as the train is not
full--very much the reverse indeed--only one other passenger, a
gentleman--no more--"

The news affected her strangely, and in two very different ways. At
first a look of satisfaction came into her face, but it was quickly
succeeded by one of nervous apprehension, amounting to positive fear. She turned to talk to her maid in English, while the conductor busied
himself in preparing the tickets. "What are we to do, Philpotts?" This was said to the maid in English. "What if it should be--"

"Oh, no, never! We can't turn back. You must face it out now. There is
nothing to be afraid of, not in that way. I saw him, the gentleman, as
we came up. He's quite a gentleman, a good-looking military-looking
man, not at all the other sort--you know the sort I mean." Now while I accepted the compliment to myself, I was greatly mystified
by the allusion to the "other sort of man." "You think we can go on, that it's safe, even in this empty train? It
would have been so different in a crowd. We should have passed
unobserved among a lot of people." "But then there would have been a lot of people to observe us; some
one, perhaps, who knew you, some one who might send word." "I wish I knew who this passenger is. It would make me much easier in
my mind. It might be possible perhaps to get him on our side if he is
to go with us, at least to get him to help to take care of our
treasure until I can hand it over. What a burden it is! It's terribly
on my mind. I wonder how I could have done it. The mere thought makes
me shiver. To turn thief! Me, a common thief!" "Stealing is common enough, and it don't matter greatly, so long as
you're not found out. And you did it so cleverly too; with such a
nerve. Not a soul could have equalled you at the business. You might
have been at it all your life," said the maid, with affectionate
familiarity, that of a humble performer paying tribute to a great
artist in crime. She was a decent, respectable-looking body too, this confederate whom
I concluded was masquerading as maid. The very opposite of the younger
woman (about her more directly), a neatly dressed unassuming person,
short and squat in figure, with a broad, plain, and, to the casual
observer, honest face, slow in movement and of no doubt sluggish
temperament, not likely to be moved or distressed by conscience,
neither at the doing or the memory of evil deeds. Now the conductor came up and civilly bowed them towards their
carriage, mine, which they entered at the other end as I left it
making for the restaurant, not a little interested in what I had
heard. Who and what could these two people be with whom I was so strangely
and unexpectedly thrown? The one was a lady, I could hardly be
mistaken in that; it was proved in many ways, voice, air, aspect, all
spoke of birth and breeding, however much she might have fallen away
from or forfeited her high station. She might have taken to devious practices, or been forced into them;
whatever the cause of her present decadence she could not have been
always the thief she now confessed herself. I had it from her own
lips, she had acknowledged it with some show of remorse. There must
surely have been some excuse for her, some overmastering temptation,
some extreme pressure exercised irresistibly through her emotions, her
affections, her fears. What! this fair creature a thief? This beautiful woman, so richly
endowed by nature, so outwardly worthy of admiration, a despicable
degraded character within? It was hard to credit it. As I still
hesitated, puzzled and bewildered, still anxious to give her the
benefit of the doubt, she came to the door of the buffet where I was
now seated at lunch, and allowed me to survey her more curiously and
more at leisure. "A daughter of the gods, divinely tall and most divinely fair." The height and slimness of her graceful figure enhanced by the
tight-fitting tailor-made ulster that fell straight from collar to
heel; her head well poised, a little thrown back with chin in the air,
and a proud defiant look in her undeniably handsome face. Fine eyes of
darkest blue, a well-chiseled nose with delicate, sensitive nostrils,
a small mouth with firm closely compressed lips, a wealth of glossy
chestnut hair, gathered into a knot under her tweed travelling cap. As she faced me, looking straight at me, she conveyed the impression
of a determined unyielding character, a woman who would do much, dare
much, who would go her own road if so resolved, undismayed and
undeterred by any difficulties that might beset her. Then, to my surprise, although I might have expected it, she came and
seated herself at a table close to my elbow. She had told her
companion that she wanted to know more about me, that she would like
to enlist me in her service, questionable though it might be, and here
she was evidently about to make the attempt. It was a little
barefaced, but I admit that I was amused by it, and not at all
unwilling to measure swords with her. She was presumably an
adventuress, clever, designing, desirous of turning me round her
finger, but she was also a pretty woman. "I beg your pardon," she began almost at once in English, when the
waiter had brought her a plate of soup, and she was toying with the
first spoonful, speaking in a low constrained, almost sullen voice, as
though it cost her much to break through the _convenances_ in thus
addressing a stranger. "You will think it strange of me," she went on, "but I am rather
awkwardly situated, in fact in a position of difficulty, even of
danger, and I venture to appeal to you as a countryman, an English
officer." "How do you know that?" I asked, quickly concluding that my light
baggage had been subjected to scrutiny, and wondering what subterfuge
she would adopt to explain it. "It is easy to see that. Gentlemen of your cloth are as easily
recognizable as if your names were printed on your back." "And as they are generally upon our travelling belongings." I looked
at her steadily with a light laugh, and a crimson flush came on her
face. However hardened a character, she had preserved the faculty of
blushing readily and deeply, the natural adjunct of a cream-like
complexion. "Let me introduce myself in full," I said, pitying her obvious
confusion; and I handed her my card, which she took with a shamefaced
air, rather foreign to her general demeanour. "Lieut.-Colonel Basil Annesley, Mars and Neptune Club," she read
aloud. "What was your regiment?" "The Princess Ulrica Rifles, but I left it on promotion. I am
unattached for the moment, and waiting for reemployment." "Your own master then?" "Practically, until I am called upon to serve. I hope to get a staff
appointment. Meanwhile I am loafing about Europe." "Do you go beyond Lucerne?" "Across the St. Gothard certainly, and as far as Como, perhaps beyond. And you? Am I right in supposing we are to be fellow travellers by the
Engadine express?" I went on by way of saying something. "To Lucerne
or further?" CHAPTER II. "Probably." The answer was given with great hesitation. "If I go by
this train at all, that is to say." "Have you any doubts?" "Why, yes. To tell you the truth, I dread the journey. I have been
doing so ever since--since I felt it must be made. Now I find it ever
so much worse than I expected." "Why is that, if I may ask?" "You see, I am travelling alone, practically alone that is to say,
with only my maid." "And your child," I added rather casually, with no second thought, and
I was puzzled to understand why the chance phrase evoked another vivid
blush. "The child! Oh, yes, the child," and I was struck that she did not say
"my" child, but laid rather a marked stress on the definite article. "That of course increases your responsibility," I hazarded, and she
seized the suggestion. "Quite so. You see how I am placed. The idea of going all that way in
an empty train quite terrifies me." "I don't see why it should." "But just think. There will be no one in it, no one but ourselves. We
two lone women and you, single-handed. Suppose the five attendants and
the others were to combine against us? They might rob and murder us." "Oh, come, come. You must not let foolish fears get the better of your
common sense. Why should they want to make us their victims? I believe
they are decent, respectable men, the employes of a great company,
carefully selected. At any rate, I am not worth robbing, are you? Have
you any special reason for fearing thieves? Ladies are perhaps a
little too reckless in carrying their valuables about with them. Your
jewel-case may be exceptionally well lined." "Oh, but it is not; quite the contrary," she cried with almost
hysterical alacrity. "I have nothing to tempt them. And yet something
dreadful might happen; I feel we are quite at their mercy." "I don't. I tell you frankly that I think you are grossly exaggerating
the situation. But if you feel like that, why not wait? Wait over for
another train, I mean?" I am free to confess that, although my curiosity had been aroused, I
would much rather have washed my hands of her, and left her and her
belongings, especially the more compromising part, the mysterious
treasure, behind at Calais. "Is there another train soon?" she inquired nervously. "Assuredly--by Boulogne. It connects with the train from Victoria at
2.20 and the boat from Folkestone. You need only run as far as
Boulogne with this Engadine train, and wait there till it starts. I
think about 6 P.M."

"Will that not lose time?" "Undoubtedly you will be two hours later at Basle, and you may lose
the connection with Lucerne and the St. Gothard if you want to get on
without delay. To Naples I think you said?" "I did not say Naples. You said you were going to Naples," she replied
stiffly. "I did not mention my ultimate destination." "Perhaps not. I have dreamt it. But I do not presume to inquire where
you are going, and I myself am certainly not bound for Naples. But if
I can be of no further use to you I will make my bow. It is time for
me to get back to the train, and for my part I don't in the least want
to lose the Engadine express." She got up too, and walked out of the buffet by my side. "I shall go on, at any rate as far as Boulogne," she volunteered,
without my asking the question; and we got into our car together, she
entering her compartment and I mine. I heard her door bang, but I kept
mine still open. I smoked many cigarettes pondering over the curious episode and my new
acquaintance. How was I to class her? A young man would have sworn she
was perfectly straight, that there could be no guile in this
sweet-faced, gentle, well-mannered woman; and I, with my greater
experience of life and the sex, was much tempted to do the same. It
was against the grain to condemn her as all bad, a depredator, a woman
with perverted moral sense who broke the law and did evil things. But what else could I conclude from the words I had heard drop from
her own lips, strengthened and confirmed as they were by the
incriminating language of her companion? "Bother the woman and her dark blue eyes. I wish I'd never come across
her. A fine thing, truly, to fall in love with a thief. I hope to
heaven she will really leave the train at Boulogne; we ought to be
getting near there by now." I had travelled the road often enough to know it by heart, and I
recognized our near approach only to realize that the train did not
mean to stop. I turned over the leaves of Bradshaw and saw I had been
mistaken; the train skirted Boulogne and never entered the station. "Well, that settles it for the present, anyhow. If she still wants to
leave the train she must wait now until Amiens. That ought to suit her
just as well." But it would not; at least, she lost no time in expressing her
disappointment at not being able to alight at Boulogne. We had hardly passed the place when her maid's (or companion's) square
figure filled the open doorway of my compartment, and in her strong
deep voice she addressed a brief summons to me brusquely and
peremptorily:

"My lady wishes to speak to you." "And pray what does 'my lady' want with me?" I replied carelessly,
using the expression as a title of rank. "She is not 'my lady,' but 'my' lady, my mistress, and simply Mrs. Blair." The correction and information were vouchsafed with cold
self-possession. "Are you coming?" "I don't really see why I should," I said, not too civilly. "Why
should I be at her beck and call? If she had been in any trouble, any
serious trouble, such as she anticipated when talking to me at the
buffet, and a prey to imaginary alarms since become real, I should
have been ready to serve her or any woman in distress, but nothing of
this could have happened in the short hour's run so far." "I thought you were a gentleman," was the scornful rejoinder. "A nice
sort of gentleman, indeed, to sit there like a stock or a stone when a
lady sends for you!" "A lady!" There was enough sarcasm in my tone to bring a flush upon
her impassive face, a fierce gleam of anger in her stolid eyes; and
when I added, "A fine sort of lady!" I thought she would have struck
me. But she did no more than hiss an insolent gibe. "You call yourself an officer, a colonel? I call you a bounder, a
common cad." "Be off!" I was goaded into crying, angrily. "Get away with you; I
want to have nothing more to say to you or your mistress. I know what
you are and what you have been doing, and I prefer to wash my hands of
you both. You're not the kind of people I like to deal with or wish to
know." She stared at me open-mouthed, her hands clenched, her eyes half out
of her head. Her face had gone deadly white, and I thought she would
have fallen there where she stood, a prey to impotent rage. Now came a sudden change of scene. The lady, Mrs. Blair, as I had just
heard her called, appeared behind, her taller figure towering above
the maid's, her face in full view, vexed with varying acute emotions,
rage, grief, and terror combined. CHAPTER III. "What's all this?" she cried in great agitation. "Wait, do not speak,
Philpotts, leave him to me.... Do you go back to our place this
instant; we cannot be away together, you know that; _it_ must not be
left alone, one of us must be on guard over it. Hurry, hurry, I never
feel that _it_ is safe out of our sight. "Now, sir," Mrs. Blair turned on me fiercely, "will you be so good as
to explain how I find you quarrelling with my maid, permitting
yourself to cast aspersions, to make imputations upon two unprotected
women?" "How much have you overheard?" I asked, feeling very small already. My
self-reproach was aroused even before I quailed under the withering
contempt of her tone. "Enough to expect ample apology. How dare you, how dare you say such
things? What you may imagine, what unworthy idea you may have formed,
is beyond me to guess, but you can know nothing. You can have no real
reason for condemning me." "Let me admit that, and leave the matter there," I pleaded. I could
not bring myself to tell her that she was self-condemned, that she was
the principal witness against herself. It would have been too cruel,
ungenerous, to take an unfair advantage. Why should I constitute
myself her judge? She looked at me very keenly, her eyes piercing me through and
through. I felt that she was penetrating my inmost thoughts and
turning me inside out. "I will not leave it at that. I insist upon your speaking plainly. I
must know what is in your mind." "And if I refuse, distinctly, positively, categorically; if I deny
your contention, and protest that I have nothing to tell you?" "I shall not believe you. Come, please, let there be no more evasion. I must have it out. I shall stay here until you tell me what you think
of me, and why." She seated herself by my side in the narrow velvet seat of the small
compartment, so close that the folds of her tweed skirt (she had
removed her ulster) touched and rubbed against me. I was invaded by
the sweet savour of her gracious presence (she used some delightful
scent, _violette ideale_, I believe), by putting forth my hand a few
inches I might have taken hers in mine. She fixed her eyes on me with
an intent unvarying gaze that under other conditions would have been
intoxicating, but was now no more than disquieting and embarrassing. As I was still tongue-tied, she returned to her point with resolute
insistence. "Come, Colonel Annesley, how long is this to go on? I want and will
have an explanation. Why have you formed such a bad opinion of me?" "How do you know I have done so?" I tried to fence and fight with her,
but in vain. "I cannot be mistaken. I myself heard you tell my maid that you wished
to have nothing to say to us, that we were not your sort. Well! why is
that? How do I differ from the rest of--your world, let us call it?" "You do not, as far as I can see. At least you ought to hold your own
anywhere, in any society, the very best." "And yet I'm not 'your sort.' Am I a humbug, an impostor, an
adventuress, a puppet and play-actress? Or is it that I have
forfeited my right, my rank of gentlewoman, my position in the world,
your world?" I was silent, moodily, obstinately silent. She had hit the blot, and
could put but one interpretation upon it. I saw she guessed I knew
something. Not how much, perhaps, but something to her discredit. She
still was not satisfied; she would penetrate my reserve, overcome my
reticence, have it out of me willy nilly, whether I would or no. "You cannot surely refuse me? I have my reasons for desiring to know
the very worst." "Why drive me to that?" I schooled myself to seem hard and
uncompromising. I felt I was weakening under the subtle charm of her
presence, and the pretty pleading of her violet eyes; but I was still
resolute not to give way. "If you will only tell me why you think such evil I may be able to
justify myself, or at least explain away appearances that are against
me." "You admit there are such appearances? Remember, I never said so." "Then on what do you condemn me? You do condemn me, I am certain of
it," she insisted, seeing my gesture of negation. "Are you treating
me fairly, chivalrously, as a gentleman and a man of honour should? How can you reconcile it to your conscience?" "Some people talk very lightly of conscience, or use it when it is an
empty meaningless word," I said severely. "You imply that I have no conscience, or that I should feel the
qualms, the prickings of conscience?" "After what you've done, yes," I blurted out. "What have I done? What do you know of it, or what led me to do it? How dare you judge me without knowing the facts, without a shadow of
proof?" She sprang to her feet and passed to the door, where she
turned, as it were, at bay. "I have the very best proof, from your own lips. I heard you and your
maid talking together at Calais." "A listener, Colonel Annesley? Faugh!" "It was forced on me. You stood under my window there." I defended
myself indignantly. "I wish to heaven I had never heard. I did not
want to know; your secrets are your own affair." "And my actions, I presume?" she put in with superb indifference. "And their consequences, madam," but the shot failed rather of effect. She merely smiled and shook her head recklessly, contemptuously. Was
she so old a hand, so hardened in crime, that the fears of detection,
arrest, reprisals, the law and its penalties had no effect upon her? Undoubtedly at Calais she was afraid; some misgiving, some haunting
terror possessed her. Now, when standing before me fully confessed for
what she was, and practically at my mercy, she could laugh with cool
and unabashed levity and make little of the whole affair. If I had hoped that I had done with her now, when the murder was out,
I was very much mistaken. She had some further designs on me, I was
sure. She wanted to make use of me, how or in what way I could not
imagine; but I soon perceived that she was anxious to be friends. The
woman was in the ascendant, and, as I thought, the eternal feminine
ever agog to attract and subjugate the male, she would conquer my
admiration even if she could not secure my esteem. Suddenly, and quite without my invitation or encouragement, she
reseated herself by my side. "See, Colonel Annesley, let us come to an understanding." She said it
quite gaily and with no shadow of apprehension left in her, not a sign
of shame or remorse in her voice. Her mood had entirely changed. She
was _debonnaire_, frolicsome, overflowing with fun. "What do you mean to do? Give me into custody? Call in the gendarmes
at the next station? Have me taken red-handed with the--stolen
property--the 'swag,' you know the word, perhaps, in my possession?" "I am not a police officer; it's not my business," I answered gruffly. I thought this flippancy very much misplaced. "Or you might telegraph back to England, to London, to Scotland Yard:
'The woman Blair in the Engadine express. Wire along the line to
authorities, French and Swiss, to look out for her and arrest
preparatory to extradition.'" "I would much rather not continue this conversation, Mrs. Blair." "I am not 'Mrs. Blair,'" she cried, laughing merrily as at a
tremendous joke. "It is only one of my aliases. I am better known as
Slippery Sue, and the Countess of Plantagenet, and the Sly American,
and dashing Mrs. Mortimer, and--"

"Oh, please, please spare me. It does not matter, not a row of pins,
what you are called. I would rather not have the whole list," I
interrupted her, but could not check her restless tongue. "You shall hear, you must know all about me and my famous exploits. I
was the heroine of that robbery at Buckingham Palace. I was at the
State Ball, and made a fine harvest of jewels. I have swept a dozen
country-houses clean; I have picked pockets and lifted old lace from
the shop counters, and embezzled and forged--"

"And turned pirate, and held up trains, and robbed the Bank of
England," I added, falling into her humour and laughing as she rose to
her full height; and again her mood changed, dominating me with
imperious air, her voice icily cold in manner, grave and repellent. "Why not? I am a thief; you believe me to be a common thief." CHAPTER IV. I was too much taken aback to do better than stammer out helplessly,
hopelessly, almost unintelligibly, a few words striving to remind her
of her own admission. Nothing, indeed, could take the sting out of
this, and yet it was all but impossible to accuse her, to blame her
even for what she had done. She read that in my eyes, in my abashed face, my hands held out
deprecating her wrath, and her next words had a note of conciliation
in them. "There are degrees of wrong-doing, shades of guilt," she said. "Crimes, offences, misdeeds, call them as you please, are not
absolutely unpardonable; in some respects they are excusable, if not
justifiable. Do you believe that?" "I should like to do so in your case," I replied gently. "You know I
am still quite in the dark." "And you must remain so, for the present at any rate," she said
firmly and sharply. "I can tell you nothing, I am not called upon to
do it indeed. We are absolute strangers, I owe you no explanation, and
I would give you none, even if you asked." "I have not asked and shall not ask anything." "Then you are willing to take it so, to put the best construction on
what you have heard, to forget my words, to surrender your
suspicions?" "If you will tell me only this: that I may have confidence in you,
that I may trust you, some day, to enlighten me and explain what seems
so incomprehensible to-day." "I am sorely tempted to do so now," she paused, lost for a time in
deep and anxious thought; and then, after subjecting me to a long and
intent scrutiny, she shook her head. "No, it cannot be, not yet. You
must earn the right to my confidence, you must prove to me that you
will not misuse it. There are others concerned; I am not speaking for
myself alone. You must have faith in me, believe in me or let it be." She had beaten me, conquered me. I was ready to be her slave with
blind, unquestioning obedience. "As you think best. I will abide by your decision. Tell me all or
nothing. If the first I will help you, if the latter I will also help
you as far as lies in my power." "Without conditions?" And when I nodded assent such a smile lit up her
face that more than repaid me, and stifled the doubts and qualms that
still oppressed me. But, bewitched by the sorcery of her bright eyes,
I said bravely:

"I accept service--I am yours to command. Do with me what you please." "Will you give me your hand on it?" She held out hers, gloveless,
white and warm, and it lay in mine just a second while I pressed it to
my lips in token of fealty and submission. "You shall be my knight and champion, and I say it seriously. I may
call you to fight for me, at least to defend and protect me in my
present undertaking. The way is by no means clear. I cannot foresee
what may happen on this journey. There are risks, dangers before me. I
may ask you to share them. Do you repent already?" She had been watching me closely for any sign of wavering, but I
showed none, whatever I might feel in my inmost heart. "I shall not disappoint you," was what I said, and, in a firm assured
voice, added, "You have resolved then to travel forward in this
train?" "I must, I have no choice. I dare not tarry by the way. But I no
longer feel quite alone and unprotected. If trouble arises, I tell you
candidly I shall try to throw it on you." "From what quarter do you anticipate it?" I asked innocently enough. "You expect to be pursued, I presume?" She held up a warning finger. "That is not in the compact. You are not to be inquisitive. Ask me no
questions, please, but wait on events. For the present you must be
satisfied so, and there is nothing more to be said." "I shall see you again, I trust," I pleaded, as she rose to leave me. "If you wish, by all means. Why should we not dine together in the
dining-car by and by?" she proposed with charming frankness, in the
lighter mood that sat so well upon her. "The waiters will be there to
play propriety, and no Mrs. Grundy within miles." "Or your maid might be chaperon at an adjoining table." "Philpotts? Impossible! She cannot leave--she must remain on duty; one
of us must be in charge always. Who knows what might happen when our
backs were turned? We might lose it--it might be abstracted. Horrible
thought after all it has cost us." "'It' has evidently an extraordinary value in your eyes. If only I
might be allowed to--" know more, I would have said, but she chose to
put other words into my mouth. "To join us in the watching? Take your turn of 'sentry go'--isn't that
your military term? Become one of us, belong to a gang of thieves,
liable like the rest of us to the law? Ah, that would be trying you
too far. I see your face fall." "I am ready to do much to serve you. I would gladly help you, see you
through any difficulty by the way, but I'm afraid I must draw the line
at active partnership," I answered a little lamely under her mocking
eyes. Once more, as suddenly as before, she veered round. "There is a limit, then, to your devotion?" She was coldly sarcastic
now, and I realized painfully that I had receded in her favour. "I
must not expect unhesitating self-sacrifice? So be it; it is well to
know how far I may go. I sincerely hope I may have no need of you at
all. How thankful I am that I never let you into my secrets! Good
afternoon," and with a contemptuous whisk of her skirts and a laugh,
she was gone. "I'll have nothing more to say to her," I cried in great heat, vexed
and irritated beyond measure at her capricious temper. I should only
be dragged into some pitfall, some snare, some dire unpleasantness. But what did I know of her real character? What of my first doubts and
suspicions? She had by no means dispelled them. She had only
bamboozled me by her insinuating ways, had drawn me on by her guileful
cleverness to pity and promises to befriend her. I had accorded her an
active sympathy which in my more sober moments I felt she did not,
could not, deserve; if I were not careful she would yet involve me in
some inextricable mess. So for half an hour I abused her fiercely; I swore at myself hotly as
an ass, a hopeless and unmitigated ass, ever ready to be betrayed and
beguiled by woman's wiles, the too easy victim of the first pretty
face I saw. The fit lasted for quite half an hour, and then came the
reaction. I heard her rich deep voice singing in my ears, I felt the
haunting glamour of her eyes, remembered her gracious presence, and my
heart went out to her. I was so sorry for her: how could I cast her
off? How could I withhold my countenance if she were in real distress? She was a woman--a weak, helpless woman; I could not desert and
abandon her. However reprehensible her conduct might have been, she
had a claim to my protection from ill-usage, and I knew in my heart
that she might count upon a good deal more. I knew, of course, that I
ought not to stand between her and the inevitable Nemesis that awaits
upon misdeeds, but what if I helped her to avoid or escape it? The opportunity was nearer at hand than I thought. My kindly
intentions, bred of my latest sentiments towards Mrs. Blair, were soon
to be put to the test. CHAPTER V.


The train reached Amiens punctually at 5 P.M., and a stoppage
of five minutes was announced. I got out to stretch my legs on the
platform. No one took much notice of us; it must have been known that
the train was empty, for there were no waiters from the buffet with
_cafe au lait_ or fruit, or _brioches_--no porters about, or other
officials. I had not expected to see any passengers come on board the train, a
through express, made up of sleeping-cars and a supplementary charge
on the tickets. But on running into the station (ours was the first
carriage) I had noticed a man standing with a valise in his hand, and
I saw him following the train down the platform when we stopped. He
addressed himself to a little group of conductors who had already
alighted, and were gossiping idly among themselves, having nothing
else to do. One of them indicated our particular attendant, to whom
he spoke, and who brought him directly to our carriage. Evidently the newcomer was bound for Lucerne _via_ Basle. Here was one
more occupant of our neglected train, another companion and fellow
traveller in our nearly empty sleeping-car. Curiosity and something
more led me to examine this man closely; it was a strange, undefined,
inexplicable sense of foreboding, of fateful forecast, that he and I
were destined to be thrown together unpleasantly, to be much mixed up
with one another, and to the comfort and satisfaction of neither. Who and what was he? His position in life, his business, trade or
calling were not to be easily fixed; a commercial man, an agent or
"traveller" on his own account, well-to-do and prosperous, was the
notion borne out by his dress, his white waistcoat and coloured shirt
of amazing pattern (a hint of his Italian origin), his rings and the
showy diamond pin in his smart necktie. I added to this, my first impression, by further observation, for
which I soon had abundant opportunity. When the train moved on, he
came and took his seat on the flap seat (or _strapontin_) just
opposite my compartment. I could not tell why, until presently he
made overtures of sociability and began a desultory talk across the
corridor. My cabin or compartment, it will be remembered, was the last
but one; the newcomer had been given the one behind mine, and here
from his seat he commanded the whole length of the carriage forward,
which included the compartment occupied by Mrs. Blair and her party. I cannot say that I liked his looks or was greatly attracted by him. He was not prepossessing. Fair, with a flaccid unwholesome complexion,
foxy haired, his beard cut to a point, small moustaches curled upward
showing thin pale lips, and giving his mouth a disagreeable curve also
upwards, a sort of set smile that was really a sardonic sneer,
conveying distrust and disbelief in all around. His eyes were so deep
set as to be almost lost in their recesses behind his sandy eyelashes,
and he kept them screwed up close, with the intent watchful gaze of an
animal about to make a spring. His whole aspect, his shifty, restless
manner, his furtive looks, all were antipathetic and to his great
advantage. I did not take to him at all, and plainly showed him that
I had no desire for his talk or his company. It was not easy to shake him off, however. He would take no offence; I
was cold to positive rudeness, I snubbed him unmercifully; I did not
answer his remarks or his questions, which were incessant and
shamelessly inquisitorial. Nothing disconcerted him. I had all but
shut the door of my compartment in his face, but it suddenly occurred
to me that he was capable of wandering on, and when he found the
ladies inflicting his greasy attentions upon them. I felt that I had better submit to his unpalatable society than let
him bore Mrs. Blair with his colossal impudence. How right I was in this became at once apparent. He had taken out a
cigar-case and pressed one upon me with such pertinacious, offensive
familiarity that I could see no way out of it than by saying
peremptorily:

"You cannot smoke here. There are ladies in that compartment yonder." "Ladies indeed! You surprise me," but I saw a look on his face that
convinced me he perfectly well knew they were there. "Ladies, aha! How
many, may I ask?" "One at least, with her maid and a child," I replied gruffly. "And a child," he repeated, as if by rote. "Does monsieur, tell me
quickly, I--I--beg--know them! Can he describe them to me?" "I shall tell you nothing about them. What the mischief do you mean by
asking me questions? Find out what you want for yourself." I was hot
and indignant with the brute. "By George, you're right. I'll go and ask for leave to smoke. I shall
find out then," and he jumped up, the spring seat closing with a bang
from under him. The noise concealed the sound of the electric bell which I had pressed
to summon the attendant, as I rushed out and caught the other man by
the arm. "You'll do nothing of the kind," I cried with very vigorous emphasis,
backed by all my strength. "I'll shake you to a jelly if you dare to
move another inch." "Here, I say, drop it. Who the deuce are you? None of your bally
nonsense. Hands off, or I'll make you." But he was too soft and flabby to avail much, and I dragged him back
helplessly with tightened grip, only too delighted to try conclusions
with him. At this moment the conductor appeared upon the scene, and began to
expostulate loudly. "Here, I say, what's all this? It can't be allowed. No fighting and
quarrelling are permitted." "Well, then, people must behave themselves," I retorted. "Don't let
this chap annoy your passengers." "I have done nothing to annoy them," stammered the other. "You shall
answer for this. I've done no harm." "I'll see you don't. Get in there and stay there;" and with that I
forced him, almost flung him, into his compartment, where he fell
panting upon the velvet sofa. "You'd better keep an eye on him," I said to the conductor, who was
inclined to be disagreeable, and was barely pacified by a couple of
five-franc pieces. "Fellows of this sort are apt to be a nuisance, and
we must take care of the ladies." As I said this I saw Mrs. Blair's face peering out beyond her door a
little nervously, but she ventured to come right out and along the
passage towards me. "What has happened? I heard some noise, high words, a scuffle." "Some ruffian who got in at Amiens, and who has had to be taught
manners. I told him not to smoke here, and he wanted to intrude
himself upon you, which I prevented, a little forcibly." "Where is he? In here?" and she followed the indication of my thumb as
I jerked it back, and looked over my shoulder into the compartment. "Ah!" The ejaculation was involuntary, and one of acute painful
surprise, the gesture that accompanied it spontaneous and full of
terror. "That man! that man!" she gasped. "He must not see me; let me go, let
me go!" But her strength failed her, and but for my supporting arm she would
have fallen to the ground. Half-fainting, I led her back to her own
compartment, where her maid received her tenderly and with comforting
words. There was clearly a strong bond of affection between these two,
possibly companions and confederates in wrong-doing; the delicate and
refined woman, tormented by the inner qualms of outraged conscience,
relied and leant upon the stronger and more resolute nature. "What's come to you, ma'am? There, there, don't give way," said the
maid, softly coaxing her and stroking her hands. "Oh, Philpotts, fancy! He is there! Falfani, the--the--you know--"

Of course I saw it all now. Stupid ass! I might have guessed it all
along. I had puzzled my brains vainly trying to place him, to fix his
quality and condition in life, neglecting the one simple obvious
solution to which so many plain indications pointed. The man, of
course, was a detective, an officer or private agent, and his dirty
business--you see, I was already shaken in my honesty, and now with
increasing demoralization under seductive influences I was already
inclined to cross over to the other side of the frontier of crime--his
dirty business was the persecution of my sweet friend. "What are we to do now?" asked Mrs. Blair, her nervous trepidation
increasing. "I begin to think we shall fail, we cannot carry it
through, we shall lose our treasure. It will be taken from us." "You cannot, you must not, shall not turn back now," said the maid
with great determination. "We must devise something, some way, of
outwitting this Falfani. We did it before, we must do it again. After
all he has no power over us; we are in France and shall be in
Switzerland by daylight." "We ought to go on, you think? Wouldn't it be better to slip out of
the train at the first station and run away?" "He would do the same. He does not intend to let us out of his sight. And how much the better should we be? It would be far worse; we should
be much more at his mercy if we left the train. The journey would
still have to be made; we must get to the end, the very end, or we'd
better not have started." "He will know then, if he sticks to us. We cannot hide it from him,
nor where we have taken it; we shall never be able to keep it, they
will come and claim it and recover it;" and she cried hysterically: "I
cannot see my way; it's all dark, black as night. I wish--I wish--"

"That you had never done it?" quickly asked the maid; and I noticed a
slight sarcasm in her tone that was not without its effect in bracing
up and strengthening her companion's shattered nerves. "No, no, no; I do not regret it, and I never shall. I did it
deliberately, counting the cost fully, and it shall be paid, however
heavy it may be. It is not regret that tortures me, but the fear of
failure when so near success." "We will succeed yet. Do not be cast down, my sweet dear." The maid
patted her on the cheek with great affection. "We shall find a way. This gentleman, the colonel here, will help us, perhaps." "Will you?" Who could resist her pleading voice and shining eyes? If I
had had any scruples left I would have thrown them to the winds. "Whatever lies in my power to do shall be done without stint or
hesitation," I said solemnly, careless of all consequences, content to
hold her hand and earn her heartfelt thanks. What though I were
pawning my honour? CHAPTER VI. [_The Statement of Domenico Falfani, confidential agent,
made to his employers, Messrs. Becke and Co., of the Private
Inquiry Offices, 279 St. Martin's Lane, W.C._]


I propose, gentlemen, to set down here at length the story of my
mission, and the events which befell me from the time I first received
my instructions. You desired me to pursue and call to strict account a
certain lady of title, who had fallen away from her high estate and
committed an act of rank felony. The circumstances which led up to her
disappearance and the partners of her flight are already well known to
you. The only indication given me, as you are aware, was that I might take
it for granted that she would go abroad and probably by the most
direct route to the South, to Switzerland and across the Alps into
Italy. My orders having only reached me in the early morning, the
theft having presumably been committed during the night previous to
Sunday, September 21, I was unable to ascertain through the tourist
agencies whether any and what tickets had been booked in the
directions indicated. My most urgent duty then was to watch the outgoing Continental trains,
the first of which left Charing Cross for Dover and Calais at 9
A.M. I closely watched it therefore, and its passengers, and
travelled with it to Cannon Street, where I continued my search, but
without result. I was greatly helped in my quest by the not unusual
fact noticeable on Sundays, that travellers abroad are few in number. I had no difficulty in satisfying myself that the lady and her party
were not in this train, and I returned at once to Charing Cross in
time for the second Continental train, the 10 A.M. I had resolved to book myself by that as far as Amiens, for I knew
that, once there, I should have reached a central point or junction, a
sort of throat through which every train moving southward to Paris or
Switzerland must pass. There remained, of course, the route via Dover by Ostend and through
Brussels; but I had been informed by you that Ludovic Tiler, my
colleague and coworker, was to undertake the inquiry on that line. It is part of my business to be thoroughly familiar with the
Continental Bradshaw, and I soon ticked off the different trains that
interested me. There was first the 11 A.M. from Victoria by Dover and
Calais, where it connected with the Paris express and the sleeping-car
Engadine express, both of which run through Amiens, where, however,
the latter branches off to Basle and beyond, with special cars for
Lucerne, Zurich and Coire. Then came the 2.20 P.M. from Charing Cross to Folkestone, and
so to Boulogne, Amiens and the rest, travelling the same road as the
Engadine express. This was the last of the day service, as it gave
most time, allowing people to start at the very latest moment, and I
felt it quite probable that my lady would prefer to take it. I reached Amiens a little before 5 P.M., and I had a wait of
half an hour for the first express from Calais. I was greatly
disappointed when at last it appeared issuing from the tunnel, and
passed me where I stood at the commencement of the platform, taking
stock of each carriage as it passed. The train seemed to be quite
empty; there were no passengers, so the officials, the conductors,
informed me when I talked to them, sad and unhappy at the certain loss
of tips. Only one of them had any luck, Jules l'Echelle, of the
Lucerne sleeping-car, who had one or two people on board. I questioned him not very hopefully, but was agreeably surprised when
he told me that his clients consisted of two ladies with a child, and
one gentleman. English? Yes, all English. The lady, quite a lady, a
_grande dame belle personne_, tall, fine figure, well dressed; her
companion no doubt her servant; the child, well, an ordinary child, an
infant in arms. What would you? I had them, I felt sure. There could be no mistaking this description. I held them in the hollow of my hand. Here they were in this car, and
it would be all my own fault if they escaped me. It would be necessary
only to verify my conclusions, to identify the lady according to the
description and photograph given me. For the rest I knew what to do. But now a quite unexpected difficulty turned up. As I have said, there was one other passenger, a gentleman, in the
car, and I felt it would be prudent to make his acquaintance. No doubt
I could tell at the first glance whether or not he was an ordinary
traveller, or whether he was a friend and accomplice of the lady under
observation. I regret to say that he met me in a very hostile spirit. I was at
great pains to be affable, to treat him with all the courtly
consideration I have at command, and I flatter myself that in the
matter of tact and good-breeding I do not yield to princes of the
blood royal. But my civility was quite thrown away. The man was an
absolute brute, abrupt, overbearing, rude. Nothing would conciliate
him. I offered him a cigar (a Borneo of the best brand, at 10s. the
hundred), and he not only refused it, but positively forbade me to
smoke. There were ladies in the carriage, he said (this was the first
reference made to them), and, when declining to be ordered about, I
proposed to refer the question to themselves, he threw himself
violently upon me and assaulted me brutally. Fortunately the attendant came to my rescue or I should have been
seriously injured. He lifted me into my compartment very kindly, and
acted like an old friend, as indeed he was, for I remembered him as
the Jules l'Echelle with whom I served some time back as an assistant
at the Baths of Bormio. It was, of course, clear to my mind that my assailant was associated
in some way with the lady, and probably a confederate. I saw that I
must know more about him, with the least possible delay, and as soon
as Jules had left me, promising to return later and talk of old times,
and the changes that had come over us since then, I ventured to look
out and get a glimpse of the other man, I will not call him gentleman
after his conduct. He was nowhere in sight, but I could hear his voice, several voices,
talking together at the far end. No doubt he had joined his friends in
their compartment, and the moment seemed opportune to visit his. It
was next to mine, and the door stood invitingly open. A few minutes,
seconds even, would be enough to tell me something of his identity,
perhaps all I wanted to. At least he made no pretence at mystery; his light baggage lay about,
a dressing bag, a roll of rugs, a couple of sticks and an umbrella
strapped together, all very neat and precise and respectable, and all
alike furnished with a parchment tag or label bearing in plain
language all that I wanted to know. His name was printed "Lieut.-Col. Basil Annesley," and his club, the
Mars and Neptune, that famous military house in Piccadilly. Underneath, on all, his destination was written, "Hotel Bellevue,
Bellagio, Como." There could never be the least difficulty in finding
this person if I wanted him, as I thought likely. He was a blustering,
swashbuckling army officer, who could always be brought to account if
he misconducted himself, or mixed himself up in shady transactions. In my great contentment at the discovery I had been wanting in
caution, and I lingered too long on forbidden ground. "You infernal scoundrel," cried some one from the door, and once more
I felt an angry hand on my shoulder. "How come you here? Explain
yourself." "It's all a mistake," I began, trying to make the best of it,
struggling to get free. But he still held me in a grip of iron, and it
was not until my friend Jules appeared that I got out of the enemy's
clutches. "Here, I say!" shouted Jules vaguely. "This won't do, you know. I
shall have to lodge a complaint against you for brawling." "Complaint, by George!" he replied, shaking his fist at me. "The boot
is on the other leg, I take it. How is it that I find this chap in my
compartment? Foraging about, I believe." "Indeed no, Colonel Annesley," I protested, forgetting myself; and he
caught at it directly. "Oho, so you know my name! That proves what I say. You've been messing
about and overhauling my things. I won't stand it. The man's a thief. He will have to be locked up." "I'm not the only thief in the car, then," I cried, for I was now mad
with him and his threats. "I don't know what you're driving at, or whom you think to accuse; but
I tell you this, my friend, that I shall call in the police at the
next station and hand you over." I looked at the conductor Jules, appealing for protection. I saw at
once that it would be terrible for me to have any trouble with the
police. They could do me no harm, but I might be delayed, obliged to
leave the train, and I should lose sight of the lady, possibly fail
altogether. Jules responded at once. "Come, come," he said. "You're talking big. You might own the whole train. Who might you be?" "None of your confounded impudence," shouted the Colonel, as he
pointed to one of the luggage labels. "That's who I am. It's good
enough to get you discharged before you're a much older man. And now I
call upon you to do your duty. I have caught this man under suspicious
circumstances in the very act of rifling my effects. I insist upon his
being taken into custody." "There isn't enough for that," Jules answered, still my friend, but
weakening a little before this masterly army officer, and I felt that
I must speak for myself. "And if you stop me I will have the law of you for false imprisonment,
and bring heavy damages. You will be doing me a great injury in my
business." "Precisely what I should like to do, my fine fellow. I can guess what
your business is. Nothing reputable, I feel sure." "I'm not ashamed of it, and I have powerful friends behind me. I am
acting for--"

"Yes?" he asked me mockingly, for I had checked my tongue, fearing to
say too much. "It is my affair. Enough that you will feel the weight of their hands
if you interfere with me in carrying out their instructions." "Well, anyhow, tell me who you are. I've a right to know that in
exchange. You chose to help yourself to my name; now I insist upon
knowing yours." I told him, not very readily, as may be supposed. "Domenico Falfani? Is that your own or a 'purser's' name? Come, you
know what I mean. It's part of your stock in trade to understand all
languages, including slang. Is that the name he has given you?" --this
to the conductor. "Show me your way-bill, your _feuille de route_." Jules at a nod from me produced it, and no doubt understood my reason
when in my turn I claimed to see it. "I have a clear right," I insisted, overruling all objections raised
by the Colonel; and taking it into my hands I read the names aloud,
"Colonel Annesley, Mrs. Blair, maid and child." I pronounced the name
with great contempt. "You talk of purser's names," I said sneeringly. "What do you think of
this? Blair, indeed! No more the woman's name than Smith or Jones, or
what you please." "Speak more respectfully of a lady," cried the Colonel, catching me
tightly by the arm. "Lady? Oho! Don't, Colonel, drop it. At any rate, she is not Mrs.
Blair; you may take that from me," I said as impressively as a judge
on the bench. "And what's more, Colonel, I wouldn't press charges you
can't substantiate against me, or I may hit back with another not so
easy to meet. Try to stop me at the next station, and I'll stop your
pal--ah, don't"--he had a cruelly strong hand--"your Mrs. Blair, and
she'll find herself in a particularly tight place." "We'll see about that," said the Colonel, who kept a stiff face, but
was, I think, rather crestfallen. "I shall act as I think best. Anyhow, get out of this, both of you. This is my private berth, and
you are trespassing." CHAPTER VII. Whatever may have been the Colonel's intentions when he caught me in
his compartment, something, and I think my last words, led him to
modify them. He felt, probably, that if he attacked me I might
retaliate unpleasantly. I ought to be able to hold my own with him,
although in truth I was not over happy at the course events had taken,
and I could not compliment myself on my good management. I had not been overprudent; I had pressed my attentions on him rather
abruptly, although I had the excuse that I usually found them well
received, thanks to my affable address; again I had behaved most
incautiously in penetrating his identity. And, worse than all, I had still no certainty. I could only surmise
that the lady was the one I was in search of, for I had not as yet
clapt eyes on her, and I had been to some extent driven to show my
hand before I had made my ground good. So the first thing I did on
regaining my own compartment was to ring for Jules, the conductor, and
put before him the photograph with which I was provided, and ask him
if he recognized it. "But perfectly. It is the lady yonder," he said promptly. "Is it your
own, or did you find it or annex it from next door? Ah, your own; and
what have you to do with her?" "I may tell you some day, Jules. For the present you must know that I
am after her; I have to watch her, stick to her like her shadow until
it is time to act." "An adventuress, eh?" "She is in possession of what does not belong to her; something she
abstracted from--from--Never mind where, and it must be recovered from
her here, or after she leaves the car." "Afterwards, please. We can't have any scandal on board here." "Five hundred francs wouldn't tempt you to let me have a free hand for
just half an hour? I could do it, say somewhere short of Basle, and on
reaching there make off. No one should be any the wiser, and they, the
women, wouldn't dare to make a fuss." "It's I who do not dare--not for twice five hundred francs. My place
is worth more than that; and if it is a dog's life, it is better than
lying on the straw. Besides, there's her friend the Colonel, he'll be
on the alert, you may depend." "So must I be, and I must find some way to circumvent him. I'll be
even with him. He sha'n't beat me, the overbearing, hectoring brute. It's between him and me, and I think I'm a match for him." I spoke this confidently to my friend, who engaged for his part to do
all in his power to assist, or at least to do nothing against me, and
I was content to bide my time. Pride goes before a fall. I was not as
clever as I thought, and shall have to tell you how seriously I had
underrated his worth in the coming trial of strength. As the train sped on and the night began to close in on us, I remained
quietly in my berth, pondering over my position, and in considering
the course I should adopt under various contingencies. The first and
most serious danger was that the lady should succeed in leaving the
train at any of the intermediate stations at Basle, and so give me
the slip. There were Laon, Rheims, Chaumont, and the rest. It must be my business to keep close watch against any evasion of this
kind, and Jules had promised to help. I did not look for any such
attempt until far into the night, when the stations were empty and
half-dark, and I agreed with Jules to divide the hours till daylight,
he taking the first, I the last. We were due at Basle at 5 A.M., and I
expected to join forces then with Tiler, my colleague, coming from the
side of Ostend, via Brussels and Strasburg. Meanwhile I kept quiet and made no sign beyond showing that I was
there and on the spot ready to act if it should be necessary. Thus,
when the train slackened speed on approaching a station, I was always
on the move and the first to descend and patrol the platform. The
Colonel always got out too, but he never accosted me; indeed, he
seemed disposed to despise me, to ignore my existence, or dare me to
the worst I could do. I suppose the lady must have been of the same mind, for when
dinner-time arrived, she came boldly out of her compartment, and I met
her face to face for the first time, on her way to the restaurant. I
was standing at the door of my compartment. "Dinner is ready," the Colonel said to me significantly, but I did not
choose to understand, and shook my head, holding my ground. "You are coming to dinner, I think," he repeated in a sharp commanding
way, as if he were talking to his soldiers. "I shall please myself about that," I replied gruffly. "Not a bit of it. One moment," he whispered to the lady, who walked
on, and turned again to me: "Now see here, my friend, I do not mean to
leave you behind. You will come to the dining-car with us, and no two
ways about it, even if I have to carry you." "I won't dine with you," I cried. "I never asked you to dine with me, but you shall dine when I do. I
will pay for your dinner, but I wouldn't sit at table with you for
worlds," he shouted with scornful laughter. "You're going to dine
under my eye, that's all, even though the sight of you is enough to
make one sick. So come along, sharp's the word, see? Walk first; let
him pass you, Mrs. Blair." I felt I had no choice. He was capable of again assaulting me. There
was something in his manner that cowed me, and I was obliged in spite
of myself to give way. There were only three of us in the dining-car, and we were not a very
merry company. Our tables were laid almost adjoining, and there was no
conversation between us, except when the Colonel asked me with
contemptuous civility what wine I preferred. He did not talk to the
lady, or the merest commonplaces, for I was within earshot. But I made
an excellent dinner, I must confess. I had eaten nothing since Amiens. Then I got back to my berth, where the bed was made. I threw myself on
to it, rejoiced at the prospect of getting a few hours' sleep while
Jules remained on the watch. He was to call me a little before reaching Basle, and, like an ass
that I was, I fully relied on his doing so, believing him to be my
friend. Such friendship as his did not bear any great strain, as I
learnt presently to my great chagrin. I slept heavily, but in fitful snatches, as a man does when constantly
disturbed by the whirr and whizzing of the train, the rattle and
jangle of wheels passing over ill-jointed points. After one of the
longest periods of unconsciousness I awoke, aroused by the complete
absence of noise. The train was at a standstill in some station and
making a very protracted halt. Something moved me to lift the blind and look out, and I saw, not
without uneasiness, that we were at Basle. I thought I recognized the
station, but I soon made out for certain the name "Basilea" (Basle),
and saw the clock with the fingers at five-thirty. People were already
on the move, work-people, the thrifty, industrious Swiss, forestalling
time, travellers in twos and threes arriving and departing by the
early train through this great junction on the frontier of
Switzerland. Stay! What? Who are those crossing the platform hurriedly. Great
powers! Right under my eyes, a little party of four, two females, two
men accompanying them, escorting them, carrying rugs and parcels. There could not be a shadow of doubt. It was the lady, the so-called Mrs. Blair, in full flight, with all
her belongings, and under the care and guidance not only of the
Colonel, that of course, but also of the perfidious Jules l'Echelle. He had sold me! All doubt of his treachery disappeared when on rushing
to the door I found I had been locked into my compartment. I rang the electric bell frantically, again and again. I got no
answer; I threw up the window and thrust my head out, shouting for
help, but got none, only one or two sluggish porters came up and asked
what was amiss, answering stolidly, when they heard, that it was none
of their business. "They had no key, it must be a mistake. The
conductor would explain, I must wait till he came." Presently Jules arrived, walking very leisurely from the direction of
the restaurant, and he stood right under my window with a grin on his
face and mockery in his voice. "What's wrong? Locked in? Can't be possible? Who could have done it? I
will inquire," he said slowly and imperturbably. "No, no; let me out first. You can do it if you choose. I believe it
was your trickery from the first. I must get out, I tell you, or they
will escape me," I cried. "Not unlikely. I may say it is pretty certain they will. That was the
Colonel's idea; you'd better talk to him about it next time you see
him." "And that will be never, I expect. He's not going to show up here
again." "There you're wrong; he will be back before the train starts, you may
rely on that, and you'll be able to talk to him. We'll let you out
then," he was laughing at me, traitor that he was. "Here he comes. We're just going on." Now I saw my last chance of successfully performing my mission
disappearing beyond recall. I renewed my shouts and protests, but was
only laughed at for my pains. The railway officials at Basle might
have interfered, but Jules answered for me, declaring with a
significant gesture that I was in drink and that he would see to me. I quite despaired. Already the train was moving out of the station,
when, to my intense joy, I caught sight of Ludovic Tiler, who came
down the platform running alongside us, and crying, "Falfani,
Falfani," as he recognized me. "Don't mind me," I shouted to him. "I must go on, I can't help myself. It's for you to take it up now. She's in the restaurant. You'll easily
know her, in a long ulster, with her maid and the child. You can't
miss her. By the Lord, she is standing at the door! Get away with
you, don't let her see you talking with me. She must not know we are
acting in common, and I do hope she hasn't noticed. Be off, I tell
you, only let me hear of you; wire to Lucerne what you're doing. Address telegraph-office. Send me a second message at Goeschenen. I
shall get one or both. Say where I may answer and where I can join
you." CHAPTER VIII. The timely appearance of my colleague, Ludovic Tiler, consoled me a
little for the loss of the lady and her lot. I had failed, myself, but
I hoped that with my lead he would get on to the scent and keep to it. Ere long, on the first intimation from him I might come into the game
again. I should be guided by his wire if I got it. For the moment I was most concerned to find out whether Tiler's
intervention and my short talk with him had been noticed by the other
side. If the Colonel knew that another man was on his friend's track,
he would surely have left the train at once so as to go to her
assistance. But he was still in the train, I could hear him plainly,
speaking to Jules in the next compartment. Again, as we sped on, I
reasoned favourably from their leaving me as I was, still under lock
and key. No one came near me until after we had passed Olten station,
the first stopping-place after Basle, where I could alight and retrace
my steps. By holding on to me I guessed that I was still thought to
be the chief danger, and that they had no suspicion of Tiler's
existence. I laughed in my sleeve, but not the less did I rage and storm when
Jules l'Echelle came with the Colonel to release me. "You shall pay for this," I cried hotly. "As for you, l'Echelle, it shall cost you your place, and I'll take
the law of you, Colonel Annesley; I'll get damages and you shall
answer for your illegal action." "Pfui!" retorted the Colonel. "The mischief you can do is nothing to
what you might have done. We can stand the racket. I've bested you for
the present--that's the chief thing, anyway. You can't persecute the
poor lady any more." "Poor lady! Do you know who she is or was, anyway?" "Of course I do," he answered bold as brass. "Did she let on? Told you, herself? My word! She's got a nerve. I
wonder she'd own to it after all she's done." "Silence!" he shouted, in a great taking. "If you dare to utter a
single word against that lady, I'll break every bone in your body." "I'm saying nothing--it's not me, it's all the world. It was in the
papers, you must have read them, the most awful story, such--such
depravity there never was--such treachery, such gross misconduct." He caught me by the arm so violently and looked so fierce that for a
moment I was quite alarmed. "Drop it, I tell you. Leave the lady alone, both by word and deed. You'll never find her again, I've seen to that. She has escaped you." "Aha! You think so? Don't be too cocksure. We understand our
business better than that, we don't go into it single-handed. You've
collared me for a bit, but I'm not the only one in the show." "The only one that counts," he said sneering. "Am I?" I answered in the same tone. "What if I had a pal waiting for
me at Basle, who received my instructions there--just when you thought
you had me safe--and has now taken up the running?" He was perfectly staggered at this, I could see plainly. I thought at
first he would have struck me, he was so much upset. "You infernal villain," he shouted, "I believe the whole thing is a
confounded lie! Explain." "I owe you no explanations," I replied stiffly, "my duty is to my
employers. I only account to them for my conduct. I am a confidential
agent." He seemed impressed by this, for when he spoke again it was more
quietly. But he looked me very straight in the eyes. I felt that he
was still likely to give trouble. "Well, I suppose I cannot expect you to tell me things. You must go
your own way and I shall go mine." "I should advise you to leave it, Colonel," I said, civilly enough. "I'm always anxious to conciliate and avoid unpleasantness. Give up
the whole business; you will only burn your fingers." "Ah! How so?" "The law is altogether against you. It is a nasty job; better not be
mixed up in it. Have you any idea what that woman--that lady," I
corrected myself, for his eyes flashed, "has done?" "Nothing really wrong," he was warming up into a new burst of passion. "Tell that to the Courts and to the Judge when you are prosecuted for
contempt and charged as an accessory after the fact. How will you like
that? It will take the starch out of you." "Rot! The law can't do us much harm. The only person who might make it
disagreeable is Lord Blackadder, and I snap my fingers at him." "The Earl of Blackadder? Are you mad? He is a great personage, a rich
and powerful nobleman. You cannot afford to fight him; he will be too
strong for you. He has been made the victim of an abominable outrage,
and will spare no effort, no means, no money to recover his own." "Lord Blackadder is a cad--a cruel, cowardly ruffian. I know all about
him and what has happened. It would give me the greatest pleasure to
kick him down the street. Failing that, I shall do my best to upset
and spoil his schemes, and so you know." I smiled contemptuously. "A mere Colonel against an Earl! What sort of
a chance have you? It's too absurd." "We shall see. Those laugh longest who laugh last." By this time our talk was done, for we were approaching Lucerne, and
I began to think over my next plans. All must depend on what I heard
there--upon what news, if any, came from Ludovic Tiler. So on my arrival I made my way straight to the telegraph-office in the
corner of the great station, and on showing my card an envelope was
handed to me. It was from Tiler at Basle, and ran as follows:

"They have booked through by 7.30 A.M., via Brienne, Lausanne
to Brieg, and I suppose the Simplon. I shall accompany. Can you join
me at either end--Brieg or Domo Dossola? The sooner the better. Wire
me from all places along the route, giving your movements. Address me
in my train No. 70." The news pointed pretty clearly to the passage of the Alps and descent
into Italy by another route than the St. Gothard. I had my Bradshaw in
my bag, and proceeded at once to verify the itinerary by the
time-table, while I drank my early coffee in the restaurant upon the
station platform. I was most anxious to join hands with Tiler, and
quickly turned over the leaves of my railway guide to see if it was
possible, and how it might best be managed. My first idea was to retrace my steps to Basle and follow him by the
same road. But I soon found that the trains would not fit in the very
least. He would be travelling by the one fast train in the day, which
was due at Brieg at four o'clock in the afternoon. My first chance, if
I caught the very next train back from Lucerne, would only get me to
Brieg by the eleven o'clock the following morning. It was not good enough, and I dismissed the idea forthwith. Then I
remembered that by getting off the St. Gothard railway at Goeschenen I
should strike the old Furka diligence route by the Devil's Bridge,
Hospenthal, and the Rhone Glacier, a drive of fifty miles, more or
less, but at least it would get me to Brieg that same night by 10 or
11 o'clock. Before adopting this line I had to consider that there was a risk of
missing Tiler and his quarry; that is to say, of being too late for
them; for the lady might decide to push on directly she reached Brieg,
taking a special carriage extra post as far as the Simplon at least,
even into Domo Dossola. She was presumably in such a hurry that the
night journey would hardly deter her from driving over the pass. Tiler
would certainly follow. By the time I reached Brieg they would be
halfway across the Alps, and I must take the same road, making a stern
chase, proverbially the longest. I turned my attention, therefore, to the Italian end of the carriage
road, and to seeing how and when I could reach Domo Dossola, the
alternative suggestion made by Tiler. There would be no difficulty as
to that, and I found I could be there in good time the same evening. I
worked it out on the tables and it looked easy enough. Leave Lucerne by the St. Gothard railway, pass Goeschenen, and go
through the tunnel down the Italian side as far as Bellizona. Thence a
branch line would take me to Locarno and into touch with the steamboat
service on Lake Maggiore. There was a fixed connection according to
the tables, and I should land at Pallanza within a short hour's drive
of the line to Domo Dossola. I could be established there by nightfall
and would command the situation. Every carriage that came down the
Simplon must come under my eye. There could be no doubt that the Bellizona-Locarno Lake line was the
preferable one, and I finally decided in favour of it. I closed my
Bradshaw with a bang, replaced it in my bag, drank up my coffee, and
started for the telegraph office. I meant to advise Tiler of my plans,
and at the same time arrange with him to look out for me just outside
the terminus station at Domo Dossola, or to communicate with me there
at the Hotel de la Poste. On coming out I ran up against the last person I wished to see. It was
the Colonel, who greeted me with a loud laugh, and gave me a slap on
the back. "Halloa, my wily detective," he said mockingly; "settled it all quite
to your satisfaction? Done with Bradshaw--sent off your wires? Well,
what's the next move?" "I decline to hold any conversation with you," I began severely. "I
beg you will not intrude upon my privacy. I do not desire your
acquaintance." "Hoity toity!" he cried. "On your high horse, eh? Aren't you afraid
you may fall off or get knocked off?" and he raised his hand with an
ugly gesture. "We are not alone now in a railway carriage. There are police about,
and the Swiss police do not approve of brawling," I replied, with all
the dignity I could assume. "Come, Falfani, tell me what you mean to do now," he went on in the
same tone. "Your questions are an impertinence. I do not know you. I do not
choose to know you, and I beg you will leave me alone." "Don't think of it, my fine fellow. I'm not going to leave you alone. You may make up your mind to that. Where you go, I go; what you do, I
shall do. We are inseparables, you and I, as much united as the
Siamese twins. So I tell you." "But it's monstrous, it's not to be tolerated. I shall appeal for
protection to the authorities." "Do so, my friend, do so. See which will get the best of that. I don't
want to swagger, but at any rate all the world knows pretty well who I
am; but what shall you call yourself, Mr. Falfani?" "I have my credentials from my employers; I have letters,
testimonials, recommendations from the best people." "Including the Earl of Blackadder, I presume? I admit your great
advantages. Well, try it. You may get the best of it in the long run,
but you'll lose a good deal of time. I'm not in a hurry," he said with
emphasis, and promptly recalled me to my senses, for I realized that
I could not fight him that way. It must be by stratagem or evasion. I
must throw dust in his eyes, put him off the scent, mislead, befool,
elude him somehow. How was I to shake him off now I saw that he was determined to stick
to me? He had said it in so many words. He would not let me out of his
sight; wherever I went he was coming too. The time was drawing on for the departure of the St. Gothard express
at 9.8 A.M., and as yet I had no ticket. I had booked at
Amiens as far as Lucerne only, leaving further plans as events might
fall out. Now I desired to go on, but did not see how I was to take a
fresh ticket without his learning my destination. He would be certain
to be within earshot when I went up to the window. I was beginning to despair when I saw Cook's man, who was, as usual,
hovering about to assist travellers in trouble, and I beckoned him to
approach. "See that gentleman," I nodded towards the Colonel. "He wants you; do
your best for him." And when the tourist agent proceeded on his
mission to be accosted, I fear rather unceremoniously, I slipped off
and hid out of sight. I felt sure I was unobserved as I took my place in the crowd at the
ticket-window, but when I had asked and paid for my place to Locarno I
heard, to my disgust, some one else applying for a ticket to exactly
the same place, and in a voice that was strangely familiar. On looking round I saw Jules l'Echelle, the sleeping-car conductor,
but out of uniform, and with an amused grin on his face. "It seems that we are still to be fellow travellers," he observed
casually. "What is taking you to Lake Maggiore? How about your service on the
car?" 