



Produced by Steve Crites





THE WOMAN IN THE ALCOVE

By Anna Katharine Green




CONTENTS

     I  THE WOMAN WITH THE DIAMOND
     II  THE GLOVES
     II  ANSON DURAND
     IV  EXPLANATIONS
     V  SUPERSTITION
     VI  SUSPENSE
     VII  NIGHT AND A VOICE
     VIII  ARREST
     IX  THE MOUSE NIBBLES AT THE NET
     X  I ASTONISH THE INSPECTOR
     XI  THE INSPECTOR ASTONISHES ME
     XII  ALMOST
     XIII  THE MISSING RECOMMENDATION
     XIV  TRAPPED
     XV  SEARS OR WELLGOOD
     XVI  DOUBT
     XVII  SWEETWATER IN A NEW ROLE
     XVIII  THE CLOSED DOOR
     XIX  THE FACE
     XX  MOONLIGHT--AND A CLUE
     XXI  GRIZEL! GRIZEL! XXII  GUILT
     XXIII  THE GREAT MOGUL




I. THE WOMAN WITH THE DIAMOND

I was, perhaps, the plainest girl in the room that night. I was also the
happiest--up to one o'clock. Then my whole world crumbled, or, at least,
suffered an eclipse. Why and how, I am about to relate. I was not made for love. This I had often said to myself; very often of
late. In figure I am too diminutive, in face far too unbeautiful, for me
to cherish expectations of this nature. Indeed, love had never entered
into my plan of life, as was evinced by the nurse's diploma I had just
gained after three years of hard study and severe training. I was not made for love. But if I had been; had I been gifted with
height, regularity of feature, or even with that eloquence of expression
which redeems all defects save those which savor of deformity, I knew
well whose eye I should have chosen to please, whose heart I should have
felt proud to win. This knowledge came with a rush to my heart--(did I say heart? I should
have said understanding, which is something very different)--when, at
the end of the first dance, I looked up from the midst of the bevy
of girls by whom I was surrounded and saw Anson Durand's fine figure
emerging from that quarter of the hall where our host and hostess stood
to receive their guests. His eye was roaming hither and thither and his
manner was both eager and expectant. Whom was he seeking? Some one
of the many bright and vivacious girls about me, for he turned almost
instantly our way. But which one? I thought I knew. I remembered at whose house I had met him first, at
whose house I had seen him many times since. She was a lovely girl,
witty and vivacious, and she stood at this very moment at my elbow. In
her beauty lay the lure, the natural lure for a man of his gifts and
striking personality. If I continued to watch, I should soon see his
countenance light up under the recognition she could not fail to give
him. And I was right; in another instant it did, and with a brightness
there was no mistaking. But one feeling common to the human heart lends
such warmth, such expressiveness to the features. How handsome it made
him look, how distinguished, how everything I was not except--

But what does this mean? He has passed Miss Sperry--passed her with
a smile and a friendly word--and is speaking to me, singling me out,
offering me his arm! He is smiling, too, not as he smiled on Miss
Sperry, but more warmly, with more that is personal in it. I took his
arm in a daze. The lights were dimmer than I thought; nothing was really
bright except his smile. It seemed to change the world for me. I forgot
that I was plain, forgot that I was small, with nothing to recommend
me to the eye or heart, and let myself be drawn away, asking nothing,
anticipating nothing, till I found myself alone with him in the fragrant
recesses of the conservatory, with only the throb of music in our ears
to link us to the scene we had left. Why had he brought me here, into this fairyland of opalescent lights and
intoxicating perfumes? What could he have to say--to show? Ah in another
moment I knew. He had seized my hands, and love, ardent love, came
pouring from his lips. Could it be real? Was I the object of all this feeling, I? If so, then
life had changed for me indeed. Silent from rush of emotion, I searched his face to see if this
Paradise, whose gates I was thus passionately bidden to enter, was
indeed a verity or only a dream born of the excitement of the dance and
the charm of a scene exceptional in its splendor and picturesqueness
even for so luxurious a city as New York. But it was no mere dream. Truth and earnestness were in his manner, and
his words were neither feverish nor forced. "I love you I! I need you!" So I heard, and so he soon made me believe. "You have charmed me from the first. Your tantalizing, trusting, loyal
self, like no other, sweeter than any other, has drawn the heart from my
breast. I have seen many women, admired many women, but you only have I
loved. Will you be my wife?" I was dazzled; moved beyond anything I could have conceived. I forgot
all that I had hitherto said to myself--all that I had endeavored
to impress upon my heart when I beheld him approaching, intent, as
I believed, in his search for another woman; and, confiding in his
honesty, trusting entirely to his faith, I allowed the plans and
purposes of years to vanish in the glamour of this new joy, and spoke
the word which linked us together in a bond which half an hour before I
had never dreamed would unite me to any man. His impassioned "Mine! mine!" filled my cup to overflowing. Something
of the ecstasy of living entered my soul; which, in spite of all I have
suffered since, recreated the world for me and made all that went before
but the prelude to the new life, the new joy. Oh, I was happy, happy, perhaps too happy! As the conservatory filled
and we passed back into the adjoining room, the glimpse I caught of
myself in one of the mirrors startled me into thinking so. For had it
not been for the odd color of my dress and the unique way in which I
wore my hair that night, I should not have recognized the beaming girl
who faced me so naively from the depths of the responsive glass. Can one be too happy? I do not know. I know that one can be too
perplexed, too burdened and too sad. Thus far I have spoken only of myself in connection with the evening's
elaborate function. But though entitled by my old Dutch blood to a
certain social consideration which I am happy to say never failed me,
I, even in this hour of supreme satisfaction, attracted very little
attention and awoke small comment. There was another woman present
better calculated to do this. A fair woman, large and of a bountiful
presence, accustomed to conquest, and gifted with the power of carrying
off her victories with a certain lazy grace irresistibly fascinating to
the ordinary man; a gorgeously appareled woman, with a diamond on her
breast too vivid for most women, almost too vivid for her. I noticed
this diamond early in the evening, and then I noticed her. She was not
as fine as the diamond, but she was very fine, and, had I been in a less
ecstatic frame of mind, I might have envied the homage she received from
all the men, not excepting him upon whose arm I leaned. Later, there was
no one in the world I envied less. The ball was a private and very elegant one. There were some notable
guests. One gentleman in particular was pointed out to me as an
Englishman of great distinction and political importance. I thought
him a very interesting man for his years, but odd and a trifle
self-centered. Though greatly courted, he seemed strangely restless
under the fire of eyes to which he was constantly subjected, and only
happy when free to use his own in contemplation of the scene about him. Had I been less absorbed in my own happiness I might have noted sooner
than I did that this contemplation was confined to such groups as
gathered about the lady with the diamond. But this I failed to observe
at the time, and consequently was much surprised to come upon him, at
the end of one of the dances, talking With this lady in an animated and
courtly manner totally opposed to the apathy, amounting to boredom, with
which he had hitherto met all advances. Yet it was not admiration for her person which he openly displayed. During the whole time he stood there his eyes seldom rose to her face;
they lingered mainly-and this was what aroused my curiosity--on the
great fan of ostrich plumes which this opulent beauty held against
her breast. Was he desirous of seeing the great diamond she thus
unconsciously (or was it consciously) shielded from his gaze? It was
possible, for, as I continued to note him, he suddenly bent toward
her and as quickly raised himself again with a look which was quite
inexplicable to me. The lady had shifted her fan a moment and his eyes
had fallen on the gem. The next thing I recall with any definiteness was a tete-a-tete
conversation which I held with my lover on a certain yellow divan at the
end of one of the halls. To the right of this divan rose a curtained recess, highly suggestive of
romance, called "the alcove." As this alcove figures prominently in my
story, I will pause here to describe it. It was originally intended to contain a large group of statuary which
our host, Mr. Ramsdell, had ordered from Italy to adorn his new house. He is a man of original ideas in regard to such matters, and in this
instance had gone so far as to have this end of the house constructed
with a special view to an advantageous display of this promised work
of art. Fearing the ponderous effect of a pedestal large enough to hold
such a considerable group, he had planned to raise it to the level of
the eye by having the alcove floor built a few feet higher than the main
one. A flight of low, wide steps connected the two, which, following the
curve of the wall, added much to the beauty of this portion of the hall. The group was a failure and was never shipped; but the alcove remained,
and, possessing as it did all the advantages of a room in the way of
heat and light, had been turned into a miniature retreat of exceptional
beauty. The seclusion it offered extended, or so we were happy to think, to the
solitary divan at its base on which Mr. Durand and I were seated. With
possibly an undue confidence in the advantage of our position, we were
discussing a subject interesting only to ourselves, when Mr. Durand
interrupted himself to declare: "You are the woman I want, you and you
only. And I want you soon. When do you think you can marry me? Within a
week--if--"

Did my look stop him? I was startled. I had heard no incoherent phrase
from him before. "A week!" I remonstrated. "We take more time than that to fit ourselves
for a journey or some transient pleasure. I hardly realize my engagement
yet." "You have not been thinking of it for these last two months as I have." "No," I replied demurely, forgetting everything else in my delight at
this admission. "Nor are you a nomad among clubs and restaurants." "No, I have a home." "Nor do you love me as deeply as I do you." This I thought open to argument. "The home you speak of is a luxurious one," he continued. "I can not
offer you its equal Do you expect me to?" I was indignant. "You know that I do not. Shall I, who deliberately chose a nurse's life
when an indulgent uncle's heart and home were open to me, shrink from
braving poverty with the man I love? We will begin as simply as you
please--"

"No," he peremptorily put in, yet with a certain hesitancy which seemed
to speak of doubts he hardly acknowledged to himself, "I will not marry
you if I must expose you to privation or to the genteel poverty I hate. I love you more than you realize, and wish to make your life a happy
one. I can not give you all you have been accustomed to in your rich
uncle's house, but if matters prosper with me, if the chance I have
built on succeeds--and it will fail or succeed tonight--you will have
those comforts which love will heighten into luxuries and--and--"

He was becoming incoherent again, and this time with his eyes fixed
elsewhere than on my face. Following his gaze, I discovered what had
distracted his attention. The lady with the diamond was approaching us
on her way to the alcove. She was accompanied by two gentlemen, both
strangers to me, and her head, sparkling with brilliants, was turning
from one to the other with an indolent grace. I was not surprised that
the man at my side quivered and made a start as if to rise. She was a
gorgeous image. In comparison with her imposing figure in its trailing
robe of rich pink velvet, my diminutive frame in its sea-green gown must
have looked as faded and colorless as a half-obliterated pastel. "A striking woman," I remarked as I saw he was not likely to resume the
conversation which her presence had interrupted. "And what a diamond!" The glance he cast me was peculiar. "Did you notice it particularly?" he asked. Astonished, for there was something very uneasy in his manner so that
I half expected to see him rise and join the group he was so eagerly
watching without waiting for my lips to frame a response, I quickly
replied:

"It would be difficult not to notice what one would naturally expect to
see only on the breast of a queen. But perhaps she is a queen. I should
judge so from the homage which follows her." His eyes sought mine. There was inquiry in them, but it was an inquiry I
did not understand. "What can you know about diamonds?" he presently demanded. "Nothing but
their glitter, and glitter is not all,--the gem she wears may be a very
tawdry one." I flushed with humiliation. He was a dealer in gems--that was his
business--and the check which he had put upon my enthusiasm certainly
made me conscious of my own presumption. Yet I was not disposed to take
back my words. I had had a better opportunity than himself for seeing
this remarkable jewel, and, with the perversity of a somewhat ruffled
mood, I burst forth, as soon as the color had subsided from my cheeks:

"No, no! It is glorious, magnificent. I never saw its like. I doubt if
you ever have, for all your daily acquaintance with jewels. Its value
must be enormous. Who is she? You seem to know her." It was a direct question, but I received no reply. Mr. Durand's eyes had
followed the lady, who had lingered somewhat ostentatiously on the
top step and they did not return to me till she had vanished with
her companions behind the long plush curtain which partly veiled the
entrance. By this time he had forgotten my words, if he had ever heard
them and it was with the forced animation of one whose thoughts are
elsewhere that he finally returned to the old plea:

When would I marry him? If he could offer me a home in a month--and he
would know by to-morrow if he could do so--would I come to him then? He
would not say in a week; that was perhaps to soon; but in a month? Would
I not promise to be his in a month? What I answered I scarcely recall. His eyes had stolen back to the
alcove and mine had followed them. The gentlemen who had accompanied
the lady inside were coming out again, but others were advancing to take
their places, and soon she was engaged in holding a regular court in
this favored retreat. Why should this interest me? Why should I notice her or look that way
at all? Because Mr. Durand did? Possibly. I remember that for all his
ardent love-making, I felt a little piqued that he should divide his
attentions in this way. Perhaps I thought that for this evening, at
least, he might have been blind to a mere coquette's fascinations. I was thus doubly engaged in listening to my lover's words and in
watching the various gentlemen who went up and down the steps, when a
former partner advanced and reminded me that I had promised him a waltz. Loath to leave Mr. Durand, yet seeing no way of excusing myself to Mr.
Fox, I cast an appealing glance at the former and was greatly chagrined
to find him already on his feet. "Enjoy your dance," he cried; "I have a word to say to Mrs.
Fairbrother," and was gone before my new partner had taken me on his
arm. Was Mrs. Fairbrother the lady with the diamond? Yes; as I turned to
enter the parlor with my partner, I caught a glimpse of Mr. Durand's
tall figure just disappearing from the step behind the sage-green
curtains. "Who is Mrs. Fairbrother?" I inquired of Mr. Fox at the end of the
dance. Mr. Fox, who is one of society's perennial beaux, knows everybody. "She is--well, she was Abner Fairbrother's wife. You know Fairbrother,
the millionaire who built that curious structure on Eighty-sixth Street. At present they are living apart--an amicable understanding, I believe. Her diamond makes her conspicuous. It is one of the most remarkable
stones in New York, perhaps in the United States. Have you observed it?" "Yes--that is, at a distance. Do you think her very handsome?" "Mrs. Fairbrother? She's called so, but she's not my style." Here he
gave me a killing glance. "I admire women of mind and heart. They do not
need to wear jewels worth an ordinary man's fortune." I looked about for an excuse to leave this none too desirable partner. "Let us go back into the long hall," I urged. "The ceaseless whirl of
these dancers is making me dizzy." With the ease of a gallant man he took me on his arm and soon we were
promenading again in the direction of the alcove. A passing glimpse of
its interior was afforded me as we turned to retrace our steps in front
of the yellow divan. The lady with the diamond was still there. A fold
of the superb pink velvet she wore protruded across the gap made by the
half-drawn curtains, just as it had done a half-hour before. But it
was impossible to see her face or who was with her. What I could see,
however, and did, was the figure of a man leaning against the wall at
the foot of the steps. At first I thought this person unknown to me,
then I perceived that he was no other than the chief guest of the
evening, the Englishman of whom I have previously spoken. His expression had altered. He looked now both anxious and absorbed,
particularly anxious and particularly absorbed; so much so that I was
not surprised that no one ventured to approach him. Again I wondered and
again I asked myself for whom or for what he was waiting. For Mr. Durand
to leave this lady's presence? No, no, I would not believe that. Mr.
Durand could not be there still; yet some women make it difficult for
a man to leave them and, realizing this, I could not forbear casting
a parting glance behind me as, yielding to Mr. Fox's importunities, I
turned toward the supper-room. It showed me the Englishman in the act
of lifting two cups of coffee from a small table standing near the
reception-room door. As his manner plainly betokened whither he was
bound with this refreshment, I felt all my uneasiness vanish, and
was able to take my seat at one of the small tables with which the
supper-room was filled, and for a few minutes, at least, lend an ear
to Mr. Fox's vapid compliments and trite opinions. Then my attention
wandered. I had not moved nor had I shifted my gaze from the scene before me the
ordinary scene of a gay and well-filled supper-room, yet I found myself
looking, as if through a mist I had not even seen develop, at something
as strange, unusual and remote as any phantasm, yet distinct enough in
its outlines for me to get a decided impression of a square of light
surrounding the figure of a man in a peculiar pose not easily imagined
and not easily described. It all passed in an instant, and I sat staring
at the window opposite me with the feeling of one who has just seen
a vision. Yet almost immediately I forgot the whole occurrence in my
anxiety as to Mr. Durand's whereabouts. Certainly he was amusing himself
very much elsewhere or he would have found an opportunity of joining
me long before this. He was not even in sight, and I grew weary of the
endless menu and the senseless chit chat of my companion, and, finding
him amenable to my whims, rose from my seat at table and made my way to
a group of acquaintances standing just outside the supper-room door. As
I listened to their greetings some impulse led me to cast another glance
down the hall toward the alcove. A man--a waiter--was issuing from it in
a rush. Bad news was in his face, and as his eyes encountered those of
Mr. Ramsdell, who was advancing hurriedly to meet him, he plunged down
the steps with a cry which drew a crowd about the two in an instant. What was it? What had happened? Mad with an anxiety I did not stop to define, I rushed toward this group
now swaying from side to side in irrepressible excitement, when suddenly
everything swam before me and I fell in a swoon to the floor. Some one had shouted aloud

"Mrs. Fairbrother has been murdered and her diamond stolen! Lock the
doors!" II. THE GLOVES

I must have remained insensible for many minutes, for when I returned to
full consciousness the supper-room was empty and the two hundred guests
I had left seated at table were gathered in agitated groups about the
hall. This was what I first noted; not till afterward did I realize my
own situation. I was lying on a couch in a remote corner of this same
hall and beside me, but not looking at me, stood my lover, Mr. Durand. How he came to know my state and find me in the general disturbance I
did not stop to inquire. It was enough for me at that moment to look up
and see him so near. Indeed, the relief was so great, the sense of his
protection so comforting that I involuntarily stretched out my hand in
gratitude toward him, but, failing to attract his attention, slipped to
the floor and took my stand at his side. This roused him and he gave me
a look which steadied me, in spite of the thrill of surprise with which
I recognized his extreme pallor and a certain peculiar hesitation in his
manner not at all natural to it. Meanwhile, some words uttered near us were slowly making their way
into my benumbed brain. The waiter who had raised the first alarm was
endeavoring to describe to an importunate group in advance of us what he
had come upon in that murderous alcove. "I was carrying about a tray of ices," he was saying, "and seeing the
lady sitting there, went up. I had expected to find the place full of
gentlemen, but she was all alone, and did not move as I picked my way
over her long train. The next moment I had dropped ices, tray and all. I
bad come face to face with her and seen that she was dead. She had been
stabbed and robbed. There was no diamond on her breast, but there was
blood." A hubbub of disordered sentences seasoned with horrified cries followed
this simple description. Then a general movement took place in the
direction of the alcove, during which Mr. Durand stooped to my ear and
whispered:

"We must get out of this. You are not strong enough to stand such
excitement. Don't you think we can escape by the window over there?" "What, without wraps and in such a snowstorm?" I protested. "Besides,
uncle will be looking for me. He came with me, you know." An expression of annoyance, or was it perplexity, crossed Mr. Durand's
face, and he made a movement as if to leave me. "I must go," he began, but stopped at my glance of surprise and assumed
a different air--one which became him very much better. "Pardon me,
dear, I will take you to your uncle. This--this dreadful tragedy,
interrupting so gay a scene, has quite upset me. I was always sensitive
to the sight, the smell, even to the very mention of the word blood." So was I, but not to the point of cowardice. But then I had not just
come from an interview with the murdered woman. Her glances, her
smiles, the lift of her eyebrows were not fresh memories to me. Some
consideration was certainly due him for the shock he must be laboring
under. Yet I did not know how to keep back the vital question. "Who did it? You must have heard some one say." "I have heard nothing," was his somewhat fierce rejoinder. Then, as I
made a move, "What you do not wish to follow the crowd there?" "I wish to find my uncle, and he is in that crowd." Mr. Durand said nothing further, and together we passed down the hall. A strange mood pervaded my mind. Instead of wishing to fly a scene which
under ordinary conditions would have filled me with utter repugnance,
I felt a desire to see and hear everything. Not from curiosity, such
as moved most of the people about me, but because of some strong
instinctive feeling I could not understand; as if it were my heart which
had been struck, and my fate which was trembling in the balance. We were consequently among the first to hear such further details as
were allowed to circulate among the now well-nigh frenzied guests. No
one knew the perpetrator of the deed nor did there appear to be any
direct evidence calculated to fix his identity. Indeed, the sudden death
of this beautiful woman in the midst of festivity might have been looked
upon as suicide, if the jewel had not been missing from her breast
and the instrument of death removed from the wound. So far, the casual
search which had been instituted had failed to produce this weapon; but
the police would be here soon and then something would be done. As to
the means of entrance employed by the assassin, there seemed to be but
one opinion. The alcove contained a window opening upon a small balcony. By this he had doubtless entered and escaped. The long plush curtains
which, during the early part of the evening, had remained looped back
on either side of the casement, were found at the moment of the crime's
discovery closely drawn together. Certainly a suspicious circumstance. However, the question was one easily settled. If any one had approached
by the balcony there would be marks in the snow to show it. Mr. Ramsdell
had gone out to see. He would be coming back soon. "Do you think this a probable explanation of the crime?" I demanded
of Mr. Durand at this juncture. "If I remember rightly this window
overlooks the carriage drive; it must, therefore, be within plain
sight of the door through which some three hundred guests have passed
to-night. How could any one climb to such a height, lift the window and
step in without being seen?" "You forget the awning." He spoke quickly and with unexpected vivacity. "The awning runs up very near this window and quite shuts it off from
the sight of arriving guests. The drivers of departing carriages could
see it if they chanced to glance back. But their eyes are usually on
their horses in such a crowd. The probabilities are against any of them
having looked up." His brow had cleared; a weight seemed removed from
his mind. "When I went into the alcove to see Mrs. Fairbrother, she was
sitting in a chair near this window looking out. I remember the effect
of her splendor against the snow sifting down in a steady stream behind
her. The pink velvet--the soft green of the curtains on either side--her
brilliants--and the snow for a background! Yes, the murderer came in
that way. Her figure would be plain to any one outside, and if she moved
and the diamond shone--Don't you see what a probable theory it is? There must be ways by which a desperate man might reach that balcony. I
believe--"

How eager he was and with what a look he turned when the word came
filtering through the crowd that, though footsteps had been found in the
snow pointing directly toward the balcony, there was none on the balcony
itself, proving, as any one could see, that the attack had not come
from without, since no one could enter the alcove by the window without
stepping on the balcony. "Mr. Durand has suspicions of his own," I explained determinedly to
myself. "He met some one going in as he stepped out. Shall I ask him to
name this person?" No, I did not have the courage; not while his face
wore so stern a look and was so resolutely turned away. The next excitement was a request from Mr. Ramsdell for us all to go
into the drawing-room. This led to various cries from hysterical lips,
such as, "We are going to be searched!" "He believes the thief and
murderer to be still in the house!" "Do you see the diamond on me?" "Why
don't they confine their suspicions to the favored few who were admitted
to the alcove?" "They will," remarked some one close to my ear. But quickly as I turned I could not guess from whom the comment came. Possibly from a much beflowered, bejeweled, elderly dame, whose eyes
were fixed on Mr. Durand's averted face. If so, she received a defiant
look from mine, which I do not believe she forgot in a hurry. Alas! it was not the only curious, I might say searching glance I
surprised directed against him as we made our way to where I could see
my uncle struggling to reach us from a short side hall. The whisper
seemed to have gone about that Mr. Durand had been the last one to
converse with Mrs. Fairbrother prior to the tragedy. In time I had the satisfaction of joining my uncle. He betrayed great
relief at the sight of me, and, encouraged by his kindly smile,
I introduced Mr. Durand. My conscious air must have produced its
impression, for he turned a startled and inquiring look upon my
companion, then took me resolutely on his own arm, saying:

"There is likely to be some unpleasantness ahead for all of us. I do
not think the police will allow any one to go till that diamond has
been looked for. This is a very serious matter, dear. So many think the
murderer was one of the guests." "I think so, too," said I. But why I thought so or why I should say so
with such vehemence, I do not know even now. My uncle looked surprised. "You had better not advance any opinions," he advised. "A lady like
yourself should have none on a subject so gruesome. I shall never
cease regretting bringing you here tonight. I shall seize on the first
opportunity to take you home. At present we are supposed to await the
action of our host." "He can not keep all these people here long," I ventured. "No; most of us will be relieved soon. Had you not better get your wraps
so as to be ready to go as soon as he gives the word?" "I should prefer to have a peep at the people in the drawing-room
first," was my perverse reply. "I don't know why I want to see them,
but I do; and, uncle, I might as well tell you now that I engaged myself
to Mr. Durand this evening--the gentleman with me when you first came
up." "You have engaged yourself to--to this man--to marry him, do you mean?" I nodded, with a sly look behind to see if Mr. Durand were near enough
to hear. He was not, and I allowed my enthusiasm to escape in a few
quick words. "He has chosen me," I said, "the plainest, most uninteresting puss in
the whole city." My uncle smiled. "And I believe he loves me; at all
events, I know that I love him." My uncle sighed, while giving me the most affectionate of glances. "It's a pity you should have come to this understanding to-night," said
he. "He's an acquaintance of the murdered woman, and it is only right
for you to know that you will have to leave him behind when you start
for home. All who have been seen entering that alcove this evening will
necessarily be detained here till the coroner arrives." My uncle and I strolled toward the drawing-room and as we did so we
passed the library. It held but one occupant, the Englishman. He was
seated before a table, and his appearance was such as precluded any
attempt at intrusion, even if one had been so disposed. There was a
fixity in his gaze and a frown on his powerful forehead which bespoke a
mind greatly agitated. It was not for me to read that mind, much as
it interested me, and I passed on, chatting, as if I had not the least
desire to stop. I can not say how much time elapsed before my uncle touched me on the
arm with the remark:

"The police are here in full force. I saw a detective in plain clothes
look in here a minute ago. He seemed to have his eye on you. There he is
again! What can he want? No, don't turn; he's gone away now." Frightened as I had never been in all my life, I managed to keep my head
up and maintain an indifferent aspect. What, as my uncle said, could
a detective want of me? I had nothing to do with the crime; not in the
remotest way could I be said to be connected with it; why, then, had I
caught the attention of the police? Looking about, I sought Mr. Durand. He had left me on my uncle's coming up, but had remained, as I supposed,
within sight. But at this moment he was nowhere to be seen. Was I afraid
on his account? Impossible; yet--

Happily just then the word was passed about that the police had given
orders that, with the exception of such as had been requested to remain
to answer questions, the guests generally should feel themselves at
liberty to depart. The time had now come to take a stand and I informed my uncle, to his
evident chagrin, that I should not leave as long as any excuse could be
found for staying. He said nothing at the time, but as the noise of departing carriages
gradually lessened and the great hall and drawing-rooms began to wear a
look of desertion he at last ventured on this gentle protest:

"You have more pluck, Rita, than I supposed. Do you think it wise to
stay on here? Will not people imagine that you have been requested to do
so? Look at those waiters hanging about in the different doorways. Run
up and put on your wraps. Mr. Durand will come to the house fast enough
as soon as he is released. I give you leave to sit up for him if you
will; only let us leave this place before that impertinent little man
dares to come around again," he artfully added. But I stood firm, though somewhat moved by his final suggestion; and,
being a small tyrant in my way, at least with him, I carried my point. Suddenly my anxiety became poignant. A party of men, among whom I saw
Mr. Durand, appeared at the end of the hall, led by a very small but
self-important personage whom my uncle immediately pointed out as the
detective who had twice come to the door near which I stood. As this
man looked up and saw me still there, a look of relief crossed his face,
and, after a word or two with another stranger of seeming authority,
he detached himself from the group he had ushered upon the scene, and,
approaching me respectfully enough, said with a deprecatory glance at my
uncle whose frown he doubtless understood:

"Miss Van Arsdale, I believe?" I nodded, too choked to speak. "I am sorry, Madam, if you were expecting to go. Inspector Dalzell has
arrived and would like to speak to you. Will you step into one of these
rooms? Not the library, but any other. He will come to you as quickly as
he can." I tried to carry it off bravely and as if I saw nothing in this summons
which was unique or alarming. But I succeeded only in dividing a
wavering glance between him and the group of men of which he had just
formed a part. In the latter were several gentlemen whom I had noted in
Mrs. Fairbrother's train early in the evening and a few strangers,
two of whom were officials. Mr. Durand was with the former, and his
expression did not encourage me. "The affair is very serious," commented the detective on leaving me. "That's our excuse for any trouble we may be putting you to." I clutched
my uncle's arm. "Where shall we go?" I asked. "The drawing-room is too large. In this
hall my eyes are for ever traveling in the direction of the alcove. Don't you know some little room? Oh, what, what can he want of me?" "Nothing serious, nothing important," blustered my good uncle. "Some
triviality such as you can answer in a moment. A little room? Yes, I
know one, there, under the stairs. Come, I will find the door for you. Why did we ever come to this wretched ball?" I had no answer for this. Why, indeed! My uncle, who is a very patient man, guided me to the place he had
picked out, without adding a word to the ejaculation in which he had
just allowed his impatience to expend itself. But once seated within,
and out of the range of peering eyes and listening ears, he allowed a
sigh to escape him which expressed the fullness of his agitation. "My dear," he began, and stopped. "I feel--" here he again came to a
pause--"that you should know--"

"What?" I managed to ask. "That I do not like Mr. Durand and--that others do not like him." "Is it because of something you knew about him before to-night?" He made no answer. "Or because he was seen, like many other gentlemen, talking with that
woman some time before--a long time before--she was attacked for her
diamond and murdered?" "Pardon me, my dear, he was the last one seen talking to her. Some
one may yet be found who went in after he came out, but as yet he is
considered the last. Mr. Ramsdell himself told me so." "It makes no difference," I exclaimed, in all the heat of my
long-suppressed agitation. "I am willing to stake my life on his
integrity and honor. No man could talk to me as he did early this
evening with any vile intentions at heart. He was interested, no doubt,
like many others, in one who had the name of being a captivating woman,
but--"

I paused in sudden alarm. A look had crossed my uncle's face which
assured me that we were no longer alone. Who could have entered so
silently? In some trepidation I turned to see. A gentleman was standing
in the doorway, who smiled as I met his eye. "Is this Miss Van Arsdale?" he asked. Instantly my courage, which had threatened to leave me, returned and I
smiled. "I am," said I. "Are you the inspector?" "Inspector Dalzell," he explained with a bow, which included my uncle. Then he closed the door. "I hope I have not frightened you," he went on, approaching me with a
gentlemanly air. "A little matter has come up concerning which I mean to
be perfectly frank with you. It may prove to be of trivial importance;
if so, you will pardon my disturbing you. Mr. Durand--you know him?" "I am engaged to him," I declared before poor uncle could raise his
hand. "You are engaged to him. Well, that makes it difficult, and yet, in some
respects, easier for me to ask a certain question." It must have made it more difficult than easy, for he did not proceed to
put this question immediately, but went on:

"You know that Mr. Durand visited Mrs. Fairbrother in the alcove a
little while before her death?" "I have been told so." "He was seen to go in, but I have not yet found any one who saw him come
out; consequently we have been unable to fix the exact minute when
he did so. What is the matter, Miss Van Arsdale? You want to say
something?" "No, no," I protested, reconsidering my first impulse. Then, as I met
his look, "He can probably tell you that himself. I am sure he would not
hesitate." "We shall ask him later," was the inspector's response. "Meanwhile, are
you ready to assure me that since that time he has not intrusted you
with a little article to keep--No, no, I do not mean the diamond,"
he broke in, in very evident dismay, as I fell back from him in
irrepressible indignation and alarm. "The diamond--well, we shall look
for that later; it is another article we are in search of now, one which
Mr. Durand might very well have taken in his hand without realizing just
what he was doing. As it is important for us to find this article, and
as it is one he might very naturally have passed over to you when he
found himself in the hall with it in his hand, I have ventured to ask
you if this surmise is correct." "It is not," I retorted fiercely, glad that I could speak from my very
heart. "He has given me nothing to keep for him. He would not--"

Why that peculiar look in the inspector's eye? Why did he reach out for
a chair and seat me in it before he took up my interrupted sentence and
finished it?

" --would not give you anything to hold which had belonged to another
woman? Miss Van Arsdale, you do not know men. They do many things which
a young, trusting girl like yourself would hardly expect from them." "Not Mr. Durand," I maintained stoutly. "Perhaps not; let us hope not." Then, with a quick change of manner,
he bent toward me, with a sidelong look at uncle, and, pointing to my
gloves, remarked: "You wear gloves. Did you feel the need of two pairs,
that you carry another in that pretty bag hanging from your arm?" I started, looked down, and then slowly drew up into my hand the bag he
had mentioned. The white finger of a glove was protruding from the top. Any one could see it; many probably had. What did it mean? I had brought
no extra pair with me. "This is not mine," I began, faltering into silence as I perceived my
uncle turn and walk a step or two away. "The article we are looking for," pursued the inspector, "is a pair of
long, white gloves, supposed to have been worn by Mrs. Fairbrother when
she entered the alcove. Do you mind showing me those, a finger of which
I see?" I dropped the bag into his hand. The room and everything in it was
whirling around me. But when I noted what trouble it was to his clumsy
fingers to open it, my senses returned and, reaching for the bag, I
pulled it open and snatched out the gloves. They had been hastily rolled
up and some of the fingers were showing. "Let me have them," he said. With quaking heart and shaking fingers I handed over the gloves. "Mrs. Fairbrother's hand was not a small one," he observed as he slowly
unrolled them. "Yours is. We can soon tell--"

But that sentence was never finished. As the gloves fell open in his
grasp he uttered a sudden, sharp ejaculation and I a smothered shriek. An object of superlative brilliancy had rolled out from them. The
diamond! the gem which men said was worth a king's ransom, and which we
all knew had just cost a life. III. ANSON DURAND

With benumbed senses and a dismayed heart, I stared at the fallen jewel
as at some hateful thing menacing both my life and honor. "I have had nothing to do with it," I vehemently declared. "I did not
put the gloves in my bag, nor did I know the diamond was in them. I
fainted at the first alarm, and--"

"There! there! I know," interposed the inspector kindly. "I do not doubt
you in the least; not when there is a man to doubt. Miss Van Arsdale,
you had better let your uncle take you home. I will see that the hall
is cleared for you. Tomorrow I may wish to talk to you again, but I will
spare you all further importunity tonight." I shook my head. It would require more courage to leave at that moment
than to stay. Meeting the inspector's eye firmly, I quietly declared,

"If Mr. Durand's good name is to suffer in any way, I will not forsake
him. I have confidence in his integrity, if you have not. It was not his
hand, but one much more guilty, which dropped this jewel into the bag." "So! so! do not be too sure of that, little woman. You had better take
your lesson at once. It will be easier for you, and more wholesome for
him." Here he picked up the jewel. "Well, they said it was a wonder!" he exclaimed, in sudden admiration. "I am not surprised, now that I have seen a great gem, at the famous
stories I have read of men risking life and honor for their possession. If only no blood had been shed!" "Uncle! uncle!" I wailed aloud in my agony. It was all my lips could utter, but to uncle it was enough. Speaking
for the first time, he asked to have a passage made for us, and when the
inspector moved forward to comply, he threw his arm about me, and was
endeavoring to find fitting words with which to fill up the delay, when
a short altercation was heard from the doorway, and Mr. Durand came
rushing in, followed immediately by the inspector. His first look was not at myself, but at the bag, which still hung from
my arm. As I noted this action, my whole inner self seemed to collapse,
dragging my happiness down with it. But my countenance remained
unchanged, too much so, it seems; for when his eye finally rose to my
face, he found there what made him recoil and turn with something like
fierceness on his companion. "You have been talking to her," he vehemently protested. "Perhaps you
have gone further than that. What has happened here? I think I ought to
know. She is so guileless, Inspector Dalzell; so perfectly free from all
connection with this crime. Why have you shut her up here, and plied her
with questions, and made her look at me with such an expression, when
all you have against me is just what you have against some half-dozen
others,--that I was weak enough, or unfortunate enough, to spend a few
minutes with that unhappy woman in the alcove before she died?" "It might be well if Miss Van Arsdale herself would answer you," was the
inspector's quiet retort. "What you have said may constitute all that we
have against you, but it is not all we have against her." I gasped, not so much at this seeming accusation, the motive of which
I believed myself to understand, but at the burning blush with which it
was received by Mr. Durand. "What do you mean?" he demanded, with certain odd breaks in his voice. "What can you have against her?" "A triviality," returned the inspector, with a look in my direction that
was, I felt, not to be mistaken. "I do not call it a triviality," I burst out. "It seems that Mrs.
Fairbrother, for all her elaborate toilet, was found without gloves on
her arms. As she certainly wore them on entering the alcove, the police
have naturally been looking for them. And where do you think they have
found them? Not in the alcove with her, not in the possession of the man
who undoubtedly carried them away with him, but--"

"I know, I know," Mr. Durand hoarsely put in. "You need not say any
more. Oh, my poor Rita! what have I brought upon you by my weakness?" "Weakness!" He started; I started; my voice was totally unrecognizable. "I should give it another name," I added coldly. For a moment he seemed to lose heart, then he lifted his head again,
and looked as handsome as when he pleaded for my hand in the little
conservatory. "You have that right," said he; "besides, weakness at such a time, and
under such an exigency, is little short of wrong. It was unmanly in me
to endeavor to secrete these gloves; more than unmanly for me to choose
for their hiding-place the recesses of an article belonging exclusively
to yourself. I acknowledge it, Rita, and shall meet only my just
punishment if you deny me in the future both your sympathy and regard. But you must let me assure you and these gentlemen also, one of whom can
make it very unpleasant for me, that consideration for you, much more
than any miserable anxiety about myself, lay at the bottom of what must
strike you all as an act of unpardonable cowardice. From the moment I
learned of this woman's murder in the alcove, where I had visited her,
I realized that every one who had been seen to approach her within
a half-hour of her death would be subjected to a more or less rigid
investigation, and I feared, if her gloves were found in my possession,
some special attention might be directed my way which would cause you
unmerited distress. So, yielding to an impulse which I now recognize as
a most unwise, as well as unworthy one, I took advantage of the bustle
about us, and of the insensibility into which you had fallen, to tuck
these miserable gloves into the bag I saw lying on the floor at your
side. I do not ask your pardon. My whole future life shall be devoted to
winning that; I simply wish to state a fact." "Very good!" It was the inspector who spoke; I could not have uttered a
word to save my life. "Perhaps you will now feel that you owe it to this
young lady to add how you came to have these gloves in your possession?" "Mrs. Fairbrother handed them to me." "Handed them to you?" "Yes, I hardly know why myself. She asked me to take care of them for
her. I know that this must strike you as a very peculiar statement. It was my realization of the unfavorable effect it could not fail to
produce upon those who beard it, which made me dread any interrogation
on the subject. But I assure you it was as I say. She put the gloves
into my hand while I was talking to her, saying they incommoded her." "And you?" "Well, I held them for a few minutes, then I put them in my pocket, but
quite automatically, and without thinking very much about it. She was
a woman accustomed to have her own way. People seldom questioned it, I
judge." Here the tension about my throat relaxed, and I opened my lips to speak. But the inspector, with a glance of some authority, forestalled me. "Were the gloves open or rolled up when she offered them to you?" "They were rolled up." "Did you see her take them off?" "Assuredly." "And roll them up?" "Certainly." "After which she passed them over to you?" "Not immediately. She let them lie in her lap for a while." "While you talked?" Mr. Durand bowed. "And looked at the diamond?" Mr. Durand bowed for the second time. "Had you ever seen so fine a diamond before?" "No." "Yet you deal in precious stones?" "That is my business." "And are regarded as a judge of them?" "I have that reputation." "Mr. Durand, would you know this diamond if you saw it?" "I certainly should." "The setting was an uncommon one, I hear." "Quite an unusual one." The inspector opened his hand. "Is this the article?" "Good God! Where--"

"Don't you know?" "I do not." The inspector eyed him gravely. "Then I have a bit of news for you. It was hidden in the gloves you took
from Mrs. Fairbrother. Miss Van Arsdale was present at their unrolling." Do we live, move, breathe at certain moments? It hardly seems so. I know
that I was conscious of but one sense, that of seeing; and of but one
faculty, that of judgment. Would he flinch, break down, betray guilt, or
simply show astonishment? I chose to believe it was the latter feeling
only which informed his slowly whitening and disturbed features. Certainly it was all his words expressed, as his glances flew from the
stone to the gloves, and back again to the inspector's face. "I can not believe it. I can not believe it." And his hand flew wildly
to his forehead. "Yet it is the truth, Mr. Durand, and one you have now to face. How will
you do this? By any further explanations, or by what you may consider a
discreet silence?" "I have nothing to explain,--the facts are as I have stated." The inspector regarded him with an earnestness which made my heart sink. "You can fix the time of this visit, I hope; tell us, I mean, just when
you left the alcove. You must have seen some one who can speak for you." "I fear not." Why did he look so disturbed and uncertain? "There were but few persons in the hall just then," he went on to
explain. "No one was sitting on the yellow divan." "You know where you went, though? Whom you saw and what you did before
the alarm spread?" "Inspector, I am quite confused. I did go somewhere; I did not remain in
that part of the hall. But I can tell you nothing definite, save that
I walked about, mostly among strangers, till the cry rose which sent us
all in one direction and me to the side of my fainting sweetheart." "Can you pick out any stranger you talked to, or any one who might have
noted you during this interval? You see, for the sake of this little
woman, I wish to give you every chance." "Inspector, I am obliged to throw myself on your mercy. I have no such
witness to my innocence as you call for. Innocent people seldom have. It is only the guilty who take the trouble to provide for such
contingencies." This was all very well, if it had been uttered with a straightforward
air and in a clear tone. But it was not. I who loved him felt that it
was not, and consequently was more or less prepared for the change which
now took place in the inspector's manner. Yet it pierced me to the heart
to observe this change, and I instinctively dropped my face into my
hands when I saw him move toward Mr. Durand with some final order or
word of caution. Instantly (and who can account for such phenomena?) there floated into
view before my retina a reproduction of the picture I had seen, or
imagined myself to have seen, in the supper-room; and as at that time
it opened before me an unknown vista quite removed from the surrounding
scene, so it did now, and I beheld again in faint outlines, and yet with
the effect of complete distinctness, a square of light through which
appeared an open passage partly shut off from view by a half-lifted
curtain and the tall figure of a man holding back this curtain and
gazing, or seeming to gaze, at his own breast, on which he had already
laid one quivering finger. What did it mean? In the excitement of the horrible occurrence which
had engrossed us all, I had forgotten this curious experience; but on
feeling anew the vague sensation of shock and expectation which seemed
its natural accompaniment, I became conscious of a sudden conviction
that the picture which had opened before me in the supper-room was the
result of a reflection in a glass or mirror of something then going on
in a place not otherwise within the reach of my vision; a reflection,
the importance of which I suddenly realized when I recalled at what a
critical moment it had occurred. A man in a state of dread looking at
his breast, within five minutes of the stir and rush of the dreadful
event which had marked this evening! A hope, great as the despair in which I had just been sunk, gave me
courage to drop my hands and advance impetuously toward the inspector. "Don't speak, I pray; don't judge any of us further till you have heard
what I have to say." In great astonishment and with an aspect of some severity, he asked
me what I had to say now which I had not had the opportunity of saying
before. I replied with all the passion of a forlorn hope that it was
only at this present moment I remembered a fact which might have a very
decided bearing on this case; and, detecting evidences, as I thought, of
relenting on his part, I backed up this statement by an entreaty for a
few words with him apart, as the matter I had to tell was private and
possibly too fanciful for any ear but his own. He looked as if he apprehended some loss of valuable time, but, touched
by the involuntary gesture of appeal with which I supplemented my
request, he led me into a corner, where, with just an encouraging glance
toward Mr. Durand, who seemed struck dumb by my action, I told the
inspector of that momentary picture which I had seen reflected in what I
was now sure was some window-pane or mirror. "It was at a time coincident, or very nearly coincident, with the
perpetration of the crime you are now investigating," I concluded. "Within five minutes afterward came the shout which roused us all to
what had happened in the alcove. I do not know what passage I saw or
what door or even what figure; but the latter, I am sure, was that of
the guilty man. Something in the outline (and it was the outline only I
could catch) expressed an emotion incomprehensible to me at the moment,
but which, in my remembrance, impresses me as that of fear and dread. It
was not the entrance to the alcove I beheld--that would have struck me
at once--but some other opening which I might recognize if I saw it. Can
not that opening be found, and may it not give a clue to the man I saw
skulking through it with terror and remorse in his heart?" "Was this figure, when you saw it, turned toward you or away?" the
inspector inquired with unexpected interest. "Turned partly away. He was going from me." "And you sat--where?" "Shall I show you?" The inspector bowed, then with a low word of caution turned to my uncle. "I am going to take this young lady into the hall for a moment, at her
own request. May I ask you and Mr. Durand to await me here?" Without pausing for reply, he threw open the door and presently we were
pacing the deserted supper-room, seeking the place where I had sat. I found it almost by a miracle,--everything being in great disorder. Guided by my bouquet, which I had left behind me in my escape from the
table, I laid hold of the chair before which it lay, and declared quite
confidently to the inspector:

"This is where I sat." Naturally his glance and mine both flew to the opposite wall. A window
was before us of an unusual size and make. Unlike any which had ever
before come under my observation, it swung on a pivot, and, though shut
at the present moment, might very easily, when opened, present its huge
pane at an angle capable of catching reflections from some of the many
mirrors decorating the reception-room situated diagonally across the
hall. As all the doorways on this lower floor were of unusual width, an
open path was offered, as it were, for these reflections to pass, making
it possible for scenes to be imaged here which, to the persons involved,
would seem as safe from any one's scrutiny as if they were taking place
in the adjoining house. As we realized this, a look passed between us of more than ordinary
significance. Pointing to the window, the inspector turned to a group of
waiters watching us from the other side of the room and asked if it had
been opened that evening. The answer came quickly. "Yes, sir,--just before the--the--"

"I understand," broke in the inspector; and, leaning over me, he
whispered: "Tell me again exactly what you thought you saw." But I could add little to my former description. "Perhaps you can tell
me this," he kindly persisted. "Was the picture, when you saw it, on a
level with your eye, or did you have to lift your head in order to see
it?" "It was high up,--in the air, as it were. That seemed its oddest
feature." The inspector's mouth took a satisfied curve. "Possibly I might identify
the door and passage, if I saw them," I suggested. "Certainly, certainly," was his cheerful rejoinder; and, summoning one
of his men, he was about to give some order, when his impulse changed,
and he asked if I could draw. I assured him, in some surprise, that I was far from being an adept
in that direction, but that possibly I might manage a rough sketch;
whereupon he pulled a pad and pencil from his pocket and requested me
to make some sort of attempt to reproduce, on paper, my memory of this
passage and the door. My heart was beating violently, and the pencil shook in my hand, but I
knew that it would not do for me to show any hesitation in fixing for
all eyes what, unaccountably to myself, continued to be perfectly plain
to my own. So I endeavored to do as he bade me, and succeeded, to some
extent, for he uttered a slight ejaculation at one of its features, and,
while duly expressing his thanks, honored me with a very sharp look. "Is this your first visit to this house?" he asked. "No; I have been here before." "In the evening, or in the afternoon?" "In the afternoon." "I am told that the main entrance is not in use to-night." "No. A side door is provided for occasions like the present. Guests
entering there find a special hall and staircase, by which they can
reach the upstairs dressing-rooms, without crossing the main hall. Is
that what you mean?" "Yes, that is what I mean." I stared at him in wonder. What lay back of such questions as these? "You came in, as others did, by this side entrance," he now proceeded. "Did you notice, as you turned to go up stairs, an arch opening into a
small passageway at your left?" "I did not," I began, flushing, for I thought I understood him now. "I
was too eager to reach the dressing-room to look about me." "Very well," he replied; "I may want to show you that arch." The outline of an arch, backing the figure we were endeavoring to
identify, was a marked feature in the sketch I had shown him. "Will you take a seat near by while I make a study of this matter?" I turned with alacrity to obey. There was something in his air and
manner which made me almost buoyant. Had my fanciful interpretation of
what I had seen reached him with the conviction it had me? If so, there
was hope,--hope for the man I loved, who had gone in and out between
curtains, and not through any arch such as he had mentioned or I had
described. Providence was working for me. I saw it in the way the men
now moved about, swinging the window to and fro, under the instruction
of the inspector, manipulating the lights, opening doors and drawing
back curtains. Providence was working for me, and when, a few minutes
later, I was asked to reseat myself in my old place at the supper-table
and take another look in that slightly deflected glass, I knew that my
effort had met with its reward, and that for the second time I was
to receive the impression of a place now indelibly imprinted on my
consciousness. "Is not that it?" asked the inspector, pointing at the glass with a last
look at the imperfect sketch I had made him, and which he still held in
his hand. "Yes," I eagerly responded. "All but the man. He whose figure I see
there is another person entirely; I see no remorse, or even fear, in his
looks." "Of course not. You are looking at the reflection of one of my men. Miss
Van Arsdale, do you recognize the place now under your eye?" "I do not. You spoke of an arch in the hall, at the left of the carriage
entrance, and I see an arch in the window-pane before me, but--"

"You are looking straight through the alcove,--perhaps you did not
know that another door opened at its back,--into the passage which runs
behind it. Farther on is the arch, and beyond that arch the side hall
and staircase leading to the dressing-rooms. This door, the one in the
rear of the alcove, I mean, is hidden from those entering from the main
hall by draperies which have been hung over it for this occasion, but
it is quite visible from the back passageway, and there can be no doubt
that it was by its means the man, whose reflected image you saw, both
entered and left the alcove. It is an important fact to establish, and
we feel very much obliged to you for the aid you have given us in this
matter." Then, as I continued to stare at him in my elation and surprise, he
added, in quick explanation:

"The lights in the alcove, and in the several parlors, are all hung with
shades, as you must perceive, but the one in the hall, beyond the arch,
is very bright, which accounts for the distinctness of this double
reflection. Another thing,--and it is a very interesting point,--it
would have been impossible for this reflection to be noticeable
from where you sit, if the level of the alcove flooring had not been
considerably higher than that of the main floor. But for this freak of
the architect, the continual passing to and fro of people would have
prevented the reflection in its passage from surface to surface. Miss
Van Arsdale, it would seem that by one of those chances which happen
but once or twice in a lifetime, every condition was propitious at the
moment to make this reflection a possible occurrence, even the location
and width of the several doorways and the exact point at which the
portiere was drawn aside from the entrance to the alcove." "It is wonderful," I cried, "wonderful!" Then, to his astonishment,
perhaps, I asked if there was not a small door of communication between
the passageway back of the alcove and the large central hall. "Yes," he replied. "It opens just beyond the fireplace. Three small
steps lead to it." "I thought so," I murmured, but more to myself than to him. In my mind I
was thinking how a man, if he so wished, could pass from the very heart
of this assemblage into the quiet passageway, and so on into the alcove,
without attracting very much attention from his fellow guests. I forgot
that there was another way of approach even less noticeable that by
the small staircase running up beyond the arch directly to the
dressing-rooms. That no confusion may arise in any one's mind in regard to these curious
approaches, I subjoin a plan of this portion of the lower floor as it
afterward appeared in the leading dailies. "And Mr. Durand?" I stammered, as I followed the inspector back to the
room where we had left that gentleman. "You will believe his statement
now and look for this second intruder with the guiltily-hanging head and
frightened mien?" "Yes," he replied, stopping me on the threshold of the door and taking
my hand kindly in his, "if--(don't start, my dear; life is full of
trouble for young and old, and youth is the best time to face a sad
experience) if he is not himself the man you saw staring in frightened
horror at his breast. Have you not noticed that he is not dressed in
all respects like the other gentlemen present? That, though he has not
donned his overcoat, he has put on, somewhat prematurely, one might say,
the large silk handkerchief lie presumably wears under it? Have you not
noticed this, and asked yourself why?" I had noticed it. I had noticed it from the moment I recovered from my
fainting fit, but I had not thought it a matter of sufficient interest
to ask, even of myself, his reason for thus hiding his shirt-front. Now
I could not. My faculties were too confused, my heart too deeply shaken
by the suggestion which the inspector's words conveyed, for me to be
conscious of anything but the devouring question as to what I should do
if, by my own mistaken zeal, I had succeeded in plunging the man I loved
yet deeper into the toils in which he had become enmeshed. The inspector left me no time for the settlement of this question. Ushering me back into the room where Mr. Durand and my uncle awaited
our return in apparently unrelieved silence, he closed the door upon
the curious eyes of the various persons still lingering in the hall, and
abruptly said to Mr. Durand:

"The explanations you have been pleased to give of the manner in
which this diamond came into your possession are not too fanciful for
credence, if you can satisfy us on another point which has awakened
some doubt in the mind of one of my men. Mr. Durand, you appear to
have prepared yourself for departure somewhat prematurely. Do you mind
removing that handkerchief for a moment? My reason for so peculiar a
request will presently appear." Alas, for my last fond hope! Mr. Durand, with a face as white as the
background of snow framed by the uncurtained window against which he
leaned, lifted his hand as if to comply with the inspector's request,
then let it fall again with a grating laugh. "I see that I am not likely to escape any of the results of my
imprudence," he cried, and with a quick jerk bared his shirt-front. A splash of red defiled its otherwise uniform whiteness! That it was the
red of heart's blood was proved by the shrinking look he unconsciously
cast at it. IV. EXPLANATIONS

My love for Anson Durand died at sight of that crimson splash or I
thought it did. In this spot of blood on the breast of him to whom I had
given my heart I could read but one word--guilt--heinous guilt, guilt
denied and now brought to light in language that could be seen and read
by all men. Why should I stay in such a presence? Had not the inspector
himself advised me to go? Yes, but another voice bade me remain. Just as I reached the door, Anson
Durand found his voice and I heard, in the full, sweet tones I loved so
well:

"Wait I am not to be judged like this. I will explain!" But here the inspector interposed. "Do you think it wise to make any such attempt without the advice of
counsel, Mr. Durand?" The indignation with which Mr. Durand wheeled toward him raised in me a
faint hope. "Good God, yes!" he cried. "Would you have me leave Miss Van Arsdale one
minute longer than is necessary to such dreadful doubts? Rita--Miss Van
Arsdale--weakness, and weakness only, has brought me into my present
position. I did not kill Mrs. Fairbrother, nor did I knowingly take
her diamond, though appearances look that way, as I am very ready to
acknowledge. I did go to her in the alcove, not once, but twice, and
these are my reasons for doing so: About three months ago a certain
well-known man of enormous wealth came to me with the request that I
should procure for him a diamond of superior beauty. He wished to give
it to his wife, and he wished it to outshine any which could now be
found in New York. This meant sending abroad--an expense he was quite
willing to incur on the sole condition that the stone should not
disappoint him when he saw it, and that it was to be in his hands on the
eighteenth of March, his wife's birthday. Never before had I had such an
opportunity for a large stroke of business. Naturally elated, I entered
at once into correspondence with the best known dealers on the other
side, and last week a diamond was delivered to me which seemed to fill
all the necessary requirements. I had never seen a finer stone, and was
consequently rejoicing in my success, when some one, I do not remember
who now, chanced to speak in my hearing of the wonderful stone possessed
by a certain Mrs. Fairbrother--a stone so large, so brilliant and so
precious altogether that she seldom wore it, though it was known to
connoisseurs and had a great reputation at Tiffany's, where it had once
been sent for some alteration in the setting. Was this stone larger and
finer than the one I had procured with so much trouble? If so, my labor
had all been in vain, for my patron must have known of this diamond and
would expect to see it surpassed. "I was so upset by this possibility that I resolved to see the jewel and
make comparisons for myself. I found a friend who agreed to introduce
me to the lady. She received me very graciously and was amiable enough
until the subject of diamonds was broached, when she immediately
stiffened and left me without an opportunity of proffering my request. However, on every other subject she was affable, and I found it easy
enough to pursue the acquaintance till we were almost on friendly terms. But I never saw the diamond, nor would she talk about it, though I
caused her some surprise when one day I drew out before her eyes the one
I had procured for my patron and made her look at it. 'Fine,' she cried,
'fine!' But I failed to detect any envy in her manner, and so knew that
I had not achieved the object set me by my wealthy customer. This was a
woeful disappointment; yet, as Mrs. Fairbrother never wore her diamond,
it was among the possibilities that he might be satisfied with the very
fine gem I had obtained for him, and, influenced by this hope, I sent
him this morning a request to come and see it tomorrow. Tonight I
attended this ball, and almost as soon as I enter the drawing-room I
hear that Mrs. Fairbrother is present and is wearing her famous jewel. What could you expect of me? Why, that I would make an effort to see it
and so be ready with a reply to my exacting customer when he should ask
me to-morrow if the stone I showed him had its peer in the city. But
was not in the drawing-room then, and later I became interested
elsewhere"--here he cast a look at me--"so that half the evening passed
before I had an opportunity to join her in the so-called alcove, where
I had seen her set up her miniature court. What passed between us in the
short interview we held together you will find me prepared to state, if
necessary. It was chiefly marked by the one short view I succeeded in
obtaining of her marvelous diamond, in spite of the pains she took to
hide it from me by some natural movement whenever she caught my eyes
leaving her face. But in that one short look I had seen enough. This was
a gem for a collector, not to be worn save in a royal presence. How had
she come by it? And could Mr. Smythe expect me to procure him a stone
like that? In my confusion I arose to depart, but the lady showed
a disposition to keep me, and began chatting so vivaciously that I
scarcely noticed that she was all the time engaged in drawing off
her gloves. Indeed, I almost forgot the jewel, possibly because her
movements hid it so completely, and only remembered it when, with a
sudden turn from the window where she had drawn me to watch the falling
flakes, she pressed the gloves into my hand with the coquettish request
that I should take care of them for her. I remember, as I took them,
of striving to catch another glimpse of the stone, whose brilliancy
had dazzled me, but she had opened her fan between us. A moment after,
thinking I heard approaching steps, I quitted the room. This was my
first visit." As he stopped, possibly for breath, possibly to judge to what extent I
was impressed by his account, the inspector seized the opportunity to
ask if Mrs. Fairbrother had been standing any of this time with her back
to him. To which he answered yes, while they were in the window. "Long enough for her to pluck off the jewel and thrust it into the
gloves, if she had so wished?" "Quite long enough." "But you did not see her do this?" "I did not." "And so took the gloves without suspicion?" "Entirely so." "And carried them away?" "Unfortunately, yes." "Without thinking that she might want them the next minute?" "I doubt if I was thinking seriously of her at all. My thoughts were on
my own disappointment." "Did you carry these gloves out in your hand?" "No, in my pocket." "I see. And you met--"

"No one. The sound I heard must have come from the rear hall." "And there was nobody on the steps?" "No. A gentleman was standing at their foot--Mr. Grey, the
Englishman--but his face was turned another way, and he looked as if he
had been in that same position for several minutes." "Did this gentleman--Mr. Grey--see you?" "I can not say, but I doubt it. He appeared to be in a sort of dream. There were other people about, but nobody with whom I was acquainted." "Very good. Now for the second visit you acknowledge having paid this
unfortunate lady." The inspector's voice was hard. I clung a little more tightly to my
uncle, and Mr. Durand, after one agonizing glance my way, drew himself
up as if quite conscious that he had entered upon the most serious part
of the struggle. "I had forgotten the gloves in my hurried departure; but presently I
remembered them, and grew very uneasy. I did not like carrying this
woman's property about with me. I had engaged myself, an hour before, to
Miss Van Arsdale, and was very anxious to rejoin her. The gloves worried
me, and finally, after a little aimless wandering through the various
rooms, I determined to go back and restore them to their owner. The
doors of the supper-room had just been flung open, and the end of
the hall near the alcove was comparatively empty, save for a certain
quizzical friend of mine, whom I saw sitting with his partner on the
yellow divan. I did not want to encounter him just then, for he had
already joked me about my admiration for the lady with the diamond, and
so I conceived the idea of approaching her by means of a second entrance
to the alcove, unsuspected by most of those present, but perfectly
well-known to me, who have been a frequent guest in this house. A door,
covered by temporary draperies, connects, as you may know, this alcove
with a passageway communicating directly with the hall of entrance and
the up-stairs dressing-rooms. To go up the main stairs and come down
by the side one, and so on, through a small archway, was a very simple
matter for me. If no early-departing or late arriving guests were in
that hall, I need fear but one encounter, and that was with the servant
stationed at the carriage entrance. But even he was absent at this
propitious instant, and I reached the door I sought without any
unpleasantness. This door opened out instead of in,--this I also knew
when planning this surreptitious intrusion, but, after pulling it open
and reaching for the curtain, which hung completely across it, I found
it not so easy to proceed as I had imagined. The stealthiness of my
action held back my hand; then the faint sounds I heard within advised
me that she was not alone, and that she might very readily regard with
displeasure my unexpected entrance by a door of which she was possibly
ignorant. I tell you all this because, if by any chance I was seen
hesitating in face of that curtain, doubts might have been raised which
I am anxious to dispel." Here his eyes left my face for that of the
inspector. "It certainly had a bad look,--that I don't deny; but I did not think
of appearances then. I was too anxious to complete a task which had
suddenly presented unexpected difficulties. That I listened before
entering was very natural, and when I heard no voice, only something
like a great sigh, I ventured to lift the curtain and step in. She was
sitting, not where I had left her, but on a couch at the left of the
usual entrance, her face toward me, and--you know how, Inspector. It was
her last sigh I had heard. Horrified, for I had never looked on death
before, much less crime, I reeled forward, meaning, I presume, to
rush down the steps shouting for help, when, suddenly, something fell
splashing on my shirt-front, and I saw myself marked with a stain of
blood. This both frightened and bewildered me, and it was a minute or
two before I had the courage to look up. When I did do so, I saw whence
this drop had come. Not from her, though the red stream was pouring down
the rich folds of her dress, but from a sharp needle-like instrument
which had been thrust, point downward, in the open work of an antique
lantern hanging near the doorway. What had happened to me might have
happened to any one who chanced to be in that spot at that special
moment, but I did not realize this then. Covering the splash with my
hands, I edged myself back to the door by which I had entered, watching
those deathful eyes and crushing under my feet the remnants of some
broken china with which the carpet was bestrewn. I had no thought of
her, hardly any of myself. To cross the room was all; to escape as
secretly as I came, before the portiere so nearly drawn between me
and the main hall should stir under the hand of some curious person
entering. It was my first sight of blood; my first contact with crime,
and that was what I did,--I fled." The last word was uttered with a gasp. Evidently he was greatly affected
by this horrible experience. "I am ashamed of myself," he muttered, "but nothing can now undo the
fact. I slid from the presence of this murdered woman as though she had
been the victim of my own rage or cupidity; and, being fortunate enough
to reach the dressing-room before the alarm had spread beyond the
immediate vicinity of the alcove, found and put on the handkerchief,
which made it possible for me to rush down and find Miss Van Arsdale,
who, somebody told me, had fainted. Not till I stood over her in that
remote corner beyond the supper-room did I again think of the gloves. What I did when I happened to think of them, you already know. I could
have shown no greater cowardice if I had known that the murdered woman's
diamond was hidden inside them. Yet, I did not know this, or even
suspect it. Nor do I understand, now, her reason for placing it there. Why should Mrs. Fairbrother risk such an invaluable gem to the custody
of one she knew so little? An unconscious custody, too? Was she afraid
of being murdered if she retained this jewel?" The inspector thought a moment, and then said:

"You mention your dread of some one entering by the one door before you
could escape by the other. Do you refer to the friend you left sitting
on the divan opposite?" "No, my friend had left that seat. The portiere was sufficiently drawn
for me to detect that. If I had waited a minute longer," he bitterly
added, "I should have found my way open to the regular entrance, and so
escaped all this." "Mr. Durand, you are not obliged to answer any of my questions; but, if
you wish, you may tell me whether, at this moment of apprehension, you
thought of the danger you ran of being seen from outside by some one of
the many coachmen passing by on the driveway?" "No,--I did not even think of the window,--I don't know why; but, if
any one passing by did see me, I hope they saw enough to substantiate my
story." The inspector made no reply. He seemed to be thinking. I heard afterward
that the curtains, looped back in the early evening, had been found
hanging at full length over this window by those who first rushed in
upon the scene of death. Had he hoped to entrap Mr. Durand into some
damaging admission? Or was he merely testing his truth? His expression
afforded no clue to his thoughts, and Mr. Durand, noting this, remarked
with some dignity:

"I do not expect strangers to accept these explanations, which must
sound strange and inadequate in face of the proof I carry of having been
with that woman after the fatal weapon struck her heart. But, to one who
knows me, and knows me well, I can surely appeal for credence to a tale
which I here declare to be as true as if I had sworn to it in a court of
justice." "Anson!" I passionately cried out, loosening my clutch upon my uncle's
arm. My confidence in him had returned. And then, as I noted the inspector's businesslike air, and my uncle's
wavering look and unconvinced manner, I felt my heart swell, and,
flinging all discretion to the wind, I bounded eagerly forward. Laying
my hands in those of Mr. Durand, I cried fervently:

"I believe in you. Nothing but your own words shall ever shake my
confidence in your innocence." The sweet, glad look I received was my best reply. I could leave the
room, after that. But not the house. Another experience awaited me, awaited us all, before
this full, eventful evening came to a close. V. SUPERSTITION

I had gone up stairs for my wraps--my uncle having insisted on my
withdrawing from a scene where my very presence seemed in some degree to
compromise me. Soon prepared for my departure, I was crossing the hall to the small
door communicating with the side staircase where my uncle had promised
to await me, when I felt myself seized by a desire to have another look
below before leaving the place in which were centered all my deepest
interests. A wide landing, breaking up the main flight of stairs some few feet from
the top, offered me an admirable point of view. With but little thought
of possible consequences, and no thought at all of my poor, patient
uncle, I slipped down to this landing, and, protected by the unusual
height of its balustrade, allowed myself a parting glance at the scene
with which my most poignant memories were henceforth to be connected. Before me lay the large square of the central hall. Opening out from
this was the corridor leading to the front door, and incidentally to the
library. As my glance ran down this corridor, I beheld, approaching from
the room just mentioned, the tall figure of the Englishman. He halted as he reached the main hall and stood gazing eagerly at a
group of men and women clustered near the fireplace--a group on which I
no sooner cast my own eye than my attention also became fixed. The inspector had come from the room where I had left him with Mr.
Durand and was showing to these people the extraordinary diamond,
which he had just recovered under such remarkable if not suspicious
circumstances. Young heads and old were meeting over it, and I was
straining my ears to hear such comments as were audible above the
general hubbub, when Mr. Grey made a quick move and I looked his way
again in time to mark his air of concern and the uncertainty he showed
whether to advance or retreat. Unconscious of my watchful eye, and noting, no doubt, that most of the
persons in the group on which his own eye was leveled stood with their
backs toward him, he made no effort to disguise his profound interest
in the stone. His eye followed its passage from hand to hand with a
covetous eagerness of which he may not have been aware, and I was not
at all surprised when, after a short interval of troubled indecision, he
impulsively stepped forward and begged the privilege of handling the gem
himself. Our host, who stood not far from the inspector, said something to that
gentleman which led to this request being complied with. The stone was
passed over to Mr. Grey, and I saw, possibly because my heart was in my
eyes, that the great man's hand trembled as it touched his palm. Indeed,
his whole frame trembled, and I was looking eagerly for the result of
his inspection when, on his turning to hold the jewel up to the light,
something happened so abnormal and so strange that no one who was
fortunate (or unfortunate) enough to be present in the house at that
instant will ever forget it. This something was a cry, coming from no one knew where, which,
unearthly in its shrillness and the power it had on the imagination,
reverberated through the house and died away in a wail so weird, so
thrilling and so prolonged that it gripped not only my own nerveless and
weakened heart, but those of the ten strong men congregated below me. The diamond dropped from Mr. Grey's hand, and neither he nor any one
else moved to pick it up. Not till silence had come again--a silence
almost as unendurable to the sensitive ear as the cry which had preceded
it--did any one stir or think of the gem. Then one gentleman after
another bent to look for it, but with no success, till one of the
waiters, who possibly had followed it with his eye or caught sight of
its sparkle on the edge of the rug, whither it had rolled, sprang and
picked it up and handed it back to Mr. Grey. Instinctively the Englishman's hand closed on it, but it was very
evident to me, and I think to all, that his interest in it was gone. If
he looked at it he did not see it, for he stood like one stunned all
the time that agitated men and women were running hither and thither in
unavailing efforts to locate the sound yet ringing in their ears. Not
till these various searchers had all come together again, in terror of a
mystery they could not solve, did he let his hand fall and himself awake
to the scene about him. The words he at once gave utterance to were as remarkable as all the
rest. "Gentlemen," said he, "you must pardon my agitation. This cry--you need
not seek its source--is one to which I am only too well accustomed. I
have been the happy father of six children. Five I have buried, and,
before the death of each, this same cry has echoed in my ears. I have
but one child left, a daughter,--she is ill at the hotel. Do you wonder
that I shrink from this note of warning, and show myself something less
than a man under its influence? I am going home; but, first, one word
about this stone." Here he lifted it and bestowed, or appeared to bestow
on it, an anxious scrutiny, putting on his glasses and examining it
carefully before passing it back to the inspector. "I have heard," said he, with a change of tone which must have been
noticeable to every one, "that this stone was a very superior one, and
quite worthy of the fame it bore here in America. But, gentlemen,
you have all been greatly deceived in it; no one more than he who was
willing to commit murder for its possession. The stone, which you have
just been good enough to allow me to inspect, is no diamond, but a
carefully manufactured bit of paste not worth the rich and elaborate
setting which has been given to it. I am sorry to be the one to say
this, but I have made a study of precious stones, and I can not let
this bare-faced imitation pass through my hands without a protest. Mr. Ramsdell," this to our host, "I beg you will allow me to utter my
excuses, and depart at once. My daughter is worse,--this I know, as
certainly as that I am standing here. The cry you have heard is the one
superstition of our family. Pray God that I find her alive!" After this, what could be said? Though no one who had heard him, not
even my own romantic self, showed any belief in this interpretation of
the remarkable sound that had just gone thrilling through the house,
yet, in face of his declared acceptance of it as a warning, and the fact
that all efforts had failed to locate the sound, or even to determine
its source, no other course seemed open but to let this distinguished
man depart with the suddenness his superstitious fears demanded. That this was in opposition to the inspector's wishes was evident
enough. Naturally, he would have preferred Mr. Grey to remain, if only
to make clear his surprising conclusions in regard to a diamond which
had passed through the hands of some of the best judges in the country,
without a doubt having been raised as to its genuineness. With his departure the inspector's manner changed. He glanced at the
stone in his hand, and slowly shook his head. "I doubt if Mr. Grey's judgment can be depended on, to-night," said he,
and pocketed the gem as carefully as if his belief in its real value had
been but little disturbed by the assertions of this renowned foreigner. I have no distinct remembrance of how I finally left the house, or of
what passed between my uncle and myself on our way home. I was numb with
the shock, and neither my intelligence nor my feelings were any longer
active. I recall but one impression, and that was the effect made on me
by my old home on our arrival there, as of something new and strange;
so much had happened, and such changes had taken place in myself
since leaving it five hours before. But nothing else is vivid in my
remembrance till that early hour of the dreary morning, when, on waking
to the world with a cry, I beheld my uncle's anxious figure, bending
over me from the foot-board. Instantly I found tongue, and question after question leaped from my
lips. He did not answer them; he could not; but when I grew feverish and
insistent, he drew the morning paper from behind his back, and laid it
quietly down within my reach. I felt calmed in an instant, and when,
after a few affectionate words, he left me to myself, I seized on
the sheet and read what so many others were reading at that moment
throughout the city. I spare you the account so far as it coincides with what I had myself
seen and heard the night before. A few particulars which had not reached
my ears will interest you. The instrument of death found in the place
designated by Mr. Durand was one of note to such as had any taste or
knowledge of curios. It was a stiletto of the most delicate type, long,
keen and slender. Not an American product, not even of this century's
manufacture, but a relic of the days when deadly thrusts were given in
the corners and by-ways of medieval streets. This made the first mystery. The second was the as yet unexplainable presence, on the alcove floor,
of two broken coffee-cups, which no waiter nor any other person, in
fact, admitted having carried there. The tray, which had fallen from
Peter Mooney's hand,--the waiter who had been the first to give the
alarm of murder,--had held no cups, only ices. This was a fact, proved. But the handles of two cups had been found among the debris,--cups which
must have been full, from the size of the coffee stain left on the rug
where they had fallen. In reading this I remembered that Mr. Durand had mentioned stepping on
some broken pieces of china in his escape from the fatal scene, and,
struck with this confirmation of a theory which was slowly taking form
in my own mind, I passed on to the next paragraph, with a sense of
expectation. The result was a surprise. Others may have been told, I was not, that
Mrs. Fairbrother had received a communication from outside only a few
minutes previous to her death. A Mr. Fullerton, who had preceded Mr.
Durand in his visit to the alcove, owned to having opened the window for
her at some call or signal from outside, and taken in a small piece of
paper which he saw lifted up from below on the end of a whip handle. He
could not see who held the whip, but at Mrs. Fairbrother's entreaty he
unpinned the note and gave it to her. While she was puzzling over it,
for it was apparently far from legible, he took another look out in time
to mark a figure rush from below toward the carriage drive. He did not
recognize the figure nor would he know it again. As to the nature of the
communication itself he could say nothing, save that Mrs. Fairbrother
did not seem to be affected favorably by it. She frowned and was looking
very gloomy when he left the alcove. Asked if he had pulled the curtains
together after closing the window, he said that he had not; that she had
not requested him to do so. This story, which was certainly a strange one, had been confirmed by the
testimony of the coachman who had lent his whip for the purpose. This
coachman, who was known to be a man of extreme good nature, had seen no
harm in lending his whip to a poor devil who wished to give a telegram
or some such hasty message to the lady sitting just above them in a
lighted window. The wind was fierce and the snow blinding, and it
was natural that the man should duck his head, but he remembered his
appearance well enough to say that he was either very cold or very much
done up and that he wore a greatcoat with the collar pulled up about his
ears. When he came back with the whip he seemed more cheerful than when
he asked for it, but had no "thank you" for the favor done him, or if he
had, it was lost in his throat and the piercing gale. The communication, which was regarded by the police as a matter of the
highest importance, had been found in her hand by the coroner. It was a
mere scrawl written in pencil on a small scrap of paper. The following
facsimile of the scrawl was given to the public in the hope that some
one would recognize the handwriting. The first two lines overlapped and were confused, but the last one
was clear enough. Expect trouble if--If what? Hundreds were asking the
question and at this very moment. I should soon be asking it, too, but
first, I must make an effort to understand the situation,--a situation
which up to now appeared to involve Mr. Durand, and Mr. Durand only, as
the suspected party. This was no more than I expected, yet it came with a shock under the
broad glare of this wintry morning; so impossible did it seem in the
light of every-day life that guilt could be associated in any one's mind
with a man of such unblemished record and excellent standing. But the
evidence adduced against him was of a kind to appeal to the common
mind--we all know that evidence--nor could I say, after reading the full
account, that I was myself unaffected by its seeming weight. Not that my
faith in his innocence was shaken. I had met his look of love and tender
gratitude and my confidence in him had been restored, but I saw, with
all the clearness of a mind trained by continuous study, how difficult
it was going to be to counteract the prejudice induced, first, by his
own inconsiderate acts, especially by that unfortunate attempt of his to
secrete Mrs. Fairbrother's gloves in another woman's bag, and secondly,
by his peculiar explanations--explanations which to many must seem
forced and unnatural. I saw and felt nerved to a superhuman task. I believed him innocent,
and if others failed to prove him so, I would undertake to clear him
myself,--I, the little Rita, with no experience of law or courts or
crime, but with simply an unbounded faith in the man suspected and in
the keenness of my own insight,--an insight which had already served me
so well and would serve me yet better, once I had mastered the details
which must be the prelude to all intelligent action. The morning's report stopped with the explanations given by Mr. Durand
of the appearances against him. Consequently no word appeared of the
after events which had made such an impression at the time on all
the persons present. Mr. Grey was mentioned, but simply as one of the
guests, and to no one reading this early morning issue would any doubt
come as to the genuineness of the diamond which, to all appearance, had
been the leading motive in the commission of this great crime. The effect on my own mind of this suppression was a curious one. I began
to wonder if the whole event had not been a chimera of my disturbed
brain--a nightmare which had visited me, and me alone, and not a fact to
be reckoned with. But a moment's further thought served to clear my mind
of all such doubts, and I perceived that the police had only exercised
common prudence in withholding Mr. Grey's sensational opinion of the
stone till it could be verified by experts. The two columns of gossip devoted to the family differences which had
led to the separation of Mr. and Mrs. Fairbrother, I shall compress into
a few lines. They had been married three years before in the city of
Baltimore. He was a rich man then, but not the multimillionaire he is
to-day. Plain-featured and without manner, lie was no mate for this
sparkling coquette, whose charm was of the kind which grows with
exercise. Though no actual scandal was ever associated with her name, he
grew tired of her caprices, and the conquests which she made no endeavor
to hide either from him or from the world at large; and at some time
during the previous year they had come to a friendly understanding
which led to their living apart, each in grand style and with a certain
deference to the proprieties which retained them their friends and an
enviable place in society. He was not often invited where she was, and
she never appeared in any assemblage where he was expected; but with
this exception, little feeling was shown; matters progressed smoothly,
and to their credit, let it be said, no one ever heard either of them
speak otherwise than considerately of the other. He was at present out
or town, having started some three weeks before for the southwest, but
would probably return on receipt of the telegram which had been sent
him. The comments made on the murder were necessarily hurried. It was called
a mystery, but it was evident enough that Mr. Durand's detention was
looked on as the almost certain prelude to his arrest on the charge of
murder. I had had some discipline in life. Although a favorite of my wealthy
uncle, I had given up very early the prospects he held out to me of a
continued enjoyment of his bounty, and entered on duties which required
self-denial and hard work. I did this because I enjoy having both my
mind and heart occupied. To be necessary to some one, as a nurse is to
a patient, seemed to me an enviable fate till I came under the influence
of Anson Durand. Then the craving of all women for the common lot of
their sex became my craving also; a craving, however, to which I failed
at first to yield, for I felt that it was unshared, and thus a token of
weakness. Fighting my battle, I succeeded in winning it, as I thought,
just as the nurse's diploma was put in my hands. Then came the great
surprise of my life. Anson Durand expressed his love for me and I awoke
to the fact that all my preparation had been for home joys and a woman's
true existence. One hour of ecstasy in the light of this new hope, then
tragedy and something approaching chaos! Truly I had been through a
schooling. But was it one to make me useful in the only way I could
be useful now? I did not know; I did not care; I was determined on my
course, fit or unfit, and, in the relief brought by this appeal to my
energy, I rose and dressed and went about the duties of the day. One of these was to determine whether Mr. Grey, on his return to his
hotel, had found his daughter as ill as his fears had foreboded. A
telephone message or two satisfied me on this point. 