

E-text prepared by Lisa Miller



THE GOLDEN SCORPION

by

SAX ROHMER

1920







Part I

THE COWLED MAN

    I  The Shadow of a Cowl
   II  The Pilbroch of the M'Gregors
  III  The Scorpion's Tail
   IV  Mademoiselle Dorian
    V  The Sealed Envelope
   VI  The Assistant Commissioner
  VII  Contents of the Sealed Envelope
 VIII  The Assistant Commissioner's Theory
   IX  The Chinese Coin
    X  "Close Your Shutters at Night"
   XI  The Blue Ray


Part II

STATEMENT OF M. GASTON MAX

I. THE DANCER OF MONTMARTRE

    I  Zara el-Khala
   II  Concerning the Grand Duke
  III  A Strange Question
   IV  The Fight in the Cafe

II. "LE BALAFRE"

    I  I Become Charles Malet
   II  Baiting the Trap
  III  Disappearance of Charles Malet
   IV  I Meet an Old Acquaintance
    V  Conclusion of Statement


Part III

AT THE HOUSE OF AH-FANG-FU

    I  The Brain Thieves
   II  The Red Circle
  III  Miska's Story
   IV  Miska's Story (concluded)
    V  The Heart of Chunda Lal
   VI  The Man with the Scar
  VII  In the Opium Den
 VIII  The Green-Eyed Joss


Part IV

THE LAIR OF THE SCORPION

   I  The Sublime Order
  II  The Living Death
 III  The Fifth Secret of Rache Churan
  IV  The Guile of the East
   V  What Happened to Stuart
  VI  "Jey Bhowani!" VII  The Way of the Scorpion





Part I

THE COWLED MAN



CHAPTER I

THE SHADOW OF A COWL


Keppel Stuart, M.D., F. R. S., awoke with a start and discovered
himself to be bathed in cold perspiration. The moonlight shone in at
his window, but did not touch the bed, therefore his awakening could
not be due to this cause. He lay for some time listening for any
unfamiliar noise which might account for the sudden disturbance of
his usually sound slumbers. In the house below nothing stirred. His
windows were widely open and he could detect that vague drumming
which is characteristic of midnight London; sometimes, too, the
clashing of buffers upon some siding of the Brighton railway where
shunting was in progress and occasional siren notes from the Thames. Otherwise--nothing. He glanced at the luminous disk of his watch. The hour was half-past
two. Dawn was not far off. The night seemed to have become almost
intolerably hot, and to this heat Stuart felt disposed to ascribe
both his awakening and also a feeling of uncomfortable tension of
which he now became aware. He continued to listen, and, listening
and hearing nothing, recognized with anger that he was frightened. A sense of some presence oppressed him. Someone or something evil
was near him--perhaps in the room, veiled by the shadows. This
uncanny sensation grew more and more marked. Stuart sat up in bed, slowly and cautiously, looking all about him. He remembered to have awakened once thus in India--and to have found
a great cobra coiled at his feet. His inspection revealed the
presence of nothing unfamiliar, and he stepped out on to the floor. A faint clicking sound reached his ears. He stood quite still. The
clicking was repeated. "There is someone downstairs in my study!" muttered Stuart. He became aware that the fear which held him was such that unless he
acted and acted swiftly he should become incapable of action, but he
remembered that whereas the moonlight poured into the bedroom, the
staircase would be in complete darkness. He walked barefooted across
to the dressing-table and took up an electric torch which lay there. He had not used it for some time, and he pressed the button to learn
if the torch was charged. A beam of white light shone out across the
room, and at the same instant came another sound. If it came from below or above, from the adjoining room or from

Outside in the road, Stuart knew not. But following hard upon the
mysterious disturbance which had aroused him it seemed to pour ice
into his veins, it added the complementary touch to his panic. For
it was a kind of low wail--a ghostly minor wail in falling
cadences--unlike any sound he had heard. It was so excessively
horrible that it produced a curious effect. Discovering from the dancing of the torch-ray that his hand was
trembling, Stuart concluded that he had awakened from a nightmare
and that this fiendish wailing was no more than an unusually delayed
aftermath of the imaginary horrors which had bathed him in cold
perspiration. He walked resolutely to the door, threw it open and cast the beam of
light on to the staircase. Softly he began to descend. Before the
study door he paused. There was no sound. He threw open the door,
directing the torch-ray into the room. Cutting a white lane through the blackness, it  shone fully upon his
writing-table, which was a rather fine Jacobean piece having a sort
of quaint bureau superstructure containing cabinets and drawers. He
could detect nothing unusual in the appearance of the littered table. A tobacco jar stood there, a pipe resting in the lid. Papers and
books were scattered untidily as he had left them, surrounding a tray
full of pipe and cigarette ash. Then, suddenly, he saw something else. One of the bureau drawers was half opened. Stuart stood quite still, staring at the table. There was no sound in
the room. He crossed slowly, moving the light from right to left. His
papers had been overhauled methodically. The drawers had been
replaced, but he felt assured that all had been examined. The light
switch was immediately beside the outer door, and Stuart walked
over to it and switched on both lamps. Turning, he surveyed the
brilliantly illuminated room. Save for himself, it was empty. He
looked out into the hallway again. There was no one there. No sound
broke the stillness. But that consciousness of some near presence
asserted itself persistently and uncannily. "My nerves are out of order!" he muttered. "No one has touched my
papers. I must have left the drawer open myself." He switched off the light and walked across to the door. He had
actually passed out intending to return to his room, when he became
aware of a slight draught. He stopped. Someone or something, evil and watchful, seemed to be very near again. Stuart turned and found himself gazing fearfully in the direction of
the open study door. He became persuaded anew that someone was hiding
there, and snatching up an ash stick which lay upon a chair in the
hall he returned to the door. One step into the room he took and
paused--palsied with a sudden fear which exceeded anything he had
known. A white casement curtain was drawn across the French windows ... and
outlined upon this moon-bright screen he saw a tall figure. It was
that of a _cowled man_! Such an apparition would have been sufficiently alarming had the cowl
been that of a monk, but the outline of this phantom being suggested
that of one of the Misericordia brethren or the costume worn of old
by the familiars of the Inquisition! His heart leapt wildly, and seemed to grow still. He sought to cry out
in his terror, but only emitted a dry gasping sound. The psychology of panic is obscure and has been but imperfectly
explored. The presence of the terrible cowled figure afforded a
confirmation of Stuart's theory that he was the victim of a species
of waking nightmare. Even as he looked, the shadow of the cowled man moved--and was gone. Stuart ran across the room, jerked open the curtains and stared out
across the moon-bathed lawn, its prospect terminated by high privet
hedges. One of the French windows was wide open. There was no one on
the lawn; there was no sound. "Mrs. M'Gregor swears that I always forget to shut these windows at
night!" he muttered. He closed and bolted the window, stood for a moment looking out across
the empty lawn, then turned and went out of the room. CHAPTER II

THE PIBROCH OF THE M'GREGORS


Dr. Stuart awoke in the morning and tried to recall what had occurred
during the night. He consulted his watch and found the hour to be six
a. m.  No one was stirring in the house, and he rose and put on a
bath robe. He felt perfectly well and could detect no symptoms of
nervous disorder. Bright sunlight was streaming into the room, and
he went out on to the landing, fastening the cord of his gown as he
descended the stairs. His study door was locked, with the key outside. He remembered having
locked it. Opening it, he entered and looked about him. He was
vaguely  disappointed. Save for the untidy litter of papers upon the
table, the study was as he had left it on retiring. If he could
believe the evidence of his senses, nothing had been disturbed. Not content with a casual inspection, he particularly examined those
papers which, in his dream adventure, he had believed to have been
submitted to mysterious inspection. They showed no signs of having
been touched. The casement curtains were drawn across the recess
formed by the French windows, and sunlight streamed in where,
silhouetted against the pallid illumination of the moon, he had seen
the man in the cowl. Drawing back the curtains, he examined the window
fastenings. They were secure. If the window had really been open in
the night, he must have left it so himself. "Well," muttered Stuart--"of all the amazing nightmares!" He determined, immediately he had bathed and completed his toilet, to
write an account of the dream for the Psychical Research Society, in
whose work he was interested. Half an hour later, as the movements of
an awakened household began to proclaim themselves, he sat down at
his writing-table and commenced to write. Keppel Stuart was a dark, good-looking man of about thirty-two, an
easy-going bachelor who, whilst not over ambitious, was nevertheless
a brilliant physician. He had worked for the Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine and had spent several years in India studying snake
poisons. His purchase of this humdrum suburban practice had been
dictated by a desire to make a home for a girl who at the eleventh
hour had declined to share it. Two years had elapsed since then, but
the shadow still lay upon Stuart's life, its influence being revealed
in a certain apathy, almost indifference, which characterised his
professional conduct. His account of the dream completed, he put the paper into a
pigeon-hole and forgot all about the matter. That day seemed to be
more than usually dull and the hours to drag wearily on. He was
conscious of a sort of suspense. He was waiting for something, or for
someone. He did not choose to analyse this mental condition. Had he
done so, the explanation was simple--and one that he dared not face. At about ten o'clock that night, having been called out to a case, he
returned to his house, walking straight into the study as was his
custom and casting a light Burberry with a soft hat upon the sofa
beside his stick and bag. The lamps were lighted, and the book-lined
room, indicative of a studious and not over-wealthy bachelor, looked
cheerful enough with the firelight dancing on the furniture. Mrs. M'Gregor, a grey-haired Scotch lady, attired with scrupulous
neatness, was tending the fire at the moment, and hearing Stuart come
in she turned and glanced at him. "A fire is rather superfluous to-night, Mrs. M'Gregor," he said. "I
found it unpleasantly warm walking." "May is a fearsome treacherous month, Mr. Keppel," replied the old
housekeeper, who from long association with the struggling
practitioner had come to regard him as a son. "An' a wheen o' dry
logs is worth a barrel o' pheesic. To which I would add that if ye're
hintin' it's time ye shed ye're woolsies for ye're summer wear, all I
have to reply is that I hope sincerely ye're patients are more
prudent than yoursel'." She placed his slippers in the fender and took up the hat, stick and
coat from the sofa. Stuart laughed. "Most of the neighbors exhibit their wisdom by refraining from
becoming patients of mine, Mrs. M'Gregor." "That's no weesdom; it's just preejudice." "Prejudice!" cried Stuart, dropping down upon the sofa. "Aye," replied Mrs. M'Gregor firmly--"preejudice! They're no' that
daft but they're well aware o' who's the cleverest physeecian in the
deestrict, an' they come to nane other than Dr. Keppel Stuart when
they're sair sick and think they're dying; but ye'll never establish
the practice you desairve, Mr. Keppel--never--until--"

"Until when, Mrs. M'Gregor?" "Until ye take heed of an auld wife's advice and find a new
housekeeper." "Mrs. M'Gregor!" exclaimed Stuart with concern. "You don't mean that
you want to desert me? After--let me see--how many years is it,
Mrs. M'Gregor?" "Thirty years come last Shrove Tuesday; I dandled ye on my knee, and
eh! but ye were bonny! God forbid, but I'd like to see ye thriving as
ye desairve, and that ye'll never do whilst ye're a bachelor." "Oh!" cried Stuart, laughing again--"oh, that's it, is it? So you
would like me to find some poor inoffensive girl to share my struggles?" Mrs. M'Gregor nodded wisely. "She'd have nane so many to share. I
know ye think I'm old-fashioned, Mr. Keppel and it may be I am; but
I do assure you I would be sair harassed, if stricken to my bed--which,
please God, I won't be--to receive the veesits of a pairsonable young
bachelor--"

"Er--Mrs. M'Gregor!" interrupted Stuart, coughing in mock
rebuke--"quite so! I fancy we have discussed this point before, and
as you say your ideas are a wee bit, just a wee bit, behind the times. On this particular point I mean. But I am very grateful to you, very
sincerely grateful, for your disinterested kindness; and if ever I
should follow your advice----"

Mrs. M'Gregor interrupted him, pointing to his boots. "Ye're no' that
daft as to sit in wet boots?" "Really they are perfectly dry. Except for a light shower this
evening, there has been no rain for several days. However, I may as
well, since I shall not be going out again." He began to unlace his boots as Mrs. M'Gregor pulled the white
casement curtains across the windows and then prepared to retire. Her
hand upon the door knob, she turned again to Stuart. "The foreign lady called half an hour since, Mr. Keppel." Stuart desisted from unlacing his boots and looked up with lively
interest. "Mlle. Dorian! Did she leave any message?" "She obsairved that she might repeat her veesit later," replied
Mrs. M'Gregor, and, after a moment's hesitation; "she awaited ye're
return with exemplary patience." "Really, I am sorry I  was detained," declared Stuart, replacing his
boot. "How long has she been gone, then?" "Just the now. No more than two or three minutes. I trust she is no
worse." "Worse!" "The lass seemed o'er anxious to see you." "Well, you know, Mrs. M'Gregor, she comes a considerable distance." "So I am given to understand, Mr. Keppel," replied the old lady;
"and in a grand luxurious car." Stuart assumed an expression of perplexity to hide his embarrassment. "Mrs. M'Gregor," he said rather ruefully, "you watch over me as
tenderly as my own mother would have done. I have observed a certain
restraint in your manner whenever you have had occasion to refer to
Mlle. Dorian. In what way does she differ from my other lady
patients?" And even as he spoke the words he knew in his heart that
she differed from every other woman in the world. Mrs. M'Gregor sniffed. "Do your other lady patients wear furs that
your airnings for six months could never pay for, Mr. Keppel?" she
inquired. "No, unfortunately they pin their faith, for the most part, to gaily
coloured shawls. All the more reason why I should bless the accident
which led Mlle. Dorian to my door." Mrs. M'Gregor, betraying, in her interest, real suspicion, murmured
_sotto voce_: "Then she _is_ a patient?" "What's that?" asked Stuart, regarding her surprisedly. "A patient? Certainly. She suffers from insomnia." "I'm no' surprised to hear it." "What do you mean, Mrs. M'Gregor?" "Now, Mr. Keppel, laddie, ye're angry with me, and like enough I am
a meddlesome auld woman. But I know what a man will do for shining
een and a winsome face--nane better to my sorrow--and twa times have
I heard the Warning." Stuart stood up in real perplexity. "Pardon my density, Mrs.
M'Gregor, but--er--the Warning? To what 'warning' do you refer?" Seating herself in the chair before the writing-table, Mrs. M'Gregor
shook her head pensively. "What would it be," she said softly, "but
the Pibroch o' the M'Gregors?" Stuart came across and leaned upon a corner of the table. "The
Pibroch of the M'Gregors?" he repeated. "Nane other. 'Tis said to be Rob Roy's ain piper that gives warning
when danger threatens ane o' the M'Gregors or any they love." Stuart restrained a smile, and, "A well-meaning but melancholy
retainer!" he commented. "As well as I hear you now, laddie, I heard the pibroch on the day a
certain woman first crossed my threshold, nigh thirty years ago, in
Inverary. And as plainly as I heard it wailing then, I heard it the
first evening that Miss Dorian came to this house!" Torn between good-humoured amusement and real interest, "If I remember
rightly," said Stuart, "Mlle. Dorian first called here just a week ago,
and immediately before I returned from an Infirmary case?" "Your memory is guid, Mr. Keppel." "And when, exactly, did you hear this Warning?" "Twa minutes before you entered the house; and I heard it again the
now." "What! you heard it to-night?" "I heard it again just the now and I lookit out the window." "Did you obtain a glimpse of Rob Roy's piper?" "Ye're laughing at an old wife, laddie. No, but I saw Miss Dorian away
in her car and twa minutes later I saw yourself coming round the
corner." "If she had only waited another two minutes," murmured Stuart. "No
matter; she may return. And are these the only occasions upon which
you have heard this mysterious sound, Mrs. M'Gregor?" "No, Master Keppel, they are not. I assure ye something threatens. It
wakened me up in the wee sma' hours last night--the piping--an' I lay
awake shaking for long eno'." "How extraordinary. Are you sure your imagination is not playing you
tricks?" "Ah, you're no' takin' me seriously, laddie." "Mrs. M'Gregor"--he leaned across the table and rested his hands upon
her shoulders--"you are a second mother to me, your care makes me feel
like a boy again; and in these grey days it's good to feel like a boy
again. You think I am laughing at you, but I'm not. The strange
tradition of your family is associated with a tragedy in your life;
therefore I respect it. But have no fear with regard to Mlle. Dorian. In the first place she is a patient; in the second--I am merely a
penniless suburban practitioner. Good-night, Mrs. M'Gregor. Don't
think of waiting up. Tell Mary to show Mademoiselle in here directly
she arrives--that is if she really returns." Mrs. M'Gregor stood up and walked slowly to the door. "I'll show
Mademoiselle in mysel', Mr. Keppel," she said,--"and show her out." She closed the door very quietly. CHAPTER III

THE SCORPION'S TAIL


Seating himself at the writing-table, Stuart began mechanically to
arrange his papers. Then from the tobacco jar he loaded his pipe,
but his manner remained abstracted. Yet he was not thinking of the
phantom piper but of Mlle. Dorian. Until he had met this bewilderingly pretty woman he had thought that
his heart was for evermore proof against the glances of bright eyes. Mademoiselle had disillusioned him. She was the most fragrantly lovely
creature he had ever met, and never for one waking moment since her
first visit, had he succeeded in driving her bewitching image from
his mind. He had tried to laugh at his own folly, then had grown angry
with himself, but finally had settled down to a dismayed acceptance
of a wild infatuation. He had no idea who Mlle. Dorian was; he did not even know her exact
nationality, but he strongly suspected there was a strain of Eastern
blood in her veins. Although she was quite young, apparently little
more than twenty years of age, she dressed like a woman of unlimited
means, and although all her visits had been at night he had had
glimpses of the big car which had aroused Mrs. M'Gregor's displeasure. Yes--so ran his musings, as, pipe in mouth, he rested his chin in his
hands and stared grimly into the fire--she had always come at night
and always alone. He had supposed her to be a Frenchwoman, but an
unmarried French girl of good family does not make late calls, even
upon a medical man, unattended. Had he perchance unwittingly made
himself a party to the escapade of some unruly member of a noble
family? From the first he had shrewdly suspected the ailments of Mlle. Dorian to be imaginary--Mlle. Dorian? It was an odd name. "I shall be imagining she is a disguised princess if I wonder about
her any more!" he muttered angrily. Detecting himself in the act of heaving a weary sigh, he coughed in
self-reproval and reached into a pigeon-hole for the MS. of his
unfinished paper on "Snake Poisons and Their Antidotes." By chance he
pulled out the brief account, written the same morning, of his uncanny
experience during the night. He read it through reflectively. It was incomplete. A certain mental haziness which he had noted upon
awakening had in some way obscured the facts. His memory of the dream
had been imperfect. Even now, whilst recognizing that some feature of
the experience was missing from his written account, he could not
identify the omission. But one memory arose starkly before him--that
of the cowled man who had stood behind the curtains. It had power to
chill him yet. The old incredulity returned and methodically he
re-examined the contents of some of the table drawers. Ere long,
however, he desisted impatiently. "What the devil could a penniless doctor have hidden in his desk that
was worth stealing!" he said aloud. "I must avoid cold salmon and
cucumber in future." He tossed the statement aside and turned to his scientific paper. There came knock at the door. "Come in!" snapped Stuart irritably; but the next moment he had turned,
eager-eyed to the servant who had entered. "Inspector Dunbar has called, sir." "Oh, all right," said Stuart, repressing another sigh. "Show him in
here." There entered, shortly, a man of unusual height, a man gaunt and
square both of figure and of face. He wore his clothes and his hair
untidily. He was iron grey and a grim mouth was ill concealed by the
wiry moustache. The most notable features of a striking face were the
tawny leonine eyes, which could be fierce, which could be pensive and
which were often kindly. "Good evening, doctor," he said--and his voice was pleasant and
unexpectedly light in tome. "Hope I don't intrude." "Not at all, Inspector," Stuart assured him. "Make yourself comfortable in the armchair and fill your pipe." "Thanks," said Dunbar. "I will." He took out his pipe and reached out
a long arm for the tobacco jar. "I came to see if you could give me a
tip on a matter that has cropped up." "Something in my line?" asked Stuart, a keen professional look coming
momentarily into his eyes. "It's supposed to be a poison case, although I can't see it myself,"
answered the detective--to whom Keppel Stuart's unusual knowledge of
poisons had been of service in the past; "but if what I suspect is
true, it's a very big case all the same." Laying down his pipe, which he had filled but not lighted, Inspector
Dunbar pulled out from the inside pocket of his tweed coat a bulging
note-book and extracted therefrom some small object wrapped up in
tissue paper. Unwrapping this object, he laid it upon the table. "Tell me what that is, doctor," he said, "and I shall be obliged." Stuart peered closely at that which lay before him. It was a piece of
curiously shaped gold, cunningly engraved in a most unusual way. Rather less than an inch in length, it formed a crescent made up of
six oval segments joined one to another, the sixth terminating in a
curled point. The first and largest segment ended jaggedly where it
had evidently been snapped off from the rest of the ornament--if the
thing had formed part of an ornament. Stuart looked up, frowning in
a puzzled way. "It is a most curious fragment of jewellery--possibly of Indian
origin," he said. Inspector Dunbar lighted his pipe and tossed the match-end into the
fire. "But what does it represent?" he asked. "Oh, as to that--I said a _curious_ fragment advisedly, because I
cannot imagine any woman wearing such a beastly thing. It is the _tail
of a scorpion._"

"Ah!" cried Dunbar, the tawny eyes glittering with excitement. "The
tail of a scorpion! I thought so! And Sowerby would have it that it
represented the stem of a Cactus or Prickly Pear!" "Not so bad a guess," replied Stuart. "There _are_ resemblances--not
in the originals but in such a miniature reproduction as this. He was
wrong, however. May I ask where you obtained the fragment?" "I'm here to tell you, doctor, for now that I know it's a scorpion's
tail I know that I'm out of my depth as well. You've travelled in
the East and lived in the East--two very different things. Now, while
you were out there, in India, China, Burma, and so on, did you ever
come across a religion or a cult that worshipped scorpions?" Stuart frowned thoughtfully, rubbing his chin with the mouthpiece of
his pipe. Dunbar watched him expectantly. "Help yourself to whiskey-and-soda, Inspector," said Stuart absently. "You'll find everything on the side-table yonder. I'm thinking." Inspector Dunbar nodded, stood up and crossed the room, where he
busied himself with syphon and decanter. Presently he returned,
carrying two full glasses, one of which he set before Stuart. "What's
the answer, doctor?" he asked. "The answer is _no_. I am not acquainted with any sect of
scorpion-worshippers, Inspector. But I once met with a curious
experience at Su-Chow in China, which I have never been able to
explain, but which may interest you. It wanted but a few minutes to
sunset, and I was anxious to get back to my quarters before dusk fell. Therefore I hurried up my boy, who was drawing the rickshaw, telling
him to cross the Canal by the Wu-men Bridge. He ran fleetly in that
direction, and we were actually come to the steep acclivity of the
bridge, when suddenly the boy dropped the shafts and fell down on his
knees, hiding his face in his hands. "'Shut your eyes tightly, master!' he whispered. 'The Scorpion is
coming!' "I stared down at him in amazement, as was natural, and not a little
angrily; for his sudden action had almost pitched me on my head. But
there he crouched, immovable, and staring up the slope I say that it
was entirely deserted except for one  strange figure at that moment
crossing the crown of the bridge and approaching. It was the figure
of a tall and dignified Chinaman, or of one who wore the dress of a
Chinaman. For the extra-ordinary thing about the stranger's appearance
was this; he also wore a thick green veil!" "Covering his face?" "So as to cover his face completely. I was staring at him in wonder,
when the boy, seeming to divine the other's approach, whispered,
'Turn your head away! Turn your head away!" "He was referring to the man with the veil?" "Undoubtedly. Of course I did nothing of the kind, but it was
impossible to discern the stranger's features through the thick gauze,
although he passed quite close to me. He had not proceeded another
three paces, I should think, before my boy had snatched up the shafts
and darted across the bridge as though all hell were after him! Here's
the odd thing, though; I could never induce him to speak a word on the
subject afterwards! I bullied him and bribed him, but all to no
purpose. And although I must have asked more than a hundred Chinamen
in every station of society from mandarin to mendicant, 'Who or what
is _The Scorpion?_' one and all looked stupid, blandly assuring me
that they did not know what I meant." "H'm!" said Dunbar, "it's a queer yarn, certainly. How long ago would
that be, doctor?" "Roughly--five years." "It sounds as though it might belong to the case. Some months back,
early in the winter, we received instructions at the Yard to look out
everywhere in the press, in buffets, theatres, but particularly in
criminal quarters, for any reference (of any kind whatever) to a
scorpion. I was so puzzled that I saw the Commissioner about it,
and he could tell me next to nothing. He said the word had come
through from Paris, but that Paris seemed to know no more about it
than we did. It was associated in some way with the sudden deaths of
several notable public men about that time; but as there was no
evidence of foul play in any of the cases, I couldn't see what it
meant at all. Then, six weeks ago, Sir Frank Narcombe, the surgeon,
fell dead in the foyer of a West-End theatre--you remember?" CHAPTER IV

MADEMOISELLE DORIAN


The telephone bell rang. Stuart reached across for the instrument and raised the receiver. "Yes," he said--"Dr. Stuart speaking. Inspector Dunbar is here. Hold
on." He passed the instrument to Dunbar, who had stood up on hearing his
name mentioned. "Sergeant Sowerby at Scotland Yard wishes to speak
to you, Inspector." "Hullo," said Dunbar--"that you, Sowerby. Yes--but I arrived here
only a short time ago. What's that?--Max? Good God! what does it all
mean! Are you sure of the number--49685? Poor chap--he should have
worked with us instead of going off alone like that. But he was
always given to that sort of thing. Wait for me. I'll be with you in
a few minutes. I can get a taxi. And, Sowerby--listen! It's 'The
Scorpion' case right enough. That bit of gold found on the dead man
is not a cactus stem; it's a scorpion's tail!" He put down the telephone and turned to Stuart, who had been listening
to the words with growing concern. Dunbar struck his open palm down
on to the table with a violent gesture. "We have been asleep!" he exclaimed. "Gaston Max of the Paris Service
has been at work in London for a month, and we didn't know it!" "Gaston Max!" cried Start--"then it must be a big case indeed." As a student of criminology the name of the celebrated Frenchman was
familiar to him as that of the foremost criminal investigator in
Europe, and he found himself staring at the fragment of gold with a new
and keener interest. "Poor chap," continued Dunbar--"it was his last. The body brought in
from Hanover Hole has been identified as his." "What! it is the body of Gaston Max!" "Paris has just wired that Max's reports ceased over a week ago. He
was working on the case of Sir Frank Narcombe, it seems, and I never
knew! But I predicted a long time ago that Max would play the
lone-hand game once too often. They sent particulars. The
identification disk is his. Oh! there's no doubt about it,
unfortunately. The dead man's face is unrecognizable, but it's not
likely there are two disks of that sort bearing the initials G.M. and
the number 49685. I'm going along now. Should you care to come,
doctor?" "I am expecting a patient, Inspector," replied Stuart--"er--a special
case. But I hope you will keep me in touch with this affair?" "Well, I shouldn't have suggested your coming to the Yard if I hadn't
wanted to do that. As a matter of fact, this scorpion job seems to
resolve itself into a case of elaborate assassination by means of
some unknown poison; and although I should have come to see you in
any event, because you have helped me more than once, I came to-night
at the suggestion of the Commissioner. He instructed me to retain
your services if they were available." "I am honoured," replied Stuart. "But after all, Inspector, I am
merely an ordinary suburban practitioner. My reputation has yet to
be made. What's the matter with Halesowen of Upper Wimpole Street? He's the big man." "And if Sir Frank Narcombe was really poisoned--as Paris seems to
think he was--he's also a big fool." retorted Dunbar bluntly. "He
agreed that death was due to heart trouble." "I know he did; unsuspected ulcerative endocarditis. Perhaps he was
right." "If he was right," said Dunbar, taking up the piece of gold from the
table, "what was Gaston Max doing with this thing in his possession?" "There may be no earthly connection between Max's inquiries and the
death of Sir Frank." "On the other hand--there may! Leaving Dr. Halesowen out of the
question, are you open to act as expert adviser in this case?" "Certainly; delighted." "Your fee is your own affair, doctor. I will communicate with you
later, if you wish, or call again in the morning." Dunbar wrapped up the scorpion's tail in the piece of tissue paper
and was about to replace it in his note-case. Then:

"I'll leave this with you, doctor," he said. "I know it will be safe
enough, and you might like to examine it at greater leisure." "Very well," replied Stuart. "Some of the engraving is very minute. I will have a look at it through a glass later." He took the fragment from Dunbar, who had again unwrapped it, and,
opening a drawer of the writing-table in which he kept his cheque-book
and some few other personal valuables, he placed the curious piece of
gold-work within and relocked the drawer. "I will walk as far as the cab-rank with you," he said, finding
himself to be possessed of a spirit of unrest. Whereupon the two went
out of the room, Stuart extinguishing the lamps as he came to the
door. They had not left the study for more than two minutes ere a car drew
up outside the house, and Mrs. M'Gregor ushered a lady into the room
but lately quitted by Stuart and Dunbar, turning up the lights as she
entered. "The doctor has gone out but just now, Miss Dorian," she said stiffly. "I am sorry that ye are so unfortunate in your veesits. But I know
he'll be no more than a few minutes." The girl addressed was of a type fully to account for the misgivings
of the shrewd old Scotswoman. She had the slim beauty of the East
allied to the elegance of the West. Her features, whilst cast in a
charming European mould, at the same time suggested in some subtle
way the Oriental. She had the long, almond-shaped eyes of the Egyptian,
and her hair, which she wore unconventionally in a picturesque
fashion reminiscent of the _harem_, was inclined to be "fuzzy," but
gleamed with coppery tints where the light touched its waves. She wore a cloak of purple velvet having a hooded collar of white fox
fur; it fastened with golden cords. Beneath it was a white and gold
robe, cut with classic simplicity of line and confined at the waist
by an ornate Eastern girdle. White stockings and dull gold shoes
exhibited to advantage her charming little feet and slim ankles, and
 she carried a handbag of Indian beadwork. Mlle. Dorian was a figure
calculated to fire the imagination of any man and to linger long and
sweetly in the memory. Mrs. M'Gregor, palpably ill at ease, conducted her to an armchair. "You are very good," said the visitor, speaking with a certain
hesitancy and with a slight accent most musical and fascinating. "I wait a while if I may." "Dear, dear," muttered Mrs. M'Gregor, beginning to poke the fire, "he
has let the fire down, of course! Is it out? No ... I see a wee
sparkie!" She set the poker upright before the nearly extinguished fire and
turned triumphantly to Mlle. Dorian, who was watching her with a
slight smile. "That will be a comforting blaze in a few minutes, Miss Dorian," she
said, and went towards the door. "If you please," called the girl, detaining her--"do you permit me to
speak on the telephone a moment? As Dr. Stuart is not at home, I must
explain that I wait for him." "Certainly, Miss Dorian," replied Mrs. M'Gregor; "use the telephone
by all means. But I think the doctor will be back any moment now." "Thank you so much." Mrs. M'Gregor went out, not without a final backward glance at the
elegant figure in the armchair. Mlle. Dorian was seated, her chin
resting in her hand and her elbow upon the arm of the chair, gazing
into the smoke arising from the nearly extinguished ember of the fire. The door closed, and Mrs. M'Gregor's footsteps could be heard receding
along the corridor. Mlle. Dorian sprang from the chair and took out of her handbag a
number of small keys attached to a ring. Furtively she crossed the
room, all the time listening intently, and cast her cloak over the
back of the chair which was placed before the writing-table. Her robe
of white and gold clung to her shapely figure as she bent over the
table and tried three of the keys in the lock of the drawer which
contained Stuart's cheque-book and in which he had recently placed
the mysterious gold ornament. The third key fitted the lock, and Mlle. Dorian pulled open the drawer. She discovered first the cheque-book
and next a private account-book; then from under the latter she drew
out a foolscap envelope sealed with red wax and bearing, in Stuart's
handwriting, the address:

  Lost Property Office,
  Metropolitan Police,
  New Scotland Yard, S. W. I. She uttered a subdued exclamation; then, as a spark of light gleamed
within the open drawer, she gazed as if stupefied at the little
ornament which she had suddenly perceived lying near the cheque-book. She picked it up and stared at it aghast. A moment she hesitated;
then, laying down the fragment of gold and also the long envelope upon
the table, she took up the telephone. Keeping her eyes fixed upon the
closed door of the study, she asked for the number East 89512, and
whilst she waited for the connection continued that nervous watching
and listening. Suddenly she began to speak, in a low voice. "Yes! ... Miska speaks. Listen! One of the new keys--it fits. I have
the envelope. But, also in the same drawer, I find a part of a broken
gold _'agrab_ (scorpion). Yes, it is broken. It must be they find it,
on him." Her manner grew more and more agitated. "Shall I bring it? The envelope it is very large. I do not know if----"

From somewhere outside the house came a low, wailing cry--a cry which
Stuart, if he had heard it, must have recognized to be identical with
that which he had heard in the night--but which he had forgotten to
record in his written account. "Ah!" whispered the girl--"there is the signal! It is the doctor who
returns." She listened eagerly, fearfully, to the voice which spoke
over the wires. "Yes--yes!" Always glancing toward the door, she put down the instrument, took
up the long envelope and paused for a moment, thinking that she had
heard the sound of approaching footsteps. She exhibited signs of
nervous indecision, tried to thrust the envelope into her little bag
and realized that even folded it would not fit so as to escape
observation. She ran across to the grate and dropped the envelope
upon the smouldering fire. As she did so, the nicely balanced poker
fell with a clatter upon the tiled hearth. She started wildly, ran back to the table, took up the broken ornament
and was about to thrust it into the open drawer, when the study door
was flung open and Stuart came in. CHAPTER V

THE SEALED ENVELOPE


"MADEMOISELLE DORIAN!" cried Stuart joyously, advancing with
outstretched hand. She leaned back against the table watching him--and
suddenly he perceived the open drawer. He stopped. His expression
changed to one of surprise and anger, and the girl's slim fingers
convulsively clutched the table edge as she confronted him. Her
exquisite colour fled and left her pallid, dark-eyed and dismayed. "So," he said bitterly--"I returned none too soon, Mlle.--_Dorian_"

"Oh! she whispered, and shrank from him as he approached nearer. "Your object in selecting an obscure practitioner for your medical
adviser becomes painfully evident to me. Diagnosis of your case would
have been much more easy if I had associated your symptoms with the
presence in my table drawer of"--he hesitated--"of something which
you have taken out. Give me whatever you have stolen and compose
yourself to await the arrival of the police." He was cruel in his disillusionment. Here lay the explanation of his
romance; here was his disguised princess--a common thief! She stared
at him wildly. "I take nothing!" she cried. "Oh, let me go! Please, please let me go!" "Pleading is useless. What have you stolen?" "Nothing--see." She cast the little gold ornament on the table. "I
look at this, but I do not mean to steal it." She raised her beautiful eyes to his face again, and he found himself
wavering. That she had made his acquaintance in order to steal the
fragment of the golden scorpion was impossible, for he had not
possessed it at the time of her first visit. He was hopelessly
mystified and utterly miserable. "How did you open the drawer?" he asked sternly. She took up the bunch of keys which lay upon the table and naively
exhibited that which fitted the lock of the drawer. Her hands were
shaking. "Where did you obtain this key; and why?" She watched him intently, her lips trembling and her eyes wells of
sorrow into which he could not gaze unmoved. "If I tell you--will you let me go?" "I shall make no promises, for I can believe nothing that you may
tell me. You gained my confidence by a lie--and now, by another lie,
you seem to think that you can induce me to overlook a deliberate
attempt at burglary--common burglary." He clenched his hands. "Heavens! I could never have believed it of you!" She flinched as though from a blow and regarded him pitifully as he
stood, head averted. "Oh, please listen to me," she whispered. "At first I tell you a lie,
yes." "And now?" "Now--I tell you the truth." "That you are a petty thief?" "Ah! you are cruel--you have no pity! You judge me as you judge--one
of your Englishwomen. Perhaps I cannot help what I do. In the East a
woman is a chattel and has no will of her own." "A chattel!" cried Stuart scornfully. "Your resemblance to the
'chattels' of the East is a remote one. There is Eastern blood in
your veins, no doubt, but you are educated, you are a linguist, you
know the world. Right and wrong are recognizable to the lowest savage." "And if they recognize, but are helpless?" Stuart made a gesture of impatience. "You are simply seeking to enlist my sympathy," he said bitterly. "But you have said nothing which inclines me to listen to you any
longer. Apart from the shock of finding you to be--what you are, I
am utterly mystified as to your object. I am a poor man. The entire
contents of my house would fetch only a few hundred pounds if sold
to-morrow. Yet you risk your liberty to rifle my bureau. For the last
time--what have you taken from that drawer?" She leaned back against the table, toying with the broken piece of
gold and glancing down at it as she did so. Her long lashes cast
shadows below her eyes, and a hint of colour was returning to her
cheeks. Stuart studied her attentively--even delightedly, for all
her shortcomings, and knew in his heart that he could never give her
in charge of the police. More and more the wonder of it all grew upon
him, and now he suddenly found himself thinking of the unexplained
incident of the previous night. "You do not answer," he said. "I will ask you another question: have
you attempted to open that drawer prior to this evening?" Mlle. Dorian looked up rapidly, and her cheeks, which had been pale,
now flushed rosily. "I try twice before," she confessed, "and cannot open it." "Ah! And--has _someone else_ tried also?" Instantly her colour fled again, and she stared at him wide-eyed,
fearful. "Someone else?" she whispered. "Yes--someone else. A man ... wearing a sort of cowl----"

"Oh?" she cried and threw out her hands in entreaty. "Do not ask me of
_him_! I dare not answer--I dare not!" "You have answered," said Stuart, in a voice unlike his own; for a
horrified amazement was creeping upon him and supplanting the
contemptuous anger which the discovery of this beautiful girl engaged
in pilfering his poor belongings had at first aroused. The mystery of her operations was explained--explained by a deeper
and a darker mystery. The horror of the night had been no dream but
an almost incredible reality. He now saw before him an agent of the
man in the cowl; he perceived that he was in some way entangled in an
affair vastly more complex and sinister than a case of petty larceny. "Has the golden scorpion anything to do with the matter?" he demanded
abruptly. And in the eyes of his beautiful captive he read the answer. She
flinched again as she had done when he had taunted her with being a
thief; but he pressed his advantage remorselessly. "So you were concerned in the death of Sir Frank Narcombe!" he said. "I was not!" she cried at him fiercely, and her widely opened eyes
were magnificent. "Sir Frank Narcombe is----"

She faltered--and ceased speaking, biting her lip which had become
tremulous again. "Sir Frank Narcombe is?" prompted Stuart, feeling himself to stand
upon the brink of a revelation. "I know nothing of him--this Sir Frank Narcombe." Stuart laughed unmirthfully. "Am I, by any chance, in danger of sharing the fate of that
distinguished surgeon?" he asked. His question produced an unforeseen effect. Mlle. Dorian suddenly
rested her jewelled hands upon his shoulders, and he found himself
looking hungrily into those wonderful Eastern eyes. "If I swear that I speak the truth, will you believe me?" she
whispered, and her fingers closed convulsively upon his shoulders. He was shaken. Her near presence was intoxicating. "Perhaps," he said
unsteadily. "Listen, then. _Now_ you are in danger, yes. Before, you were not, but
now you must be very careful. Oh! indeed, indeed, I tell you true! I
tell you for your own sake. Do with me what you please. I do not care. It does not matter. You ask me why I come here. I tell you that also. I come for what is in the long envelope--look, I cannot hide it. It
is on the fire!" Stuart turned and glanced toward the grate. A faint wisp of brown
smoke was arising from a long white envelope which lay there. Had the
fire been actually burning, it must long ago have been destroyed. More than ever mystified, for the significance of the envelope was
not evident to him, he ran to the grate and plucked the smouldering
paper from the embers. As he did so, the girl, with one quick glance in his direction,
snatched her cloak, keys and bag and ran from the room. Stuart heard
the door close, and racing back to the table he placed the slightly
charred envelope there beside the fragment of gold and leapt to the
door. "Damn!" he said. His escaped prisoner had turned the key on the outside. He was locked
in his own study! Momentarily nonplussed, he stood looking at the closed door. The sound
of a restarted motor from outside the house spurred him to action. He
switched off the lamps, crossed the darkened room and drew back the
curtain, throwing open the French windows. Brilliant moonlight bathed
the little lawn with its bordering of high privet hedges. Stuart ran
out as the sound of the receding car reached his ears. By the time
that he had reached the front of the house the street was vacant from
end to end. He walked up the steps to the front door, which he
unfastened with his latch-key. As he entered the hall, Mrs. M'Gregor
appeared from her room. "I did no' hear ye go out with Miss Dorian," she said. "That's quite possible, Mrs. M'Gregor, but she has gone, you see." "Now tell me, Mr. Keppel, did ye or did ye no' hear the wail o' the
pibroch the night? "No--I am afraid I cannot say that I did, Mrs. M'Gregor," replied
Stuart patiently. "I feel sure you must be very tired and you can
justifiably turn in now. I am expecting no other visitor. Good-night." Palpably dissatisfied and ill at ease, Mrs. M'Gregor turned away. "Good-night, Mr. Keppel," she said. Stuart, no longer able to control his impatience, hurried to the study
door, unlocked it and entered. Turning on the light, he crossed and
hastily drew the curtains over the window recess, but without
troubling to close the window which he had opened. Then he returned
to the writing-table and took up the sealed envelope whose presence
in his bureau was clearly responsible for the singular visitation of
the cowled man and for the coming of the lovely Mlle. Dorian. The "pibroch of the M'Gregors": He remembered something--something
which, unaccountably, he hitherto had failed to recall: that fearful
wailing in the night--which had heralded the coming of the cowled
man!--or had it been a _signal_ of some kind? He stared at the envelope blankly, then laid it down and stood looking
for some time at the golden scorpion's tail. Finally, his hands
resting upon the table, he found that almost unconsciously he had
been listening--listening to the dim night sounds of London and to
the vague stirrings within the house. "_Now_, you are in danger. Before, you were not...."

Could he believe her? If in naught else, in this at least surely she
had been sincere? Stuart started--then laughed grimly. A clock on the mantel-piece had chimed the half-hour. CHAPTER VI

THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER


Detective-Inspector Dunbar arrived at New Scotland Yard in a veritable
fever of excitement. Jumping out of the cab he ran into the building
and without troubling the man in charge of the lift went straight on
upstairs to his room. He found it to be in darkness and switched on
the green-shaded lamp which was suspended above the table. Its light
revealed a bare apartment having distempered walls severely decorated
by an etching of a former and unbeautiful Commissioner. The blinds
were drawn. A plain, heavy deal table (bearing a blotting-pad, a
pewter ink-pot, several pens and a telephone), together with three
uncomfortable chairs, alone broke the expanse of highly polished
floor. Dunbar glanced at the table and then stood undecided in the
middle of the bare room, tapping his small, widely separated teeth
with a pencil which he had absently drawn from his waistcoat pocket. He rang the bell. A constable came in almost immediately and stood waiting just inside
the door. "When did Sergeant Sowerby leave?" asked Dunbar. "About three hours ago, sir." "What!" cried Dunbar. "Three hours ago! But I have been here myself
within that time--in the Commissioner's office." "Sergeant Sowerby left before then. I saw him go." "But, my good fellow, he has been back again. He spoke to me on the
telephone less than a quarter of an hour ago." "Not from here, sir." "But I say it _was_ from here!" shouted Dunbar fiercely; "and I told
him to wait for me." "Very good, sir. Shall I make inquiries?" "Yes. Wait a minute. Is the Commissioner here?" "Yes, sir, I believe so. At least I have not seen him go." "Find Sergeant Sowerby and tell him to wait here for me," snapped
Dunbar. He walked out into the bare corridor and along to the room of the
Assistant Commissioner. Knocking upon the door, he opened it
immediately, and entered an apartment which afforded a striking
contrast to his own. For whereas the room of Inspector Dunbar was
practically unfurnished, that of his superior was so filled with
tables, cupboards, desks, bureaux, files, telephones, bookshelves
and stacks of documents that one only discovered the Assistant
Commissioner sunk deep in a padded armchair and a cloud of tobacco
smoke by dint of close scrutiny. The Assistant Commissioner was small,
sallow and satanic. His black moustache was very black and his eyes
were of so dark a brown as to appear black also. When he smiled he
revealed a row of very large white teeth, and his smile was correctly
Mephistophelean. He smoked a hundred and twenty Egyptian cigarettes
per diem, and the first and second fingers of either hand were
coffee-coloured. "Good-evening, Inspector," he said courteously. "You come at an
opportune moment." He lighted a fresh cigarette. "I was detained here
unusually late to-night or this news would not have reached us till
the morning." He laid his finger upon a yellow form. "There is an
unpleasant development in 'The Scorpion' case." "So I gather, sir. That is what brought me back to the Yard." The Assistant Commissioner glanced up sharply. "What brought you back to the Yard?" he asked. "The news about Max." The assistant Commissioner leaned back in his chair. "Might I ask,
Inspector," he said, "what news you have learned and how you have
learned it?" Dunbar stared uncomprehendingly. "Sowerby 'phoned me about half an hour ago, sir. Did he do so without
your instructions?" "Most decidedly. What was his message?" "He told me," replied Dunbar, in ever-growing amazement, "that the
body brought in by the River Police last night had been identified
as that of Gaston Max." The Assistant Commissioner handed a pencilled slip to Dunbar. It read
as follows:--

"Gaston Max in London. Scorpion, Narcombe. No report since 30th ult. Fear trouble. Identity-disk G. M. 49685." "But, sir," said Dunbar--"this is exactly what Sowerby told me!" "Quite so. That is the really extraordinary feature of the affair. Because, you see, Inspector, I only finished decoding this message
at the very moment that you knocked at my door!" "But----"

"There is no room for a 'but,' Inspector. This confidential message
from Paris reached me ten minutes ago. You know as well as I know that
there is no possibility of leakage. No one has entered my room in the
interval, yet you tell me that Sergeant Sowerby communicated this
information to you, by telephone, half an hour ago." Dunbar was tapping his teeth with the pencil. His amazement was too
great for words. "Had the message been a false one," continued the Commissioner, "the
matter would have been resolved into a meaningless hoax, but the
message having been what it was, we find ourselves face to face with
no ordinary problem. Remember, Inspector, that voices on the telephone
are deceptive. Sergeant Sowerby has marked vocal mannerisms----"

"Which would be fairly easy to imitate? Yes, sir--that's so." "But it brings us no nearer to the real problems; viz., first, the
sender of the message; and, second, his purpose." There was a dull purring sound and the Assistant Commissioner raised
the telephone. "Yes. Who is it that wishes to speak to him? Dr. Keppel Stuart? Connect with my office." He turned again to Dunbar. "Dr. Stuart has a matter of the utmost urgency to communicate,
Inspector. It was at the house of Dr. Stuart, I take it, that you
received the unexplained message?" "It was--yes." "Did you submit to Dr. Stuart the broken gold ornament?" "Yes. It's a scorpion's tail." "Ah!" The Assistant Commissioner smiled satanically and lighted a
fresh cigarette. "And is Dr. Stuart agreeable to placing his unusual
knowledge at our disposal for the purposes of this case?" "He is, sir." The purring sound was repeated. "You are through to Dr. Stuart," said the Assistant Commissioner. "Hullo" cried Dunbar, taking up the receiver--"is that Dr. Stuart? Dunbar speaking." He stood silent for a while, listening to the voice over the wires. Then: "You want me to come around now, doctor? Very well. I'll be
with you in less than half an hour." He put down the instrument. "Something extraordinary seems to have taken place at Dr. Stuart's
house a few minutes after I left, sir," he said. "I'm going back
there, now, for particulars. It sounds as though the 'phone message
might have been intended to get me away." He stared down at the
pencilled slip which the Assistant Commissioner had handed him, but
stared vacantly, and: "Do you mind if I call someone up, sir?" he
asked. "It should be done at once." "Call by all means, Inspector." Dunbar again took up the telephone. "Battersea 0996," he said, and stood waiting. Then:

"Is that Battersea 0996?" he asked. "Is Dr. Stuart there? He is
speaking? Oh, this is Inspector Dunbar. You called me up here at the
Yard a few moments ago, did you not? Correct, doctor; that's all I
wanted to know. I am coming now." "Good," said the Assistant Commissioner, nodding his approval. "You
will have to check 'phone messages in that way until you have run your
mimic to earth, Inspector. I don't believe for a moment that it was
Sergeant Sowerby who rang you up at Dr. Stuart's." "Neither do I," said Dunbar grimly. "But I begin to have a glimmer of
a notion who it was. I'll be saying good-night, sir. Dr. Stuart seems
to have something very important to tell me." As a mere matter of form he waited for the report of the constable who
had gone in quest of Sowerby, but it merely confirmed the fact that
Sowerby had left Scotland Yard over three hours earlier. Dunbar
summoned a taxicab and proceeded to the house of Dr. Stuart. CHAPTER VII

CONTENTS OF THE SEALED ENVELOPE


Stuart personally admitted Dunbar, and once more the Inspector found
himself in the armchair in the study. The fire was almost out and the
room seemed to be chilly. Stuart was labouring under the influence of
suppressed excitement and was pacing restlessly up and down the floor. "Inspector," he began, "I find it difficult to tell you the facts which
have recently come to my knowledge bearing upon this most mysterious
'Scorpion' case. I clearly perceive, now, that without being aware of
the fact I have nevertheless been concerned in the case for at least
a week." Dunbar stared surprisedly, but offered no comment. "A fortnight ago," Stuart continued, "I found myself in the
neighbourhood of the West India Docks. I had been spending the evening
with a very old friend, chief officer of a liner in dock. I had
intended to leave the ship at about ten o'clock and to walk to the
railway station, but, as it fell out, the party did not break up until
after midnight. Declining the offer of a berth on board, I came ashore
determined to make my way home by tram and afoot. I should probably
have done so and have been spared--much; but rain began to fall
suddenly and I found myself, foolishly unprovided with a top-coat, in
those grey East End streets without hope of getting a lift. "It was just as I was crossing Limehouse Causeway that I observed, to
my astonishment, the head-lamps of a cab or car shining out from a dark
and forbidding thoroughfare which led down to the river. The sight was
so utterly unexpected that I paused, looking through the rainy mist in
the direction of the stationary vehicle. I was still unable to make
out if it were a cab or a car, and accordingly I walked along to where
it stood and found that it was a taxicab and apparently for hire. "'Are you disengaged?' I said to the man. "'Well, sir, I suppose I am,' was his curious reply. 'Where do you
want to go?' "I gave him this address and he drove me home. On arriving, so
grateful did I feel that I took pity upon the man, for it had settled
down into a brute of a night, and asked him to come in and take a
glass of grog. He was only too glad to do so. He turned out to be
quite an intelligent sort of fellow, and we chatted together for ten
minutes or so. "I had forgotten all about him when, I believe on the following night,
he reappeared in the character of a patient. He had a badly damaged
skull, and I gathered that he had had an accident with his cab and had
been pitched out into the road. "When I had fixed him up, he asked me to do him a small favour. From
inside his tunic he pulled out a long stiff envelope, bearing no
address but the number 30 in big red letters. It was secured at both
ends with black wax bearing the imprint of a curious and complicated
seal. "'A gentleman left this behind in the cab today, sir,' said the
man--'perhaps the one who was with me when I had the spill, and I've
got no means of tracing him; but he may be able to trace _me_ if he
happened to notice my number, or he may advertise. It evidently
contains something valuable.' "'Then why not take it to Scotland Yard?' I asked. 'Isn't that the
proper course?' "'It is,' he admitted; 'but here's the point: if the owner reclaims it
from Scotland Yard he's less likely to dub up handsome than if he gets
it direct from me!' "I laughed at that, for the soundness of the argument was beyond
dispute. 'But what on earth do you want to leave it with _me_ for?' I asked." "'Self-protection,' was the reply. 'They can't say I meant to pinch
it! Whereas, directly there's any inquiry I can come and collect it
and get the reward; and your word will back me up if any questions are
asked; that's if you don't mind, sir.' "I told him I didn't mind in the least, and accordingly I sealed the
envelope in a yet larger one which I addressed to the Lost Property
Office and put into a private drawer of my bureau. 'You will have no
objection,' I said, 'to this being posted if it isn't reclaimed within
a reasonable time?' "He said that would be all right and departed--since which moment I
have not set eyes upon him. I now come to the sequel, or what I have
just recognized to be the sequel." Stuart's agitation grew more marked and it was only by dint of a
palpable effort that he forced himself to resume. "On the evening of the following day a lady called professionally. She was young, pretty, and dressed with extraordinary elegance. My
housekeeper admitted her, as I was out at the time but momentarily
expected. She awaited my return here, in this room. She came again
two days later. The name she gave was an odd one: Mademoiselle Dorian. There is her card,"--Stuart opened a drawer and laid a visiting-card
before Dunbar--"no initials and no address. She travelled in a large
and handsome car. That is to say, according to my housekeeper's
account it is a large and handsome car. I personally, have had but an
imperfect glimpse of it. It does not await her in front of the house,
for some reason, but just around the corner in the side turning. Beyond wondering why Mademoiselle Dorian had selected me as her
medical advisor I had detected nothing suspicious in her behaviour up
to the time of which I am about to speak. "Last night there was a singular development, and to-night matters
came to a head." Thereupon Stuart related as briefly as possible the mysterious episode
of the cowled man, and finally gave an account of the last visit of
Mlle. Dorian. Inspector Dunbar did not interrupt him, but listened
attentively to the singular story. "And there," concluded Stuart, "on the blotting-pad, lies the sealed
envelope!" Dunbar took it up eagerly. A small hole had been burned in one end of
the envelope and much of the surrounding paper was charred. The wax
with which Stuart had sealed it had lain uppermost, and although it
had been partly melted, the mark of his signet-ring was still
discernible upon it. Dunbar stood staring at it. "In the circumstances, Inspector, I think you would be justified in
opening both envelopes," said Stuart. "I am inclined to agree. But let me just be clear on one or two
points." He took out the bulging note-book and also a fountain-pen
with which he prepared to make entries. "About this cabman, now. You
didn't by any chance note the number of his cab?" "I did not." "What build of man was he?" "Over medium height and muscular. Somewhat inclined to flesh and past
his youth, but active all the same." "Dark or fair?" "Dark and streaked with grey. I noted this particularly in dressing
his skull. He wore his hair cropped close to the scalp. He had a short
beard and moustache and heavily marked eyebrows. He seemed to be very
short-sighted and kept his eyes so screwed up that it was impossible
to detect their colour, by night at any rate." "What sort of wound had he on his skull?" "A short ugly gash. He had caught his head on the footboard in falling. I may add that on the occasion of his professional visit his breath
smelled strongly of spirits, and I rather suspected that his accident
might have been traceable to his condition." "But he wasn't actually drunk?" "By no means. He was perfectly sober, but he had recently been
drinking--possibly because his fall had shaken him, of course." "His hands?" "Small and very muscular. Quite steady. Also very dirty." "What part of the country should you say he hailed from?" "London. He had a marked cockney accent." "What make of cab was it?" "I couldn't say." "An old cab?" "Yes. The fittings were dilapidated, I remember, and the cab had a
very musty smell." "Ah," said Dunbar, making several notes. "And now--the lady: about
what would be her age?" "Difficult to say, Inspector. She had Eastern blood and may have been
much younger than she appeared to be. Judged from a European standpoint
and from her appearance and manner of dress, she might be about
twenty-three or twenty-four." "Complexion?" "Wonderful. Fresh as a flower." "Eyes?" "Dark. They looked black at night." "Hair?" "Brown and 'fuzzy' with copper tints." "Tall?" "No; slight but beautifully shaped." "Now--from her accent what should you judge her nationality to be?" Stuart paced up and down the room, his head lowered in reflection,
then:

"She pronounced both English and French words with an intonation which
suggested familiarity with Arabic." "Arabic? That still leaves a fairly wide field." "It does, Inspector, but I had no means of learning more. She had
certainly lived for a long time somewhere in the Near East." "Her jewellery?" "Some of it was European and some of it Oriental, but not
characteristic of any particular country of the Orient." "Did she use perfume?" "Yes, but it was scarcely discernible. Jasmine--probably the Eastern
preparation." "Her ailment was imaginary?" "I fear so." "H'm--and now you say that Mrs. M'Gregor saw the car?" "Yes, but she has retired." "Her evidence will do to-morrow. We come to the man in the hood. Can
you give me any kind of a description of him?" "He appeared to be tall, but a shadow is deceptive, and his
extraordinary costume would produce that effect, too. I can tell you
absolutely nothing further about him. Remember, I thought I was
dreaming. I could not credit my senses." Inspector Dunbar glanced over the notes which he had made, then
returning the note-book and pen to his pocket, he took up the long
smoke-discoloured envelope and with a paper-knife which lay upon the
table slit one end open. Inserting two fingers, he drew out the second
envelope which the first enclosed. It was an ordinary commercial
envelope only notable by reason of the number, 30, appearing in large
red figures upon it and because it was sealed with black wax bearing
a weird-looking device:

Stuart bent over him intently as he slit this envelope in turn. Again,
he inserted two fingers--and brought forth the sole contents... a
plain piece of cardboard, roughly rectangular and obviously cut in
haste from the lid of a common cardboard box! CHAPTER VIII

THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER'S THEORY


On the following morning Inspector Dunbar, having questioned Mrs.
M'Gregor respecting the car in which Mlle. Dorian had visited the
house and having elicited no other evidence than that it was "a fine
luxurious concern," the Inspector and Dr. Stuart prepared to set out
upon gruesome business. Mrs. M'Gregor was very favourably impressed
with the Inspector. "A grand, pairsonable body," she confided to
Stuart. "He'd look bonny in the kilt." To an East-End mortuary the cab bore them, and they were led by a
constable in attendance to a stone-paved, ill-lighted apartment in
which a swathed form lay upon a long deal table. The spectacle
presented, when the covering was removed, was one to have shocked
less hardened nerves than those of Stuart and Dunbar; but the duties
of a police officer, like those of a medical man, not infrequently
necessitate such inspections. The two bent over the tragic flotsam of
the Thames unmoved and critical. "H'm," said Stuart--"he's about the build, certainly. Hair iron-grey
and close cropped and he seems to have worn a beard. Now, let us see." He bent, making a close inspection of the skull; then turned and
shook his head. "No, Inspector," he said definitely. "This is not the cabman. There is
no wound corresponding to the one which I dressed." "Right," answered Dunbar, covering up the ghastly face. "That's
settled." "You were wrong, Inspector. It was not Gaston Max who left the
envelope with me." "No," mused Dunbar, "so it seems." "Your theory that Max, jealously working alone, had left particulars
of his inquiries, and clues, in my hands, knowing that they would
reach Scotland Yard in the event of his death, surely collapsed when
the envelope proved to contain nothing but a bit of cardboard?" "Yes--I suppose it did. But it sounded so much like Max's round-about
methods. Anyway I wanted to make sure that the dead man from Hanover
Hole and your mysterious cabman were not one and the same." Stuart entertained a lively suspicion that Inspector Dunbar was keeping
something up his sleeve, but with this very proper reticence he had no
quarrel, and followed by the constable, who relocked the mortuary
behind them, they came out into the yard where the cab waited which
was to take them to Scotland Yard. Dunbar, standing with one foot upon
the step of the cab, turned to the constable. "Has anyone else viewed the body?" he asked. "No sir." "No one is to be allowed to do so--you understand?--_no one_, unless
he has written permission from the Commissioner." "Very good, sir." Half an hour later they arrived at New Scotland Yard and went up to
Dunbar's room. A thick-set, florid man of genial appearance, having a
dark moustache, a breezy manner and a head of hair resembling a very
hard-worked blacking-brush, awaited them. This was Detective-Sargeant
Sowerby with whom Stuart was already acquainted. "Good-morning, Sergeant Sowerby," he said. "Good-morning, sir. I hear that someone was pulling your leg last
night." "What do you mean exactly, Sowerby?" inquired Dunbar, fixing his
fierce eyes upon his subordinate. Sergeant Sowerby exhibited confusion. "I mean nothing offensive, Inspector. I was referring to the
joker who gave so good an imitation of my voice that even
_you_ were deceived." "Ah," replied Dunbar--"I see. Yes--he did it well. He spoke just like
you. I could hardly make out a word he said." With this Caledonian shaft and a side-glance at Stuart, Inspector
Dunbar sat down at the table. "Here's Dr. Stuart's description of the missing cabman," he continued,
taking out his note-book. "Dr. Stuart has viewed the body and it is
not the man. You had better take a proper copy of this." "Then the cabman wasn't Max?" cried Sowerby eagerly. "I thought not." "I believe you told me so before," said Dunbar sourly. "I also seem to
recall that you thought a scorpion's tail was a Prickly Pear. However--here, on the page numbered twenty-six, is a description of
the woman known as Mlle. Dorian. 