

E-text prepared by David Clarke, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



THE DAFFODIL MYSTERY

by

EDGAR WALLACE







Ward, Lock & Co., Limited
London and Melbourne
Made and Printed in Great Britain




CONTENTS


       I. AN OFFER REJECTED

      II. THE HUNTER DECLINES HIS QUARRY

     III. THE MAN WHO LOVED LYNE

      IV. MURDER

       V. FOUND IN LYNE'S POCKET

      VI. THE MOTHER OF ODETTE RIDER

     VII. THE WOMAN IN THE CASE

    VIII. THE SILENCING OF SAM STAY

      IX. WHERE THE FLOWERS CAME FROM

       X. THE WOMAN AT ASHFORD

      XI. "THORNTON LYNE IS DEAD"

     XII. THE HOSPITAL BOOK

    XIII. TWO SHOTS IN THE NIGHT

     XIV. THE SEARCH OF MILBURGH'S COTTAGE

      XV. THE OWNER OF THE PISTOL

     XVI. THE HEIR

    XVII. THE MISSING REVOLVER

   XVIII. THE FINGER PRINTS

     XIX. LING CHU TELLS THE TRUTH

      XX. MR. MILBURGH SEES IT THROUGH

     XXI. COVERING THE TRAIL

    XXII. THE HEAVY WALLET

   XXIII. THE NIGHT VISITOR

    XXIV. THE CONFESSION OF ODETTE RIDER

     XXV. MILBURGH'S LAST BLUFF

    XXVI. IN MRS. RIDER'S ROOM

   XXVII. THE LAUGH IN THE NIGHT

  XXVIII. THE THUMB-PRINT

    XXIX. THE THEORY OF LING CHU

     XXX. WHO KILLED MRS. RIDER

    XXXI. SAM STAY TURNS UP

   XXXII. THE DIARY OF THORNTON LYNE

  XXXIII. LING CHU--TORTURER

   XXXIV. THE ARREST

    XXXV. MILBURGH'S STORY

   XXXVI. AT HIGHGATE CEMETERY

  XXXVII. LING CHU RETURNS

CHAPTER THE LAST. THE STATEMENT OF SAM STAY




THE DAFFODIL MYSTERY




CHAPTER I

AN OFFER REJECTED


"I am afraid I don't understand you, Mr. Lyne." Odette Rider looked gravely at the young man who lolled against his open
desk. Her clear skin was tinted with the faintest pink, and there was in
the sober depths of those grey eyes of hers a light which would have
warned a man less satisfied with his own genius and power of persuasion
than Thornton Lyne. He was not looking at her face. His eyes were running approvingly over
her perfect figure, noting the straightness of the back, the fine poise
of the head, the shapeliness of the slender hands. He pushed back his long black hair from his forehead and smiled. It
pleased him to believe that his face was cast in an intellectual mould,
and that the somewhat unhealthy pastiness of his skin might be described
as the "pallor of thought." Presently he looked away from her through the big bay window which
overlooked the crowded floor of Lyne's Stores. He had had this office built in the entresol and the big windows had been
put in so that he might at any time overlook the most important
department which it was his good fortune to control. Now and again, as he saw, a head would be turned in his direction, and he
knew that the attention of all the girls was concentrated upon the little
scene, plainly visible from the floor below, in which an unwilling
employee was engaged. She, too, was conscious of the fact, and her discomfort and dismay
increased. She made a little movement as if to go, but he stopped her. "You don't understand, Odette," he said. His voice was soft and
melodious, and held the hint of a caress. "Did you read my little book?" he asked suddenly. She nodded. "Yes, I read--some of it," she said, and the colour deepened on her face. He chuckled. "I suppose you thought it rather curious that a man in my position should
bother his head to write poetry, eh?" he asked. "Most of it was written
before I came into this beastly shop, my dear--before I developed into a
tradesman!" She made no reply, and he looked at her curiously. "What did you think of them?" he asked. Her lips were trembling, and again he mistook the symptoms. "I thought they were perfectly horrible," she said in a low voice. "Horrible!" He raised his eyebrows. "How very middle-class you are, Miss Rider!" he scoffed. "Those verses
have been acclaimed by some of the best critics in the country as
reproducing all the beauties of the old Hellenic poetry." She went to speak, but stopped herself and stood with lips compressed. Thornton Lyne shrugged his shoulders and strode to the other end of his
luxuriously equipped office. "Poetry, like cucumbers, is an acquired taste," he said after a while. "You have to be educated up to some kind of literature. I daresay there
will come a time when you will be grateful that I have given you an
opportunity of meeting beautiful thoughts dressed in beautiful language." She looked up at this. "May I go now, Mr. Lyne?" she asked. "Not yet," he replied coolly. "You said just now you didn't understand
what I was talking about. I'll put it plainer this time. You're a very
beautiful girl, as you probably know, and you are destined, in all
probability, to be the mate of a very average suburban-minded person, who
will give you a life tantamount to slavery. That is the life of the
middle-class woman, as you probably know. And why would you submit to
this bondage? Simply because a person in a black coat and a white collar
has mumbled certain passages over you--passages which have neither
meaning nor, to an intelligent person, significance. I would not take
the trouble of going through such a foolish ceremony, but I would take a
great deal of trouble to make you happy." He walked towards her slowly and laid one hand upon her shoulder. Instinctively she shrank back and he laughed. "What do you say?" She swung round on him, her eyes blazing but her voice under control. "I happen to be one of those foolish, suburban-minded people," she said,
"who give significance to those mumbled words you were speaking about. Yet I am broad-minded enough to believe that the marriage ceremony would
not make you any happier or more unhappy whether it was performed or
omitted. But, whether it were marriage or any other kind of union, I
should at least require a man." He frowned at her. "What do you mean?" he asked, and the soft quality of his voice underwent
a change. Her voice was full of angry tears when she answered him. "I should not want an erratic creature who puts horrid sentiments into
indifferent verse. I repeat, I should want a man." His face went livid. "Do you know whom you are talking to?" he asked, raising his voice. "I am talking to Thornton Lyne," said she, breathing quickly, "the
proprietor of Lyne's Stores, the employer of Odette Rider who draws three
pounds every week from him." He was breathless with anger. "Be careful!" he gasped. "Be careful!" "I am speaking to a man whose whole life is a reproach to the very name
of man!" she went on speaking rapidly. "A man who is sincere in nothing,
who is living on the brains and reputation of his father, and the money
that has come through the hard work of better men. "You can't scare me," she cried scornfully, as he took a step towards
her. "Oh, yes, I know I'm going to leave your employment, and I'm leaving
to-night!" The man was hurt, humiliated, almost crushed by her scorn. This she
suddenly realised and her quick woman's sympathy checked all further
bitterness. "I'm sorry I've been so unkind," she said in a more gentle tone. "But you
rather provoked me, Mr. Lyne." He was incapable of speech and could only shake his head and point with
unsteady finger to the door. "Get out," he whispered. Odette Rider walked out of the room, but the man did not move. Presently,
however, he crossed to the window and, looking down upon the floor, saw
her trim figure move slowly through the crowd of customers and assistants
and mount the three steps which led to the chief cashier's office. "You shall pay for this, my girl!" he muttered. He was wounded beyond forgiveness. He was a rich man's son and had lived
in a sense a sheltered life. He had been denied the advantage which a
public school would have brought to him and had gone to college
surrounded by sycophants and poseurs as blatant as himself, and never
once had the cold breath of criticism been directed at him, except in
what he was wont to describe as the "reptile Press." He licked his dry lips, and, walking to his desk, pressed a bell. After a
short wait--for he had purposely sent his secretary away--a girl came in. "Has Mr. Tarling come?" he asked. "Yes, sir, he's in the board-room. He has been waiting a quarter of an
hour." He nodded. "Thank you," he said. "Shall I tell him----"

"I will go to him myself," said Lyne. He took a cigarette out of his gold case, struck a match and lit it. His
nerves were shaken, his hands were trembling, but the storm in his heart
was soothing down under the influence of this great thought. Tarling! What an inspiration! Tarling, with his reputation for ingenuity, his
almost sublime uncanny cleverness. What could be more wonderful than this
coincidence? He passed with quick steps along the corridor which connected his private
den with the board-room, and came into that spacious apartment with
outstretched hand. The man who turned to greet him may have been twenty-seven or
thirty-seven. He was tall, but lithe rather than broad. His face was the
colour of mahogany, and the blue eyes turned to Lyne were unwinking and
expressionless. That was the first impression which Lyne received. He took Lyne's hand in his--it was as soft as a woman's. As they shook
hands Lyne noticed a third figure in the room. He was below middle height
and sat in the shadow thrown by a wall pillar. He too rose, but bowed his
head. "A Chinaman, eh?" said Lyne, looking at this unexpected apparition with
curiosity. "Oh, of course, Mr. Tarling, I had almost forgotten that
you've almost come straight from China. Won't you sit down?" He followed the other's example, threw himself into a chair and offered
his cigarette case. "The work I am going to ask you to do I will discuss later," he said. "But I must explain, that I was partly attracted to you by the
description I read in one of the newspapers of how you had recovered the
Duchess of Henley's jewels and partly by the stories I heard of you when
I was in China. You're not attached to Scotland Yard, I understand?" Tarling shook his head. "No," he said quietly. "I was regularly attached to the police in
Shanghai, and I had intended joining up with Scotland Yard; in fact, I
came over for that purpose. But several things happened which made me
open my own detective agency, the most important of which happenings, was
that Scotland Yard refused to give me the free hand I require!" The other nodded quickly. China rang with the achievements of Jack Oliver Tarling, or, as the
Chinese criminal world had named him in parody of his name, "Lieh Jen,"
"The Hunter of Men." Lyne judged all people by his own standard, and saw in this unemotional
man a possible tool, and in all probability a likely accomplice. The detective force in Shanghai did curious things by all accounts, and
were not too scrupulous as to whether they kept within the strict letter
of the law. There were even rumours that "The Hunter of Men" was not
above torturing his prisoners, if by so doing he could elicit confessions
which could implicate some greater criminal. Lyne did not and could not
know all the legends which had grown around the name of "The Hunter" nor
could he be expected in reason to differentiate between the truth and the
false. "I pretty well know why you've sent for me," Tarling went on. He spoke
slowly and had a decided drawl. "You gave me a rough outline in your
letter. You suspect a member of your staff of having consistently robbed
the firm for many years. A Mr. Milburgh, your chief departmental
manager." Lyne stopped him with a gesture and lowered his voice. "I want you to forget that for a little while, Mr. Tarling," he said. "In
fact, I am going to introduce you to Milburgh, and maybe, Milburgh can
help us in my scheme. I do not say that Milburgh is honest, or that my
suspicions were unfounded. But for the moment I have a much greater
business on hand, and you will oblige me if you forget all the things
I have said about Milburgh. I will ring for him now." He walked to a long table which ran half the length of the room, took up
a telephone which stood at one end, and spoke to the operator. "Tell Mr. Milburgh to come to me in the board-room, please," he said. Then he went back to his visitor. "That matter of Milburgh can wait," he said. "I'm not so sure that I
shall proceed any farther with it. Did you make inquiries at all? If so,
you had better tell me the gist of them before Milburgh comes." Tarling took a small white card from his pocket and glanced at it. "What salary are you paying Milburgh?" "Nine hundred a year," replied Lyne. "He is living at the rate of five thousand," said Tarling. "I may even
discover that he's living at a much larger rate. He has a house up the
river, entertains very lavishly----"

But the other brushed aside the report impatiently. "No, let that wait," he cried. "I tell you I have much more important
business. Milburgh may be a thief----"

"Did you send for me, sir?" He turned round quickly. The door had opened without noise, and a man
stood on the threshold of the room, an ingratiating smile on his face,
his hands twining and intertwining ceaselessly as though he was washing
them with invisible soap. CHAPTER II

THE HUNTER DECLINES HIS QUARRY


"This is Mr. Milburgh," said Lyne awkwardly. If Mr. Milburgh had heard the last words of his employer, his face did
not betray the fact. His smile was set, and not only curved the lips but
filled the large, lustreless eyes. Tarling gave him a rapid survey and
drew his own conclusions. The man was a born lackey, plump of face, bald
of head, and bent of shoulder, as though he lived in a perpetual gesture
of abasement. "Shut the door, Milburgh, and sit down. This is Mr. Tarling. Er--Mr.
Tarling is--er--a detective." "Indeed, sir?" Milburgh bent a deferential head in the direction of Tarling, and the
detective, watching for some change in colour, some twist of face--any
of those signs which had so often betrayed to him the convicted
wrongdoer--looked in vain. "A dangerous man," he thought. He glanced out of the corner of his eye to see what impression the man
had made upon Ling Chu. To the ordinary eye Ling Chu remained an
impassive observer. But Tarling saw that faint curl of lip, an almost
imperceptible twitch of the nostrils, which invariably showed on the face
of his attendant when he "smelt" a criminal. "Mr. Tarling is a detective," repeated Lyne. "He is a gentleman I heard
about when I was in China--you know I was in China for three months, when
I made my tour round the world?" he asked Tarling. Tarling nodded. "Oh yes, I know," he said. "You stayed at the Bund Hotel. You spent
a great deal of time in the native quarter, and you had rather an
unpleasant experience as the result of making an experiment in opium
smoking." Lyne's face went red, and then he laughed. "You know more about me than I know about you, Tarling," he said, with a
note of asperity in his voice, and turned again to his subordinate. "I have reason to believe that there has been money stolen in this
business by one of my cashiers," he said. "Impossible, sir!" said the shocked Mr. Milburgh. "Wholly impossible! Who
could have done it? And how clever of you to have found it out, sir! I
always say that you see what we old ones overlook even though it's right
under our noses!" Mr. Lyne smiled complacently. "It will interest you to know, Mr. Tarling," he said, "that I myself have
some knowledge of and acquaintance with the criminal classes. In fact,
there is one unfortunate protege of mine whom I have tried very hard to
reform for the past four years, who is coming out of prison in a couple
of days. I took up this work," he said modestly, "because I feel it is
the duty of us who are in a more fortunate position, to help those who
have not had a chance in the cruel competition of the world." Tarling was not impressed. "Do you know the person who has been robbing you?" he asked. "I have reason to believe it is a girl whom I have summarily dismissed
to-night, and whom I wish you to watch." The detective nodded. "This is rather a primitive business," he said with the first faint hint
of a smile he had shown. "Haven't you your own shop detective who could
take that job in hand? Petty larceny is hardly in my line. I understood
that this was bigger work----"

He stopped, because it was obviously impossible to explain just why
he had thought as much, in the presence of the man whose conduct,
originally, had been the subject of his inquiries. "To you it may seem a small matter. To me, it is very important," said
Mr. Lyne profoundly. "Here is a girl, highly respected by all her
companions and consequently a great influence on their morals, who, as I
have reason to believe, has steadily and persistently falsified my books,
taking money from the firm, and at the same time has secured the goodwill
of all with whom she has been brought into contact. Obviously she is more
dangerous than another individual who succumbs to a sudden temptation. It
may be necessary to make an example of this girl, but I want you clearly
to understand, Mr. Tarling, that I have not sufficient evidence to
convict her; otherwise I might not have called you in." "You want me to get the evidence, eh?" said Tarling curiously. "Who is the lady, may I venture to ask, sir?" It was Milburgh who interposed the question. "Miss Rider," replied Lyne. "Miss Rider!" Milburgh's face took on a look of blank surprise, as he gasped the words. "Miss Rider--oh, no, impossible!" "Why impossible?" demanded Mr. Lyne sharply. "Well, sir, I meant----" stammered the manager, "it is so unlikely--she
is such a nice girl----"

Thornton Lyne shot a suspicious glance at him. "You have no particular reason for wishing to shield Miss Rider, have
you?" he asked coldly. "No, sir, not at all. I beg of you not to think that," appealed the
agitated Mr. Milburgh, "only it seems so--extraordinary." "All things are extraordinary that are out of the common," snapped Lyne. "It would be extraordinary if you were accused of stealing, Milburgh. It
would be very extraordinary indeed, for example, if we discovered that
you were living a five-thousand pounds life on a nine-hundred pounds
salary, eh?" Only for a second did Milburgh lose his self-possession. The hand that
went to his mouth shook, and Tarling, whose eyes had never left the man's
face, saw the tremendous effort which he was making to recover his
equanimity. "Yes, sir, that would be extraordinary," said Milburgh steadily. Lyne had lashed himself again into the old fury, and if his vitriolic
tongue was directed at Milburgh, his thoughts were centred upon that
proud and scornful face which had looked down upon him in his office. "It would be extraordinary if you were sent to penal servitude as the
result of my discovery that you had been robbing the firm for years," he
growled, "and I suppose everybody else in the firm would say the same as
you--how extraordinary!" "I daresay they would, sir," said Mr. Milburgh, his old smile back, the
twinkle again returning to his eyes, and his hands rubbing together in
ceaseless ablutions. "It would sound extraordinary, and it would be
extraordinary, and nobody here would be more surprised than the
unfortunate victim--ha! ha!" "Perhaps not," said Lyne coldly. "Only I want to say a few words in your
presence, and I would like you to give them every attention. You have
been complaining to me for a month past," he said speaking with
deliberation, "about small sums of money being missing from the cashier's
office." It was a bold thing to say, and in many ways a rash thing. He was
dependent for the success of his hastily-formed plan, not only upon
Milburgh's guilt, but upon Milburgh's willingness to confess his guilt. If the manager agreed to stand sponsor to this lie, he admitted his own
peculations, and Tarling, to whom the turn of the conversation had at
first been unintelligible, began dimly to see the drift it was taking. "I have complained that sums of money have been missing for the past
month?" repeated Milburgh dully. The smile had gone from his lips and eyes. His face was haggard--he was a
man at bay. "That is what I said," said Lyne watching him. "Isn't that the fact?" There was a long pause, and presently Milburgh nodded. "That is the fact, sir," he said in a low voice. "And you have told me that you suspected Miss Rider of defalcations?" Again the pause and again the man nodded. "Do you hear?" asked Lyne triumphantly. "I hear," said Tarling quietly. "Now what do you wish me to do? Isn't
this a matter for the police? I mean the regular police." Lyne frowned. "The case has to be prepared first," he said. "I will give you full
particulars as to the girl's address and her habits, and it will be your
business to collect such information as will enable us to put the case in
the hands of Scotland Yard." "I see," said Tarling and smiled again. Then he shook his head. "I'm
afraid I can't come into this case, Mr. Lyne." "Can't come in?" said Lyne in astonishment. "Why not?" "Because it's not my kind of job," said Tarling. "The first time I met
you I had a feeling that you were leading me to one of the biggest cases
I had ever undertaken. It shows you how one's instincts can lead one
astray," he smiled again, and picked up his hat. "What do you mean? You're going to throw up a valuable client?" "I don't know how valuable you're likely to be," said Tarling, "but at
the present moment the signs are not particularly encouraging. I tell you
I do not wish to be associated with this case, Mr. Lyne, and I think
there the matter can end." "You don't think it's worth while, eh?" sneered Lyne. "Yet when I tell
you that I am prepared to give you a fee of five hundred guineas----"

"If you gave me a fee of five thousand guineas, or fifty thousand
guineas, I should still decline to be associated with this matter," said
Tarling, and his words had the metallic quality which precludes argument. "At any rate, I am entitled to know why you will not take up this case. Do you know the girl?" asked Lyne loudly. "I have never met the lady and probably never shall," said Tarling. "I
only know that I will not be concerned with what is called in the United
States of America a 'frame up.'" "Frame up?" repeated the other. "A frame up. I dare say you know what it means--I will put the matter
more plainly and within your understanding. For some reason or other you
have a sudden grudge against a member of your staff. I read your face,
Mr. Lyne, and the weakness of your chin and the appetite of your mouth
suggest to me that you are not over scrupulous with the women who are in
your charge. I guess rather than know that you have been turned down with
a dull, sickening thud by a decent girl, and in your mortification you
are attempting to invent a charge which has no substance and no
foundation. "Mr. Milburgh," he turned to the other, and again Mr. Milburgh ceased to
smile, "has his own reasons for complying with your wishes. He is your
subordinate, and moreover, the side threat of penal servitude for him if
he refuses has carried some weight." Thornton Lyne's face was distorted with fury. "I will take care that your behaviour is widely advertised," he said. "You have brought a most monstrous charge against me, and I shall proceed
against you for slander. The truth is that you are not equal to the job I
intended giving you and you are finding an excuse for getting out." "The truth is," replied Tarling, biting off the end of a cigar he had
taken from his pocket, "that my reputation is too good to be risked in
associating with such a dirty business as yours. I hate to be rude, and
I hate just as much to throw away good money. But I can't take good money
for bad work, Mr. Lyne, and if you will be advised by me, you will drop
this stupid scheme for vengeance which your hurt vanity has suggested--it
is the clumsiest kind of frame up that was ever invented--and also you
will go and apologise to the young lady, whom, I have no doubt, you have
grossly insulted." He beckoned to his Chinese satellite and walked leisurely to the door. Incoherent with rage, shaking in every limb with a weak man's sense of
his own impotence, Lyne watched him until the door was half-closed, then,
springing forward with a strangled cry, he wrenched the door open and
leapt at the detective. Two hands gripped his arm and lifting him bodily back into the room,
pushed him down into a chair. A not unkindly face blinked down at him,
a face relieved from utter solemnity by the tiny laughter lines about
the eyes. "Mr. Lyne," said the mocking voice of Tarling, "you are setting an awful
example to the criminal classes. It is a good job your convict friend is
in gaol." Without another word he left the room. CHAPTER III

THE MAN WHO LOVED LYNE


Two days later Thornton Lyne sat in his big limousine which was drawn up
on the edge of Wandsworth Common, facing the gates of the gaol. Poet and _poseur_ he was, the strangest combination ever seen in man. Thornton Lyne was a store-keeper, a Bachelor of Arts, the winner of the
Mangate Science Prize and the author of a slim volume. The quality of the
poetry therein was not very great--but it was undoubtedly a slim volume
printed in queerly ornate type with old-fashioned esses and wide margins. He was a store-keeper because store-keeping supplied him with caviare and
peaches, a handsome little two-seater, a six-cylinder limousine for state
occasions, a country house and a flat in town, the decorations of which
ran to a figure which would have purchased many stores of humbler
pretensions than Lyne's Serve First Emporium. To the elder Lyne, Joseph Emanuel of that family, the inception and
prosperity of Lyne's Serve First Emporium was due. He had devised a sale
system which ensured every customer being attended to the moment he or
she entered one of the many departments which made up the splendid whole
of the emporium. It was a system based upon the age-old principle of
keeping efficient reserves within call. Thornton Lyne succeeded to the business at a moment when his slim volume
had placed him in the category of the gloriously misunderstood. Because
such reviewers as had noticed his book wrote of his "poetry" using
inverted commas to advertise their scorn, and because nobody bought the
volume despite its slimness, he became the idol of men and women who also
wrote that which nobody read, and in consequence developed souls with the
celerity that a small boy develops stomachache. For nothing in the wide world was more certain to the gloriously
misunderstood than this: the test of excellence is scorn. Thornton Lyne
might in different circumstances have drifted upward to sets even more
misunderstood--yea, even to a set superior to marriage and soap and clean
shirts and fresh air--only his father died of a surfeit, and Thornton
became the Lyne of Lyne's Serve First. His first inclination was to sell the property and retire to a villa in
Florence or Capri. Then the absurdity, the rich humour of an idea, struck
him. He, a scholar, a gentleman and a misunderstood poet, sitting in the
office of a store, appealed to him. Somebody remarked in his hearing that
the idea was "rich." He saw himself in "character" and the part appealed
to him. To everybody's surprise he took up his father's work, which meant
that he signed cheques, collected profits and left the management to the
Soults and the Neys whom old Napoleon Lyne had relied upon in the
foundation of his empire. Thornton wrote an address to his 3,000 employees--which address was
printed on decided antique paper in queerly ornate type with wide
margins. He quoted Seneca, Aristotle, Marcus Aurelius and the "Iliad." The "address" secured better and longer reviews in the newspapers than
had his book. He had found life a pleasant experience--all the more piquant because of
the amazement of innumerable ecstatic friends who clasped their hands
and asked awefully: "How _can_ you--a man of your temperament...!" Life might have gone on being pleasant if every man and woman he had met
had let him have his own way. Only there were at least two people with
whom Thornton Lyne's millions carried no weight. It was warm in his limousine, which was electrically heated. But outside,
on that raw April morning, it was bitterly cold, and the shivering little
group of women who stood at a respectful distance from the prison gates,
drew their shawls tightly about them as errant flakes of snow whirled
across the open. The common was covered with a white powder, and the
early flowers looked supremely miserable in their wintry setting. The prison clock struck eight, and a wicket-gate opened. A man slouched
out, his jacket buttoned up to his neck, his cap pulled over his eyes. At
sight of him, Lyne dropped the newspaper he had been reading, opened the
door of the car and jumped out, walking towards the released prisoner. "Well, Sam," he said, genially "you didn't expect me?" The man stopped as if he had been shot, and stood staring at the
fur-coated figure. Then:

"Oh, Mr. Lyne," he said brokenly. "Oh, guv'nor!" he choked, and tears
streamed down his face, and he gripped the outstretched hand in both of
his, unable to speak. "You didn't think I'd desert you, Sam, eh?" said Mr. Lyne, all aglow with
consciousness of his virtue. "I thought you'd given me up, sir," said Sam Stay huskily. "You're a
gentleman, you are, sir, and I ought to be ashamed of myself!" "Nonsense, nonsense, Sam! Jump into the car, my lad. Go along. People
will think you're a millionaire." The man gulped, grinned sheepishly, opened the door and stepped in, and
sank with a sigh of comfort into the luxurious depths of the big brown
cushions. "Gawd! To think that there are men like you in the world, sir! Why, I
believe in angels, I do!" "Nonsense Sam. Now you come along to my flat, and I'm going to give you a
good breakfast and start you fair again." "I'm going to try and keep straight, sir, I am s'help me!" It may be said in truth that Mr. Lyne did not care very much whether Sam
kept straight or not. He might indeed have been very much disappointed if
Sam had kept to the straight and narrow path. He "kept" Sam as men keep
chickens and prize cows, and he "collected" Sam as other men collect
stamps and china. Sam was his luxury and his pose. In his club he boasted
of his acquaintance with this representative of the criminal classes--for
Sam was an expert burglar and knew no other trade--and Sam's adoration
for him was one of his most exhilarating experiences. And that adoration was genuine. Sam would have laid down his life for the
pale-faced man with the loose mouth. He would have suffered himself to be
torn limb from limb if in his agony he could have brought ease or
advancement to the man who, to him, was one with the gods. Originally, Thornton Lyne had found Sam whilst that artist was engaged in
burgling the house of his future benefactor. It was a whim of Lyne's to
give the criminal a good breakfast and to evince an interest in his
future. Twice had Sam gone down for a short term, and once for a long
term of imprisonment, and on each occasion Thornton Lyne had made a
parade of collecting the returned wanderer, driving him home, giving him
breakfast and a great deal of worldly and unnecessary advice, and
launching him forth again upon the world with ten pounds--a sum just
sufficient to buy Sam a new kit of burglar's tools. Never before had Sam shown such gratitude; and never before had Thornton
Lyne been less disinterested in his attentions. There was a hot
bath--which Sam Stay could have dispensed with, but which, out of sheer
politeness, he was compelled to accept, a warm and luxurious breakfast; a
new suit of clothes, with not two, but four, five-pound notes in the
pocket. After breakfast, Lyne had his talk. "It's no good, sir," said the burglar, shaking his head. "I've tried
everything to get an honest living, but somehow I can't get on in the
straight life. I drove a taxicab for three months after I came out, till
a busy-fellow[A] tumbled to me not having a license, and brought me up
under the Prevention of Crimes Act. It's no use my asking you to give me
a job in your shop, sir, because I couldn't stick it, I couldn't really! I'm used to the open air life; I like being my own master. I'm one of
those fellows you've read about--the word begins with A." [Footnote A: Detective.] "Adventurers?" said Lyne with a little laugh. "Yes, I think you are, Sam,
and I'm going to give you an adventure after your own heart." And then he began to tell a tale of base ingratitude--of a girl he had
helped, had indeed saved from starvation and who had betrayed him at
every turn. Thornton Lyne was a poet. He was also a picturesque liar. The
lie came as easily as the truth, and easier, since there was a certain
crudeness about truth which revolted his artistic soul. And as the tale
was unfolded of Odette Rider's perfidy, Sam's eyes narrowed. There was
nothing too bad for such a creature as this. She was wholly undeserving
of sympathy. Presently Thornton Lyne stopped, his eyes fixed on the other to note the
effect. "Show me," said Sam, his voice trembling. "Show me a way of getting even
with her, sir, and I'll go through hell to do it!" "That's the kind of stuff I like to hear," said Lyne, and poured out from
the long bottle which stood on the coffee-tray a stiff tot of Sam's
favourite brandy. "Now, I'll give you my idea." For the rest of the morning the two men sat almost head to head, plotting
woe for the girl, whose chief offence had been against the dignity of
Thornton Lyne, and whose virtue had incited the hate of that vicious man. CHAPTER IV

MURDER


Jack Tarling lay stretched upon his hard bed, a long cigarette-holder
between his teeth, a book on Chinese metaphysics balanced on his chest,
at peace with the world. The hour was eight o'clock, and it was the day
that Sam Stay had been released from gaol. It had been a busy day for Tarling, for he was engaged in a bank fraud
case which would have occupied the whole of his time had he not had a
little private business to attend to. This private matter was wholly
unprofitable, but his curiosity had been piqued. He lay the book flat on his chest as the soft click of the opening door
announced the coming of his retainer. The impassive Ling Chu came
noiselessly into the room, carrying a tray, which he placed upon a low
table by the side of his master's bed. The Chinaman wore a blue silk
pyjama suit--a fact which Tarling noticed. "You are not going out to-night then, Ling Chu?" "No, Lieh Jen," said the man. They both spoke in the soft, sibilant patois of Shantung. "You have been to the Man with the Cunning Face?" For answer the other took an envelope from an inside pocket and laid it
in the other's hand. Tarling glanced at the address. "So this is where the young lady lives, eh? Miss Odette Rider, 27,
Carrymore Buildings, Edgware Road." "It is a clan house, where many people live," said Ling Chu. "I myself
went, in your honourable service, and saw people coming in and going out
interminably, and never the same people did I see twice." "It is what they call in English a 'flat building,' Ling," said Tarling
with a little smile. "What did the Man with the Cunning Face say to my
letter?" "Master, he said nothing. He just read and read, and then he made a face
like this." Ling gave an imitation of Mr. Milburgh's smile. "And then he
wrote as you see." Tarling nodded. He stared for a moment into vacancy, then he turned on
his elbow and lifted the cup of tea which his servant had brought him. "What of Face-White-and-Weak Man, Ling?" he asked in the vernacular. "You
saw him?" "I saw him, master," said the Chinaman gravely. "He is a man without a
heaven." Again Tarling nodded. The Chinese use the word "heaven" instead of "God,"
and he felt that Ling had very accurately sized up Mr. Thornton Lyne's
lack of spiritual qualities. He finished the tea, and swung his legs over the edge of the bed. "Ling," he said, "this place is very dull and sad. I do not think I shall
live here." "Will the master go back to Shanghai?" asked the other, without any
display of emotion. "I think so," nodded Tarling. "At any rate, this place is too dull. Just
miserable little taking-money-easily cases, and wife-husband-lover cases
and my soul is sick." "These are small matters," said Ling philosophically. "But The
Master"--this time he spoke of the great Master, Confucius--"has said
that all greatness comes from small things, and perhaps some small-piece
man will cut off the head of some big-piece man, and then they will call
you to find the murderer." Tarling laughed. "You're an optimist, Ling," he said. "No, I don't think they'll call me
in for a murder. They don't call in private detectives in this country." Ling shook his head. "But the master must find murderers, or he will no longer be Lieh Jen,
the Hunter of Men." "You're a bloodthirsty soul, Ling," said Tarling, this time in English,
which Ling imperfectly understood, despite the sustained efforts of
eminent missionary schools. "Now I'll go out," he said with sudden
resolution. "I am going to call upon the small-piece woman whom
White-Face desires." "May I come with you?" asked Ling. Tarling hesitated. "Yes, you may come," he said, "but you must trail me." Carrymore Mansions is a great block of buildings sandwiched between two
more aristocratic and more expensive blocks of flats in the Edgware Road. The ground floor is given up to lock-up shops which perhaps cheapened the
building, but still it was a sufficiently exclusive habitation for the
rents, as Tarling guessed, to be a little too high for a shop assistant,
unless she were living with her family. The explanation, as he was to
discover, lay in the fact that there were some very undesirable basement
flats which were let at a lower rental. He found himself standing outside the polished mahogany door of one of
these, wondering exactly what excuse he was going to give to the girl for
making a call so late at night. And that she needed some explanation was
clear from the frank suspicion which showed in her face when she opened
the door to him. "Yes, I am Miss Rider," she said. "Can I see you for a few moments?" "I'm sorry," she said, shaking her head, "but I am alone in the flat, so
I can't ask you to come in." This was a bad beginning. "Is it not possible for you to come out?" he asked anxiously, and in
spite of herself, she smiled. "I'm afraid it's quite impossible for me to go out with somebody I have
never met before," she said, with just a trace of amusement in her eyes. "I recognise the difficulty," laughed Tailing. "Here is one of my cards. I'm afraid I am not very famous in this country, so you will not know
my name." She took the card and read it. "A private detective?" she said in a troubled voice. "Who has sent you? Not Mr.----"

"Not Mr. Lyne," he said. She hesitated a moment, then threw open the door wider. "You must come in. We can talk here in the hall. Do I understand Mr. Lyne
has not sent you?" "Mr. Lyne was very anxious that I should come," he said. "I am betraying
his confidence, but I do not think that he has any claim upon my loyalty. I don't know why I've bothered you at all, except that I feel that you
ought to be put on your guard." "Against what?" she asked. "Against the machinations of a gentleman to whom you have been----" he
hesitated for a word. "Very offensive," she finished for him. "I don't know how offensive you've been," he laughed, "but I gather you
have annoyed Mr. Lyne for some reason or other, and that he is determined
to annoy you. I do not ask your confidence in this respect, because I
realise that you would hardly like to tell me. But what I want to tell
you is this, that Mr. Lyne is probably framing up a charge against
you--that is to say, inventing a charge of theft." "Of theft?" she cried in indignant amazement. "Against me? Of theft? It's
impossible that he could be so wicked!" "It's not impossible that anybody could be wicked," said Tarling of the
impassive face and the laughing eyes. "All that I know is that he even
induced Mr. Milburgh to say that complaints have been made by Milburgh
concerning thefts of money from your department." "That's absolutely impossible!" she cried emphatically. "Mr. Milburgh
would never say such a thing. Absolutely impossible!" "Mr. Milburgh didn't want to say such a thing, I give him credit for
that," said Tarling slowly, and then gave the gist of the argument,
omitting any reference, direct or indirect, to the suspicion which
surrounded Milburgh. "So you see," he said in conclusion, "that you ought to be on your guard. I suggest to you that you see a solicitor and put the matter in his
hands. You need not move against Mr. Lyne, but it would strengthen your
position tremendously if you had already detailed the scheme to some
person in authority." "Thank you very, very much, Mr. Tarling," she said warmly, and looked up
into his face with a smile so sweet, so pathetic, so helpless, that
Tarling's heart melted towards her. "And if you don't want a solicitor," he said, "you can depend upon me. I will help you if any trouble arises." "You don't know how grateful I am to you, Mr. Tarling, I didn't receive
you very graciously!" "If you will forgive my saying so, you would have been a fool to have
received me in any other way," he said. She held out both hands to him: he took them, and there were tears in her
eyes. Presently she composed herself, and led him into her little
drawing-room. "Of course, I've lost my job," she laughed, "but I've had several offers,
one of which I shall accept. I am going to have the rest of the week to
myself and to take a holiday." Tarling stopped her with a gesture. His ears were superhumanly sensitive. "Are you expecting a visitor?" he asked softly. "No," said the girl in surprise. "Do you share this flat with somebody?" "I have a woman who sleeps here," she said. "She is out for the evening." "Has she a key?" The girl shook her head. The man rose, and Odette marvelled how one so tall could move so swiftly,
and without so much as a sound, across the uncarpeted hallway. He
reached the door, turned the knob of the patent lock and jerked it open. A man was standing on the mat and he jumped back at the unexpectedness
of Tarling's appearance. The stranger was a cadaverous-looking man, in a
brand-new suit of clothes, evidently ready-made, but he still wore
on his face the curious yellow tinge which is the special mark of the
recently liberated gaol-bird. "Beg pardon," he stammered, "but is this No. 87?" Tarling shot out a hand, and gripping him by the coat, drew the helpless
man towards him. "Hullo, what are you trying to do? What's this you have?" He wrenched something from the man's hand. It was not a key but a
flat-toothed instrument of strange construction. "Come in," said Tarling, and jerked his prisoner into the hall. A swift turning back of his prisoner's coat pinioned him, and then with
dexterousness and in silence he proceeded to search. From two pockets he
took a dozen jewelled rings, each bearing the tiny tag of Lyne's Store. "Hullo!" said Tarling sarcastically, "are these intended as a loving gift
from Mr. Lyne to Miss Rider?" The man was speechless with rage. If looks could kill, Tarling would have
died. "A clumsy trick," said Tarling, shaking his head mournfully. "Now go back
to your boss, Mr. Thornton Lyne, and tell him that I am ashamed of an
intelligent man adopting so crude a method," and with a kick he dismissed
Sam Stay to the outer darkness. The girl, who had been a frightened spectator of the scene, turned her
eyes imploringly upon the detective. "What does it mean?" she pleaded. "I feel so frightened. What did that
man want?" "You need not be afraid of that man, or any other man," said Tarling
briskly. "I'm sorry you were scared." He succeeded in calming her by the time her servant had returned and then
took his leave. "Remember, I have given you my telephone number and you will call me up
if there is any trouble. Particularly," he said emphatically, "if there
is any trouble to-morrow." But there was no trouble on the following day, though at three o'clock in
the afternoon she called him up. "I am going away to stay in the country," she said. "I got scared last
night." "Come and see me when you get back," said Tarling, who had found it
difficult to dismiss the girl from his mind. "I am going to see Lyne
to-morrow. By the way, the person who called last night is a protege of
Mr. Thornton Lyne's, a man who is devoted to him body and soul, and
he's the fellow we've got to look after. By Jove! It almost gives me an
interest in life!" He heard the faint laugh of the girl. "Must I be butchered to make a detective's holiday?" she mocked, and he
grinned sympathetically. "Any way, I'll see Lyne to-morrow," he said. The interview which Jack Tarling projected was destined never to take
place. On the following morning, an early worker taking a short cut through Hyde
Park, found the body of a man lying by the side of a carriage drive. He
was fully dressed save that his coat and waistcoat had been removed. Wound about his body was a woman's silk night-dress stained with blood. The hands of the figure were crossed on the breast and upon them lay a
handful of daffodils. At eleven o'clock that morning the evening newspapers burst forth with
the intelligence that the body had been identified as that of Thornton
Lyne, and that he had been shot through the heart. CHAPTER V

FOUND IN LYNE'S POCKET


"The London police are confronted with a new mystery, which has features
so remarkable, that it would not be an exaggeration to describe this
crime as the Murder Mystery of the Century. A well-known figure in London
Society, Mr. Thornton Lyne, head of an important commercial organisation,
a poet of no mean quality, and a millionaire renowned for his
philanthropic activities, was found dead in Hyde Park in the early hours
of this morning, in circumstances which admit of no doubt that he was
most brutally murdered. "At half-past five, Thomas Savage, a bricklayer's labourer employed by
the Cubitt Town Construction Company, was making his way across Hyde Park
_en route_ to his work. He had crossed the main drive which runs parallel
with the Bayswater Road, when his attention was attracted to a figure
lying on the grass near to the sidewalk. He made his way to the spot and
discovered a man, who had obviously been dead for some hours. The body
had neither coat nor waistcoat, but about the breast, on which his two
hands were laid, was a silk garment tightly wound about the body, and
obviously designed to stanch a wound on the left side above the heart. "The extraordinary feature is that the murderer must not only have
composed the body, but had laid upon its breast a handful of daffodils. The police were immediately summoned and the body was removed. The police
theory is that the murder was not committed in Hyde Park, but the
unfortunate gentleman was killed elsewhere and his body conveyed to the
Park in his own motor-car, which was found abandoned a hundred yards from
the scene of the discovery. We understand that the police are working
upon a very important clue, and an arrest is imminent." Mr. J. O. Tarling, late of the Shanghai Detective Service, read the short
account in the evening newspaper, and was unusually thoughtful. Lyne murdered! It was an extraordinary coincidence that he had been
brought into touch with this young man only a few days before. Tarling knew nothing of Lyne's private life, though from his own
knowledge of the man during his short stay in Shanghai, he guessed that
that life was not wholly blameless. He had been too busy in China to
bother his head about the vagaries of a tourist, but he remembered dimly
some sort of scandal which had attached to the visitor's name, and
puzzled his head to recall all the circumstances. He put down the newspaper with a little grimace indicative of regret. If
he had only been attached to Scotland Yard, what a case this would have
been for him! Here was a mystery which promised unusual interest. His mind wandered to the girl, Odette Rider. What would she think of it? She would be shocked, he thought--horrified. It hurt him to feel that she
might be indirectly, even remotely associated with such a public scandal,
and he realised with a sudden sense of dismay that nothing was less
unlikely than that her name would be mentioned as one who had quarrelled
with the dead man. "Pshaw!" he muttered, shrugging off the possibility as absurd, and,
walking to the door, called his Chinese servant. Ling Chu came silently at his bidding. "Ling Chu," he said, "the white-faced man is dead." Ling Chu raised his imperturbable eyes to his master's face. "All men die some time," he said calmly. "This man quick die. That is
better than long die." Tarling looked at him sharply. "How do you know that he quick die?" he demanded. "These things are talked about," said Ling Chu without hesitation. "But not in the Chinese language," replied Tarling, "and, Ling Chu, you
speak no English." "I speak a little, master," said Ling Chu, "and I have heard these things
in the streets." Tarling did not answer immediately, and the Chinaman waited. "Ling Chu," he said after awhile, "this man came to Shanghai whilst we
were there, and there was trouble-trouble. Once he was thrown out from
Wing Fu's tea-house, where he had been smoking opium. Also there was
another trouble--do you remember?" The Chinaman looked him straight in the eyes. "I am forgetting," he said. "This white-face was a bad man. I am glad he
is dead." "Humph!" said Tarling, and dismissed his retainer. Ling Chu was the cleverest of all his sleuths, a man who never lifted his
nose from the trail once it was struck, and he had been the most loyal
and faithful of Tarling's native trailers. But the detective never
pretended that he understood Ling Chu's mind, or that he could pierce the
veil which the native dropped between his own private thoughts and the
curious foreigner. Even native criminals were baffled in their
interpretation of Ling Chu's views, and many a man had gone to the
scaffold puzzling the head, which was soon to be snicked from his body,
over the method by which Ling Chu had detected his crime. Tarling went back to the table and picked up the newspaper, but had
hardly begun to read when the telephone bell rang. He picked up the
receiver and listened. To his amazement it was the voice of Cresswell,
the Assistant Commissioner of Police, who had been instrumental in
persuading Tarling to come to England. "Can you come round to the Yard immediately, Tarling?" said the voice. "I
want to talk to you about this murder." "Surely," said Tarling. "I'll be with you in a few minutes." In five minutes he was at Scotland Yard and was ushered into the office
of Assistant Commissioner Cresswell. The white-haired man who came across
to meet him with a smile of pleasure in his eyes disclosed the object of
the summons. "I'm going to bring you into this case, Tarling," he said. "It has
certain aspects which seem outside the humdrum experience of our own
people. It is not unusual, as you know," he said, as he motioned the
other to a chair, "for Scotland Yard to engage outside help, particularly
when we have a crime of this character to deal with. The facts you know,"
he went on, as he opened a thin folder. "These are the reports, which you
can read at your leisure. Thornton Lyne was, to say the least, eccentric. His life was not a particularly wholesome one, and he had many
undesirable acquaintances, amongst whom was a criminal and ex-convict
who was only released from gaol a few days ago." "That's rather extraordinary," said Tarling, lifting his eyebrows. "What
had he in common with the criminal?" Commissioner Cresswell shrugged his shoulders. "My own view is that this acquaintance was rather a pose of Lyne's. He
liked to be talked about. It gave him a certain reputation for character
amongst his friends." "Who is the criminal?" asked Tarling. "He is a man named Stay, a petty larcenist, and in my opinion a much more
dangerous character than the police have realised." "Is he----" began Tarling. But the Commissioner shook his head. "I think we can rule him out from the list of people who may be suspected
of this murder," he said. "Sam Stay has very few qualities that would
commend themselves to the average man, but there can be no doubt at all
that he was devoted to Lyne, body and soul. When the detective
temporarily in charge of the case went down to Lambeth to interview Stay,
he found him lying on his bed prostrate with grief, with a newspaper
containing the particulars of the murder by his side. The man is beside
himself with sorrow, and threatens to 'do in' the person who is
responsible for this crime. You can interview him later. I doubt whether
you will get much out of him, because he is absolutely incoherent. Lyne
was something more than human in his eyes, and I should imagine that the
only decent emotion he has had in his life is this affection for a man
who was certainly good to him, whether he was sincere in his philanthropy
or otherwise. Now here are a few of the facts which have not been made
public." Cresswell settled himself back in his chair and ticked off on
his fingers the points as he made them. "You know that around Lyne's chest a silk night-dress was discovered?" Tarling nodded. "Under the night-dress, made into a pad, evidently with the object of
arresting the bleeding, were two handkerchiefs, neatly folded, as though
they had been taken from a drawer. They were ladies' handkerchiefs, so we
may start on the supposition that there is a woman in the case." Tarling nodded. "Now another peculiar feature of the case, which happily has escaped the
attention of those who saw the body first and gave particulars to the
newspapers, was that Lyne, though fully dressed, wore a pair of thick
felt slippers. They were taken out of his own store yesterday evening, as
we have ascertained, by Lyne himself, who sent for one of his assistants
to his office and told him to get a pair of very soft-soled slippers. "The third item is that Lyne's boots were discovered in the deserted
motor-car which was drawn up by the side of the road a hundred yards from
where the body was lying. "And the fourth feature--and this explains why I have brought you into
the case--is that in the car was discovered his bloodstained coat and
waistcoat. In the right-hand pocket of the latter garment," said
Cresswell, speaking slowly, "was found this." He took from his drawer a
small piece of crimson paper two inches square, and handed it without
comment to the detective. Tarling took the paper and stared. Written in thick black ink were four
Chinese characters, "_tzu chao fan nao_"--"He brought this trouble
upon himself." CHAPTER VI

THE MOTHER OF ODETTE RIDER


The two men looked at one another in silence. "Well?" said the Commissioner at last. Tarling shook his head. "That's amazing," he said, and looked at the little slip of paper between
his finger and thumb. "You see why I am bringing you in," said the Commissioner. "If there is a
Chinese end to this crime, nobody knows better than you how to deal with
it. I have had this slip translated. It means 'He brought this trouble
upon himself.'" "Literally, 'self look for trouble,'" said Tarling. "But there is one
fact which you may not have noticed. If you will look at the slip, you
will see that it is not written but printed." He passed the little red square across the table, and the Commissioner
examined it. "That's true," he said in surprise. "I did not notice that. Have you seen
these slips before?" Tarling nodded. "A few years ago," he said. "There was a very bad outbreak of crime in
Shanghai, mostly under the leadership of a notorious criminal whom I was
instrumental in getting beheaded. He ran a gang called 'The Cheerful
Hearts'--you know the fantastic titles which these Chinese gangs adopt. It was their custom to leave on the scene of their depredations the
_Hong_, or sign-manual of the gang. It was worded exactly as this slip,
only it was written. These visiting cards of 'The Cheerful Hearts' were
bought up as curios, and commanded high prices until some enterprising
Chinaman started printing them, so that you could buy them at almost any
stationer's shop in Shanghai--just as you buy picture post-cards." The Commissioner nodded. "And this is one of those?" "This is such a one. How it came here, heaven knows," he said. "It is
certainly the most remarkable discovery." The Commissioner went to a cupboard, unlocked it and took out a
suit-case, which he placed upon the table and opened. "Now," said the Commissioner, "look at this, Tarling." "This" was a stained garment, which Tarling had no difficulty in
recognising as a night-dress. He took it out and examined it. Save for
two sprays of forget-me-nots upon the sleeves it was perfectly plain and
was innocent of lace or embroidery. "It was found round his body, and here are the handkerchiefs." He pointed
to two tiny squares of linen, so discoloured as to be hardly
recognisable. Tarling lifted the flimsy garment, with its evidence of the terrible
purpose for which it had been employed, and carried it to the light. "Are there laundry marks?" "None whatever," said the Commissioner. "Or on the handkerchiefs?" "None," replied Mr. Cresswell. "The property of a girl who lived alone," said Tarling. "She is not very
well off, but extremely neat, fond of good things, but not extravagant,
eh?" "How do you know that?" asked the Commissioner, surprised. Tarling laughed. "The absence of laundry marks shows that she washes her silk garments at
home, and probably her handkerchiefs also, which places her amongst the
girls who aren't blessed with too many of this world's goods. The fact
that it is silk, and good silk, and that the handkerchiefs are good
linen, suggests a woman who takes a great deal of trouble, yet whom one
would not expect to find over-dressed. Have you any other clue?" "None," said the Commissioner. "We have discovered that Mr. Lyne had
rather a serious quarrel with one of his employees, a Miss Odette
Rider----"

Tarling caught his breath. It was, he told himself, absurd to take so
keen an interest in a person whom he had not seen for more than ten
minutes, and who a week before was a perfect stranger. But somehow the
girl had made a deeper impression upon him than he had realised. This
man, who had spent his life in the investigation of crime and in the
study of criminals, had found little time to interest himself in
womanhood, and Odette Rider had been a revelation to him. "I happen to know there was a quarrel. I also know the cause," he said,
and related briefly the circumstances under which he himself had met
Thornton Lyne. "What have you against her?" he said, with an assumption
of carelessness which he did not feel. "Nothing definite," said the Commissioner. "Her principal accuser is the
man Stay. Even he did not accuse her directly, but he hinted that she was
responsible, in some way which he did not particularise, for Thornton
Lyne's death. I thought it curious that he should know anything about
this girl, but I am inclined to think that Thornton Lyne made this man
his confidant." "What about the man?" asked Tarling. "Can he account for his movements
last night and early this morning?" "His statement," replied the Commissioner, "is that he saw Mr. Lyne at
his flat at nine o'clock, and that Mr. Lyne gave him five pounds in the
presence of Lyne's butler. He said he left the flat and went to his
lodgings in Lambeth, where he went to bed very early. All the evidence we
have been able to collect supports his statement. We have interviewed
Lyne's butler, and his account agrees with Stay's. Stay left at five
minutes past nine, and at twenty-five minutes to ten--exactly half an
hour later--Lyne himself left the house, driving his two-seater. He was
alone, and told the butler he was going to his club." "How was he dressed?" asked Tarling. "That is rather important," nodded the Commissioner. "For he was
in evening dress until nine o'clock--in fact, until after Stay had
gone--when he changed into the kit in which he was found dead." Tarling pursed his lips. "He'd hardly change from evening into day dress to go to his club," he
said. He left Scotland Yard a little while after this, a much puzzled man. His
first call was at the flat in Edgware Road which Odette Rider occupied. She was not at home, and the hall porter told him that she had been away
since the afternoon of the previous day. Her letters were to be sent on
to Hertford. He had the address, because it was his business to intercept
the postman and send forward the letters. "Hillington Grove, Hertford." Tarling was worried. There was really no reason why he should be, he told
himself, but he was undoubtedly worried. And he was disappointed too. He
felt that, if he could have seen the girl and spoken with her for a few
minutes, he could have completely disassociated her from any suspicion
which might attach. In fact, that she was away from home, that she had
"disappeared" from her flat on the eve of the murder, would be quite
enough, as he knew, to set the official policeman nosing on her trail. "Do you know whether Miss Rider has friends at Hertford?" he asked the
porter. "Oh, yes, sir," said the man nodding. "Miss Rider's mother lives there." Tarling was going, when the man detained him with a remark which switched
his mind back to the murder and filled him with a momentary sense of
hopeless dismay. "I'm rather glad Miss Rider didn't happen to be in last night, sir," he
said. "Some of the tenants upstairs were making complaints." "Complaints about what?" asked Tarling, and the man hesitated. "I suppose you're a friend of the young lady's, aren't you?" and Tarling
nodded. "Well, it only shows you," said the porter confidentially, "how people
are very often blamed for something they did not do. The tenant in the
next flat is a bit crotchety; he's a musician, and rather deaf. If he
hadn't been deaf, he wouldn't have said that Miss Rider was the cause of
his being wakened up. I suppose it was something that happened outside." "What did he hear?" asked Tarling quickly, and the porter laughed. "Well, sir, he thought he heard a shot, and a scream like a woman's. It
woke him up. I should have thought he had dreamt it, but another tenant,
who also lives in the basement, heard the same sound, and the rum thing
was they both thought it was in Miss Rider's flat." "What time was this?" "They say about midnight, sir," said the porter; "but, of course, it
couldn't have happened, because Miss Rider had not been in, and the flat
was empty." Here was a disconcerting piece of news for Tarling to carry with him on
his railway journey to Hertford. He was determined to see the girl and
put her on her guard, and though he realised that it was not exactly his
duty to put a suspected criminal upon her guard, and that his conduct
was, to say the least of it, irregular, such did not trouble him very
much. He had taken his ticket and was making his way to the platform when he
espied a familiar figure hurrying as from a train which had just come in,
and apparently the man saw Tarling even before Tarling had recognised
him, for he turned abruptly aside and would have disappeared into the
press of people had not the detective overtaken him. "Hullo, Mr. Milburgh!" he said. "Your name is Milburgh, if I remember
aright?" The manager of Lyne's Store turned, rubbing his hands, his habitual smile
upon his face. "Why, to be sure," he said genially, "it's Mr. Tarling, the detective
gentleman. What sad news this is, Mr. Tarling! How dreadful for everybody
concerned!" "I suppose it has meant an upset at the Stores, this terrible happening?" "Oh, yes, sir," said Milburgh in a shocked voice. "Of course we closed
the Store for the day. It is dreadful--the most dreadful thing within my
experience. Is anybody suspected, sir?" he asked. Tarling shook his head. "It is a most mysterious circumstance, Mr. Milburgh," he said. And then:
"May I ask if any provision had been made to carry on the business in the
event of Mr. Lyne's sudden death?" Again Milburgh hesitated, and seemed reluctant to reply. "I am, of course, in control," he said, "as I was when Mr. Lyne took his
trip around the world. I have received authority also from Mr. Lyne's
solicitors to continue the direction of the business until the Court
appoints a trustee." Tarling eyed him narrowly. "What effect has this murder had upon you personally?" he asked bluntly. "Does it enhance or depreciate your position?" Milburgh smiled. "Unhappily," he said, "it enhances my position, because it gives me a
greater authority and a greater responsibility. I would that the occasion
had never arisen, Mr. Tarling." "I'm sure you do," said Tarling dryly, remembering Lyne's accusations
against the other's probity. After a few commonplaces the men parted. Milburgh! On the journey to Hertford Tarling analysed that urbane man,
and found him deficient in certain essential qualities; weighed him and
found him wanting in elements which should certainly form part of the
equipment of a trustworthy man. At Hertford he jumped into a cab and gave the address. "Hillington Grove, sir? That's about two miles out," said the cabman. "It's Mrs. Rider you want?" Tarling nodded. "You ain't come with the young lady she was expecting?" said the driver

"No," replied Tarling in surprise. "I was told to keep my eyes open for a young lady," explained the cabman
vaguely. A further surprise awaited the detective. He expected to discover that
Hillington Grove was a small suburban house bearing a grandiose title. He was amazed when the cabman turned through a pair of impressive gates,
and drove up a wide drive of some considerable length, turning eventually
on to a gravelled space before a large mansion. It was hardly the kind of
home he would have expected for the parent of a cashier at Lyne's Store,
and his surprise was increased when the door was opened by a footman. He was ushered into a drawing-room, beautifully and artistically
furnished. He began to think that some mistake had been made, and was
framing an apology to the mistress of the house, when the door opened and
a lady entered. Her age was nearer forty than thirty, but she was still a beautiful woman
and carried herself with the air of a grand dame. She was graciousness
itself to the visitor, but Tarling thought he detected a note of anxiety
both in her mien and in her voice. "I'm afraid there's some mistake," he began. "I have probably found the
wrong Mrs. Rider--I wanted to see Miss Odette Rider." The lady nodded. "That is my daughter," she said. "Have you any news of her? I am quite
worried about her." "Worried about her?" said Tarling quickly. "Why, what has happened? Isn't
she here?" "Here?" said Mrs. Rider, wide-eyed. "Of course she is not." "But hasn't she been here?" asked Tarling. "Didn't she arrive here two
nights ago?" Mrs. Rider shook her head. "My daughter has not been," she replied. "But she promised to come and
spend a few days with me, and last night I received a telegram--wait a
moment, I will get it for you." She was gone a few moments and came back with a little buff form, which
she handed to the detective. He looked and read:

     "My visit cancelled. Do not write to me at flat. I will communicate
     with you when I reach my destination." The telegram had been handed in at the General Post Office, London, and
was dated nine o'clock--three hours, according to expert opinion, before
the murder was committed! CHAPTER VII

THE WOMAN IN THE CASE


"May I keep this telegram?" asked Tarling. The woman nodded. He saw that she was nervous, ill at ease and worried. "I can't quite understand why Odette should not come," she said. "Is
there any particular reason?" "That I can't say," said Tarling. "But please don't let it worry you,
Mrs. Rider. She probably changed her mind at the last moment and is
staying with friends in town." "Then you haven't seen her?" asked Mrs. Rider anxiously. "I haven't seen her for several days." "Is anything wrong?" Her voice shook for a second, but she recovered
herself. "You see," she made an attempt to smile. "I have been in the
house for two or three days, and I have seen neither Odette nor--nor
anybody else," she added quickly. Who was she expecting to see, wondered Tarling, and why did she check
herself? Was it possible that she had not heard of the murder? He
determined to test her. "Your daughter is probably detained in town owing to Mr. Lyne's death,"
he said, watching her closely. She started and went white. "Mr. Lyne's death?" she stammered. "Has he died? That young man?" "He was murdered in Hyde Park yesterday morning," said Tarling, and she
staggered back and collapsed into a chair. "Murdered! Murdered!" she whispered. "Oh, God! Not that, not that!" Her face was ashen white, and she was shaking in every limb, this stately
woman who had walked so serenely into the drawing-room a few minutes
before. Presently she covered her face with her hands and began to weep softly
and Tarling waited. "Did you know Mr. Lyne?" he asked after a while. She shook her head. "Have you heard any stories about Mr. Lyne?" She looked up. "None," she said listlessly, "except that he was--not a very nice man." "Forgive me asking you, but are you very much interested--" He hesitated,
and she lifted her head. He did not know how to put this question into words. It puzzled him that
the daughter of this woman, who was evidently well off, should be engaged
in a more or less humble capacity in Lyne's Store. He wanted to know
whether she knew that the girl had been dismissed, and whether that made
much difference to her. Then again, his conversation with Odette Rider
had not led him to the conclusion that she could afford to throw up her
work. She spoke of finding another job, and that did not sound as though
her mother was in a good position. "Is there any necessity for your daughter working for a living?" he asked
bluntly, and she dropped her eyes. "It is her wish," she said in a low voice. "She does not get on with
people about here," she added hastily. There was a brief silence, then he rose and offered his hand. "I do hope I haven't worried you with my questions," he said, "and I
daresay you wonder why I have come. I will tell you candidly that I am
engaged in investigating this murder, and I was hoping to hear that your
daughter, in common with the other people who were brought into contact
with Mr. Lyne, might give me some thread of a clue which would lead to
more important things." "A detective?" she asked, and he could have sworn there was horror in her
eyes. "A sort of detective," he laughed, "but not a formidable one, I hope,
Mrs. Rider." She saw him to the door, and watched him as he disappeared down the
drive; then walked slowly back to the room and stood against the marble
mantelpiece, her head upon her arms, weeping softly. Jack Tarling left Hertford more confused than ever. He had instructed the
fly driver to wait for him at the gates, and this worthy he proceeded to
pump. Mrs. Rider had been living in Hertford for four years, and was greatly
respected. Did the cabman know the daughter? Oh yes, he had seen the
young lady once or twice, but "She don't come very often," he explained. "By all accounts she doesn't get on with her father." "Her father? I did not know she had a father," said Tarling in surprise. Yes, there was a father. He was an infrequent visitor, and usually came
up from London by the late train and was driven in his own brougham to
the house. He had not seen him--indeed, very few people had, but by all
accounts he was a very nice man, and well-connected in the City. Tarling had telegraphed to the assistant who had been placed at his
disposal by Scotland Yard, and Detective-Inspector Whiteside was waiting
for him at the station. "Any fresh news?" asked Tarling. "Yes, sir, there's rather an important clue come to light," said
Whiteside. "I've got the car here, sir, and we might discuss it on the
way back to the Yard." "What is it?" asked Tarling. "We got it from Mr. Lyne's manservant," said the inspector. "It appears
that the butler had been going through Mr. Lyne's things, acting on
instructions from headquarters, and in a corner of his writing-desk a
telegram was discovered. I'll show it you when I get to the Yard. It has
a very important bearing upon the case, and I think may lead us to the
murderer." On the word "telegram" Tarling felt mechanically in his pockets for the
wire which Mrs. Rider had given him from her daughter. Now he took it out
and read it again. It had been handed in at the General Post Office at
nine o'clock exactly. "That's extraordinary, sir," Detective-Inspector Whiteside, sitting by
his side, had overlooked the wire. "What is extraordinary?" asked Tarling with an air of surprise. "I happened to see the signature to that wire--'Odette,' isn't it?" said
the Scotland Yard man. "Yes," nodded Tarling. "Why? What is there extraordinary in that?" "Well, sir," said Whiteside, "it's something of a coincidence that the
telegram which was found in Mr. Lyne's desk, and making an appointment
with him at a certain flat in the Edgware Road, was also signed 'Odette,'
and," he bent forward, looking at the wire still in the astonished
Tarling's hand, "and," he said in triumph, "it was handed in exactly at
the same time as that!" An examination of the telegram at Scotland Yard left no doubt in the
detective's mind that Whiteside had spoken nothing but the truth. An
urgent message was despatched to the General Post Office, and in two
hours the original telegrams were before him. They were both written in
the same hand. The first to her mother, saying that she could not come;
the second to Lyne, running:

     "Will you see me at my flat to-night at eleven o'clock? ODETTE
     RIDER." Tarling's heart sank within him. This amazing news was stunning. It was
impossible, impossible, he told himself again and again, that this girl
could have killed Lyne. Suppose she had? Where had they met? Had they
gone driving together, and had she shot him in making the circuit of the
Park? But why should he be wearing list slippers? Why should his coat be
off, and why should the night-dress be bound round and round his body? He thought the matter out, but the more he thought the more puzzled he
became. It was a very depressed man who interviewed an authority that
night and secured from him a search warrant. Armed with this and accompanied by Whiteside he made his way to the flat
in Edgware Road, and, showing his authority, secured a pass-key from the
hall porter, who was also the caretaker of the building. Tarling
remembered the last time he had gone to the flat, and it was with a
feeling of intense pity for the girl that he turned the key in the lock
and stepped into the little hall, reaching out his hand and switching on
the light as he did so. There was nothing in the hall to suggest anything unusual. There was just
that close and musty smell which is peculiar to all buildings which have
been shut up, even for a few days. But there was something else. Tarling sniffed and Whiteside sniffed. A dull, "burnt" smell, some
pungent, "scorched" odour, which he recognised as the stale stench of
exploded cordite. He went into the tiny dining-room; everything was neat,
nothing displaced. "That's curious," said Whiteside, pointing to the sideboard, and Tarling
saw a deep glass vase half filled with daffodils. 