



Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer. HTML
version by Al Haines. The Quest of the Sacred Slipper


by

Sax Rohmer




CONTENTS

      I. THE PHANTOM SCIMITAR. II. THE GIRL WITH THE VIOLET EYES
    III. "HASSAN OF ALEPPO"
     IV. THE OBLONG BOX
      V.  THE OCCUPANT OF THE BOX
     VI. THE RING OF THE PROPHET
    VII. FIRST ATTEMPT ON THE SAFE
   VIII. THE VIOLET EYES AGAIN
     IX. SECOND ATTEMPT ON THE SAFE
      X. AT THE BRITISH ANTIQUARIAN MUSEUM
     XI. THE HOLE IN THE BLIND
    XII. THE HASHISHIN WATCH
   XIII. THE WHITE BEAM
    XIV. A SCREAM IN THE NIGHT
     XV. A SHRIVELLED HAND
    XVI. THE DWARF
   XVII. THE WOMAN WITH THE BASKET
  XVIII. WHAT CAME THROUGH THE WINDOW
    XIX. A RAPPING AT MIDNIGHT
     XX. THE GOLDEN PAVILION
    XXI. THE BLACK TUBE
   XXII. THE LIGHT OF EL-MEDINEH
  XXIII. THE THREE MESSAGES
   XXIV. I KEEP THE APPOINTMENT
    XXV. THE WATCHER IN BANK CHAMBERS
   XXVI. THE STRONG-ROOM
  XXVII. THE SLIPPER
 XXVIII. CARNETA
   XXIX. WE MEET MR. ISAACS
    XXX. AT THE GATE HOUSE
   XXXI. THE POOL OF DEATH
  XXXII. SIX PATCHES
 XXXIII. HOW WE WERE REENFORCED
  XXXIV. MY LAST MEETING WITH HASSAN OF ALEPPO




THE QUEST OF THE SACRED SLIPPER




CHAPTER I

THE PHANTOM SCIMITAR


I was not the only passenger aboard the S.S. Mandalay who perceived
the disturbance and wondered what it might portend and from whence
proceed. A goodly number of passengers were joining the ship at
Port Said. I was lounging against the rail, pipe in mouth, lazily
wondering, with a large vagueness. What a heterogeneous rabble it was!--a brightly coloured rabble,
but the colours all were dirty, like the town and the canal. Only
the sky was clean; the sky and the hard, merciless sunlight which
spared nothing of the uncleanness, and defied one even to think
of the term dear to tourists, "picturesque." I was in that kind
of mood. All the natives appeared to be pockmarked; all the
Europeans greasy with perspiration. But what was the stir about? I turned to the dark, bespectacled young man who leaned upon the
rail beside me. From the first I had taken to Mr. Ahmad Ahmadeen. "There is some kind of undercurrent of excitement among the natives,"
I said, "a sort of subdued Greek chorus is audible. What's it all
about?" Mr. Ahmadeen smiled. After a gaunt fashion, he was a handsome man
and had a pleasant smile. "Probably," he replied, "some local celebrity is joining the ship." I stared at him curiously. "Any idea who he is?" (The soul of the copyhunter is a restless
soul.) A group of men dressed in semi-European fashion--that is, in
European fashion save for their turbans, which were green--passed
close to us along the deck. Ahmadeen appeared not to have heard the question. The disturbance, which could only be defined as a subdued uproar,
but could be traced to no particular individual or group, grew
momentarily louder--and died away. It was only when it had
completely ceased that one realized how pronounced it had
been--how altogether peculiar, secret; like that incomprehensible
murmuring in a bazaar when, unknown to the insular visitor, a
reputed saint is present. Then it happened; the inexplicable incident which, though I knew
it not, heralded the coming of strange things, and the dawn of a
new power; which should set up its secret standards in England,
which should flood Europe and the civilized world with wonder. A shrill scream marked the overture--a scream of fear and of pain,
which dropped to a groan, and moaned out into the silence of which
it was the cause. "My God! what's that?" I started forward. There was a general crowding rush, and a darkly
tanned and bearded man came on board, carrying a brown leather case. Behind him surged those who bore the victim. "It's one of the lascars!" "No--an Egyptian!" "It was a porter--?" "What is it--?" "Someone been stabbed!" "Where's the doctor?" "Stand away there, if you please!" That was a ship's officer; and the voice of authority served to
quell the disturbance. Through a lane walled with craning heads
they bore the insensible man. Ahmadeen was at my elbow. "A Copt," he said softly. "Poor devil!" I turned to him. There
was a queer expression on his lean, clean-shaven, bronze face. "Good God!" I said. "His hand has been cut off!" That was the fact of the matter. And no one knew who was
responsible for the atrocity. And no one knew what had become of
the severed hand! I wasted not a moment in linking up the story. The pressman within me acted automatically. "The gentleman just come aboard, sir," said a steward, "is Professor
Deeping. The poor beggar who was assaulted was carrying some of the
Professor's baggage." The whole incident struck me as most odd. There was an idea lurking in my mind that something else--something
more--lay behind all this. With impatience I awaited the time
when the injured man, having received medical attention, was conveyed
ashore, and Professor Deeping reappeared. To the celebrated
traveller and Oriental scholar I introduced myself. He was singularly reticent. "I was unable to see what took place, Mr. Cavanagh," he said. "The
poor fellow was behind me, for I had stepped from the boat ahead of
him. I had just taken a bag from his hand, but he was carrying
another, heavier one. It is a clean cut, like that of a scimitar. I have seen very similar wounds in the cases of men who have
suffered the old Moslem penalty for theft." Nothing further had come to light when the Mandalay left, but I
found new matter for curiosity in the behaviour of the Moslem party
who had come on board at Port Said. In conversation with Mr. Bell, the chief officer, I learned that
the supposed leader of the party was one, Mr. Azraeel. "Obviously,"
said Bell, "not his real name or not all it. I don't suppose
they'll show themselves on deck; they've got their own servants with
them, and seem to be people of consequence." This conversation was interrupted, but I found my unseen fellow
voyagers peculiarly interesting and pursued inquiries in other
directions. I saw members of the distinguished travellers'
retinue going about their duties, but never obtained a glimpse
of Mr. Azraeel nor of any of his green-turbaned companions. "Who is Mr. Azraeel?" I asked Ahmadeen. "I cannot say," replied the Egyptian, and abruptly changed the
subject. Some curious aroma of mystery floated about the ship. Ahmadeen
conveyed to me the idea that he was concealing something. Then,
one night, Mr. Bell invited me to step forward with him. "Listen," he said. From somewhere in the fo'c'sle proceeded low chanting. "Hear it?" "Yes. What the devil is it?" "It's the lascars," said Bell. "They have been behaving in a most
unusual manner ever since the mysterious Mr. Azraeel joined us. I
may be wrong in associating the two things, but I shan't be sorry
to see the last of our mysterious passengers." The next happening on board the Mandalay which I have to record was
the attempt to break open the door of Professor Deeping's stateroom. Except when he was actually within, the Professor left his room door
religiously locked. He made light of the affair, but later took me aside and told me a
curious story of an apparition which had appeared to him. "It was a crescent of light," he said, "and it glittered through
the darkness there to the left as I lay in my berth." "A reflection from something on the deck?" Deeping smiled, uneasily. "Possibly," he replied; "but it was very sharply defined. Like
the blade of a scimitar," he added. I stared at him, my curiosity keenly aroused. "Does any explanation
suggest itself to you?" I said. "Well," he confessed, "I have a theory, I will admit; but it is
rather going back to the Middle Ages. You see, I have lived in the
East a lot; perhaps I have assimilated some of their superstitions." He was oddly reticent, as ever. I felt convinced that he was
keeping something back. I could not stifle the impression that the
clue to these mysteries lay somewhere around the invisible
Mohammedan party. "Do you know," said Bell to me, one morning, "this trip's giving me
the creeps. I believe the damned ship's haunted! Three bells in the
middle watch last night, I'll swear I saw some black animal crawling
along the deck, in the direction of the forward companion-way." "Cat?" I suggested. "Nothing like it," said Mr. Bell. "Mr. Cavanagh, it was some
uncanny thing! I'm afraid I can't explain quite what I mean, but
it was something I wanted to shoot!" "Where did it go?" The chief officer shrugged his shoulders. "Just vanished," he said. "I hope I don't see it again." At Tilbury the Mohammedan party went ashore in a body. Among them
were veiled women. They contrived so to surround a central figure
that I entirely failed to get a glimpse of the mysterious Mr.
Azraeel. Ahmadeen was standing close by the companion-way, and I
had a momentary impression that one of the women slipped something
into his hand. Certainly, he started; and his dusky face seemed to
pale. Then a deck steward came out of Deeping's stateroom, carrying the
brown bag which the Professor had brought aboard at Port Said. Deeping's voice came:

"Hi, my man! Let me take that bag!" The bag changed hands. Five minutes later, as I was preparing to
go ashore, arose a horrid scream above the berthing clamour. Those
passengers yet aboard made in the direction from which the scream
had proceeded. A steward--the one to whom Professor Deeping had spoken--lay
writhing at the foot of the stairs leading to the saloon-deck. His
right hand had been severed above the wrist! CHAPTER II

THE GIRL WITH THE VIOLET EYES


During the next day or two my mind constantly reverted to the
incidents of the voyage home. I was perfectly convinced that the
curtain had been partially raised upon some fantasy in which
Professor Deeping figured. But I had seen no more of Deeping nor had I heard from him, when
abruptly I found myself plunged again into the very vortex of his
troubled affairs. I was half way through a long article, I
remember, upon the mystery of the outrage at the docks. The poor
steward whose hand had been severed lay in a precarious condition,
but the police had utterly failed to trace the culprit. I had laid down my pen to relight my pipe (the hour was about ten
at night) when a faint sound from the direction of the outside
door attracted my attention. Something had been thrust through
the letter-box. "A circular," I thought, when the bell rang loudly, imperatively. I went to the door. A square envelope lay upon the mat--a
curious envelope, pale amethyst in colour. Picking it up, I found
it to bear my name--written simply--

"Mr. Cavanagh." Tearing it open I glanced at the contents. I threw open the door. No one was visible upon the landing, but when I leaned over the
banister a white-clad figure was crossing the hall, below. Without hesitation, hatless, I raced down the stairs. As I crossed
the dimly lighted hall and came out into the peaceful twilight of
the court, my elusive visitor glided under the archway opposite. Just where the dark and narrow passage opened on to Fleet Street
I overtook her--a girl closely veiled and wrapped in a long coat
of white ermine. "Madam," I said. She turned affrightedly. "Please do not detain me!" Her accent was puzzling, but pleasing. She glanced apprehensively about her. You have seen the moon through a mist?--and known it for what it
was in spite of its veiling? So, now, through the cloudy folds
of the veil, I saw the stranger's eyes, and knew them for the most
beautiful eyes I had ever seen, had ever dreamt of. "But you must explain the meaning of your note!" "I cannot! I cannot! Please do not ask me!" She was breathless from her flight and seemed to be trembling. From behind the cloud her eyes shone brilliantly, mysteriously. I was sorely puzzled. The whole incident was bizarre--indeed, it
had in it something of the uncanny. Yet I could not detain the girl
against her will. That she went in apprehension of something, of
someone, was evident. Past the head of the passage surged the noisy realities of Fleet
Street. There were men there in quest of news; men who would
have given much for such a story as this in which I was becoming
entangled. Yet a story more tantalizingly incomplete could not
well be imagined. I knew that I stood upon the margin of an arena wherein strange
adversaries warred to a strange end. But a mist was over all. Here, beside me, was one who could disperse the mist--and would
not. Her one anxiety seemed to be to escape. Suddenly she raised her veil; and I looked fully into the only
really violet eyes I had ever beheld. Mentally, I started. For
the face framed in the snowy fur was the most bewitchingly lovely
imaginable. One rebellious lock of wonderful hair swept across
the white brow. It was brown hair, with an incomprehensible
sheen in the high lights that suggested the heart of a blood-red
rose. "Oh," she cried, "promise me that you will never breathe a word
to any one about my visit!" "I promise willingly," I said; "but can you give me no hint?" "Honestly, truly, I cannot, dare not, say more! Only promise that
you will do as I ask!" Since I could perceive no alternative--

"I will do so," I replied. "Thank you--oh, thank you!" she said; and dropping her veil again
she walked rapidly away from me, whispering, "I rely upon you. Do
not fail me. Good-bye!" Her conspicuous white figure joined the hurrying throngs upon the
pavement beyond. My curiosity brooked no restraint. I hurried to
the end of the courtway. She was crossing the road. From the
shadows where he had lurked, a man came forward to meet her. A
vehicle obstructed the view ere I could confirm my impression; and
when it had passed, neither my lovely visitor nor her companion
were anywhere in sight. But, unless some accident of light and shade had deceived me, the
man who had waited was Ahmad Ahmadeen! It seemed that some astral sluice-gate was raised; a dreadful sense
of foreboding for the first time flooded my mind. Whilst the girl
had stood before me it had been different--the mysterious charm of
her personality had swamped all else. But now, the messenger gone,
it was the purport of her message which assumed supreme significance. Written in odd, square handwriting upon the pale amethyst paper,
this was the message--

  Prevail upon Professor Deeping to place what he has in the brown
  case in the porch of his house to-night. If he fails to do so,
  no power on earth can save him from the Scimitar of Hassan. A FRIEND. CHAPTER III

"HASSAN OF ALEPPO"


Professor Deeping's number was in the telephone directory,
therefore, on returning to my room, where there still lingered the
faint perfume of my late visitor's presence, I asked for his number. He proved to be at home. "Strange you should ring me up, Cavanagh," he said; "for I was
about to ring you up." "First," I replied, "listen to the contents of an anonymous letter
which I have received." (I remembered, and only just in time, my promise to the veiled
messenger.) "To me," I added, having read him the note, "it seems to mean
nothing. I take it that you understand better than I do." "I understand very well, Cavanagh!" he replied. "You will recall
my story of the scimitar which flashed before me in the darkness
of my stateroom on the Mandalay? Well, I have seen it again! I
am not an imaginative man: I had always believed myself to possess
the scientific mind; but I can no longer doubt that I am the object
of a pursuit which commenced in Mecca! The happenings on the
steamer prepared me for this, in a degree. When the man lost his
hand at Port Said I doubted. I had supposed the days of such things
past. The attempt to break into my stateroom even left me still
uncertain. But the outrage upon the steward at the docks removed
all further doubt. I perceived that the contents of a certain brown
leather case were the objective of the crimes." I listened in growing wonder. "It was not necessary in order to further the plan of stealing the
bag that the hands were severed," resumed the Professor. "In fact,
as was rendered evident by the case of the steward, this was a
penalty visited upon any one who touched it! You are thinking of
my own immunity?" "I am!" "This is attributable to two things. Those who sought to recover
what I had in the case feared that my death en route might result
in its being lost to them for ever. They awaited a suitable
opportunity. They had designed to take it at Port Said certainly,
I think; but the bag was too large to be readily concealed, and,
after the outrage, might have led to the discovery of the culprit. In the second place, they are uncertain of my faith. I have long
passed for a true Believer in the East! As a Moslem I visited
Mecca--"

"You visited Mecca!" "I had just returned from the hadj when I joined the Mandalay at
Port Said! My death, however, has been determined upon, whether
I be Moslem or Christian!" "Why?" "Because," came the Professor's harsh voice over the telephone, "of
the contents of the brown leather case! I will not divulge to you
now the nature of these contents; to know might endanger you. But
the case is locked in my safe here, and the key, together with a
full statement of the true facts of the matter, is hidden behind
the first edition copy of my book 'Assyrian Mythology,' in the
smaller bookcase--"

"Why do you tell me all this?" I interrupted. He laughed harshly. "The identity of my pursuer has just dawned upon me," he said. "I
know that my life is in real danger. I would give up what is
demanded of me, but I believe its possession to be my strongest
safeguard." Mystery upon mystery! I seemed to be getting no nearer to the heart
of this maze. What in heaven's name did it all mean? Suddenly an
idea struck me. "Is our late fellow passenger, Mr. Ahmadeen, connected with the
matter?" I asked. "In no way," replied Deeping earnestly. "Mr. Ahmadeen is, I
believe, a person of some consequence in the Moslem world; but I
have nothing to fear from him." "What steps have you taken to protect yourself?" Again the short laugh reached my ears. "I'm afraid long residence in the East has rendered me something of
a fatalist, Cavanagh! Beyond keeping my door locked, I have taken
no steps whatever. I fear I am quite accessible!" A while longer we talked; and with every word the conviction was
more strongly borne in upon me that some uncanny menace threatened
the peace, perhaps the life, of Professor Deeping. I had hung up the receiver scarce a moment when, acting upon a
sudden determination, I called up New Scotland Yard, and asked for
Detective-Inspector Bristol, whom I knew well. A few words were
sufficient keenly to arouse his curiosity, and he announced his
intention of calling upon me immediately. He was in charge of the
case of the severed hand. I made no attempt to resume work in the interval preceding his
arrival. I had not long to wait, however, ere Bristol was ringing
my bell; and I hurried to the door, only too glad to confide in one
so well equipped to analyze my doubts and fears. For Bristol is no
ordinary policeman, but a trained observer, who, when I first made
his acquaintance, completely upset my ideas upon the mental
limitations of the official detective force. In appearance Bristol suggests an Anglo-Indian officer, and at the
time of which I write he had recently returned from Jamaica and his
face was as bronzed as a sailor's. One would never take Bristol
for a detective. As he seated himself in the armchair, without
preamble I plunged into my story. He listened gravely. "What sort of house is Professor Deeping's?" he asked suddenly. "I have no idea," I replied, "beyond the fact that it is somewhere
in Dulwich." "May I use your telephone?" "Certainly." Very quickly Bristol got into communication with the superintendent
of P Division. A brief delay, and the man came to the telephone
whose beat included the road wherein Professor Deeping's house was
situated. "Why!" said Bristol, hanging up the receiver after making a number
of inquiries, "it's a sort of rambling cottage in extensive grounds. There's only one servant, a manservant, and he sleeps in a detached
lodge. If the Professor is really in danger of attack he could not
well have chosen a more likely residence for the purpose!" "What shall you do? What do you make of it all?" "As I see the case," he said slowly, "it stands something like this:
Professor Deeping has..."

The telephone bell began to ring. I took up the receiver. "Hullo! Hullo." "Cavanagh!--is that Cavanagh?" "Yes! yes! who is that?" "Deeping! I have rung up the police, and they are sending some
one. But I wish..."

His voice trailed off. The sound of a confused and singular uproar
came to me. "Hullo!" I cried. "Hullo!" A shriek--a deathful, horrifying cry--and a distant babbling alone
answered me. There was a crash. Clearly, Deeping had dropped the
receiver. I suppose my face blanched. "What is it?" asked Bristol anxiously. "God knows what it is!" I said. "Deeping has met with some
mishap--"

When, over the wires--

"Hassan of Aleppo!" came a dying whisper. "Hassan ... of
Aleppo..."




CHAPTER IV

THE OBLONG BOX


"You had better wait for us," said Bristol to the taxi-man. "Very good, sir. But I shan't be able to take you further back than
the Brixton Garage. You can get another cab there, though." A clock chimed out--an old-world chime in keeping with the
loneliness, the curiously remote loneliness, of the locality. Less
than five miles from St. Paul's are spots whereto, with the
persistence of Damascus attar, clings the aroma of former days. This iron gateway fronting the old chapel was such a spot. Just within stood a plain-clothes man, who saluted my companion
respectfully. "Professor Deeping," I began. The man, with a simple gesture, conveyed the dreadful news. "Dead! dead!" I cried incredulously. He glanced at Bristol. "The most mysterious case I have ever had anything to do with,
sir," he said. The power of speech seemed to desert me. It was unthinkable that
Deeping, with whom I had been speaking less than an hour ago,
should now be no more; that some malign agency should thus
murderously have thrust him into the great borderland. In that kind of silence which seems to be peopled with whispering
spirits we strode forward along the elm avenue. It was very dark
where the moon failed to penetrate. The house, low and rambling,
came into view, its facade bathed in silver light. Two of the
visible windows were illuminated. A sort of loggia ran along one
side. On our left, as we made for this, lay a black ocean of shrubbery. It intruded, raggedly, upon the weed-grown path, for neglect was
the keynote of the place. We entered the cottage, crossed the tiny lobby, and came to the
study. A man, evidently Deeping's servant, was sitting in a chair
by the door, his head sunken in his hands. He looked up,
haggard-faced. "My God! my God!" he groaned. "He was locked in, gentlemen! He
was locked in; and yet something murdered him!" "What do you mean?" said Bristol. "Where were you?" "I was away on an errand, sir. When I returned, the police were
knocking the door down. He was locked in!" We passed him, entering the study. It was a museum-like room, lighted by a lamp on the littered
table. At first glance it looked as though some wild thing had
run amok there. The disorder was indescribable. "Touched nothing, of course?" asked Bristol sharply of the officer
on duty. "Nothing, sir. It's just as we found it when we forced the door." "Why did you force the door?" "He rung us up at the station and said that something or somebody
had got into the house. It was evident the poor gentleman's nerve
had broken down, sir. He said he was locked in his study. When
we arrived it was all in darkness--but we thought we heard sounds
in here." "What sort of sounds?" "Something crawling about!" Bristol turned. "Key is in the lock on the inside of the door," he said. "Is that
where you found it?" "Yes, sir!" He looked across to where the brass knob of a safe gleamed dully. "Safe locked?" "Yes, sir." Professor Deeping lay half under the table, a spectacle so ghastly
that I shall not attempt to describe it. "Merciful heavens!" whispered Bristol. "He's nearly decapitated!" I clutched dizzily at the mantelpiece. It was all so utterly,
incredibly horrible. How had Deeping met his death? The windows
both were latched and the door had been locked from within! "You searched for the murderer, of course?" asked Bristol. "You can see, sir," replied the officer, "that there isn't a spot
in the room where a man could hide! And there was nobody
in here when we forced the door!" "Why!" cried my companion suddenly. "The Professor has a chisel
in his hand!" "Yes. I think he must have been trying to prise open that box
yonder when he was attacked." Bristol and I looked, together, at an oblong box which lay upon
the floor near the murdered man. It was a kind of small
packing case, addressed to Professor Deeping, and evidently had
not been opened. "When did this arrive?" asked Bristol. Lester, the Professor's
man, who had entered the room, replied shakily--

"It came by carrier, sir, just before I went out." "Was he expecting it?" "I don't think so." Inspector Bristol and the officer dragged the box fully into the
light. It was some three feet long by one foot square, and solidly
constructed. "It is perfectly evident," remarked Bristol, "that the murderer
stayed to search for--"

"The key of the safe!" "Exactly. If the men really heard sounds here, it would appear that
the assassin was still searching at that time." "I assure you," the officer interrupted, "that there was no living
thing in the room when we entered." Bristol and I looked at one another in horrified wonder. "It's incomprehensible!" he said. "See if the key is in the place mentioned by the Professor, Mr.
Cavanagh, whilst I break the box." I went to a great, open bookcase, which the frantic searcher seemed
to have overlooked. Removing the bulky "Assyrian Mythology," there,
behind the volume, lay an envelope, containing a key, and a short
letter. Not caring to approach more closely to the table and to
that which lay beneath it, I was peering at the small writing, in
the semi-gloom by the bookcase, when Bristol cried--

"This box is unopenable by ordinary means! I shall have to smash
it!" At his words, I joined him where he knelt on the floor. Mysteriously, the chest had defied all his efforts. "There's a pick-axe in the garden," volunteered Lester. "Shall I
bring it?" "Yes." The man ran off. "I see the key is safe," said Bristol. "Possibly the letter may
throw some light upon all this." "Let us hope so," I replied. "You might read it." He took the letter from my hand, stepped up to the table, and by
the light of the lamp read as follows--

My Dear Cavanagh,--

It has now become apparent to me that my life is in imminent danger. You know of the inexplicable outrages which marked my homeward
journey, and if this letter come to your hand it will be because
these have culminated in my death. The idea of a pursuing scimitar is not new to me. This phenomenon,
which I have now witnessed three times, is fairly easy of
explanation, but its significance is singular. It is said to be
one of the devices whereby the Hashishin warn those whom they have
marked down for destruction, and is called, in the East, "The
Scimitar of Hassan." The Hashishin were the members of a Moslem secret society, founded
in 1090 by one Hassan of Khorassan. There is a persistent tradition
in parts of the Orient that this sect still flourishes in Assyria,
under the rule of a certain Hassan of Aleppo, the Sheikh-al-jebal,
or supreme lord of the Hashishin. My careful inquiries, however,
at the time that I was preparing matter for my "Assyrian Mythology,"
failed to discover any trace of such a person or such a group. I accordingly assumed Hassan to be a myth--a first cousin to the
ginn. I was wrong. He exists. And by my supremely rash act I
have incurred his vengeance, for Hassan of Aleppo is the
self-appointed guardian of the traditions and relics of Mohammed. And I have Stolen one of the holy slippers of the Prophet! He, with some of his servants, has followed me from Mecca to
England. My precautions have enabled me to retain the relic, but
you have seen what fate befell all those others who even touched
the receptacle containing it. If I fall a victim to the Hashishin, I am uncertain how you, as my
confidant, will fare. Therefore I have locked the slipper in my
safe and to you entrust the key. I append particulars of the lock
combination; but I warn you--do not open the safe. If their
wrath be visited upon you, your possession of the key may prove a
safeguard. Take the copy of "Assyrian Mythology." You will find in it all
that I learned respecting the Hashishin. If I am doomed to be
assassinated, it may aid you; if not in avenging me, in saving
others from my fate. I fear I shall never see you again. A
cloud of horror settles upon me like a pall. Do not touch the
slipper, nor the case containing it. EDWARD DEEPING. "It is almost incredible!" I said hoarsely. Bristol returned the letter to me without a word, and turning to
Lester, who had reentered carrying a heavy pick-axe, he attacked
the oblong box with savage energy. Through the house of death the sound of the blows echoed and rang
with a sort of sacrilegious mockery. The box fell to pieces. "My God! look, sir!" Lester was the trembling speaker. The box, I have said, was but three feet long by one foot square,
and had clearly defied poor Deeping's efforts to open it. But a
crescent-shaped knife, wet with blood, lay within! CHAPTER V

THE OCCUPANT OF THE BOX


Dimly to my ears came the ceaseless murmur of London. The night now
was far advanced, and not a sound disturbed the silence of the court
below my windows. Professor Deeping's "Assyrian Mythology" lay open before me, beside
it my notebook. A coal dropped from the fire, and I half started up
out of my chair. My nerves were all awry, and I had more than my
horrible memories of the murdered man to thank for it. Let me
explain what I mean. When, after assisting, or endeavouring to assist, Bristol at his
elaborate inquiries, I had at last returned to my chambers, I had
become the victim of a singular delusion--though one common enough
in the case of persons whose nerves are overwrought. I had thought
myself followed. During the latter part of my journey I found myself constantly
looking from the little window at the rear of the cab. I had an
impression that some vehicle was tracking us. Then, when I
discharged the man and walked up the narrow passage to the court,
it was fear of a skulking form that dodged from shadow to shadow
which obsessed me. Finally, as I entered the hall and mounted the darkened stair, from
the first landing I glanced down into the black well beneath. Blazing yellow eyes, I thought, looked up at me! I will confess that I leapt up the remaining flight of stairs to my
door, and, safely within, found myself trembling as if with a palsy. When I sat down to write (for sleep was an impossible proposition)
I placed my revolver upon the table beside me. I cannot say why. It afforded me some sense of protection, I suppose. My conclusions,
thus far, amounted to the following--

The apparition of the phantom scimitar was due to the presence of
someone who, by means of the moonlight, or of artificial light,
cast a reflection of such a weapon as that found in the oblong chest
upon the wall of a darkened apartment--as, Deeping's stateroom on
the Mandalay, his study, etc. A group of highly efficient assassins, evidently Moslem fanatics,
who might or might not be of the ancient order of the Hashishin,
had pursued the stolen slipper to England. They had severed any
hand, other than that of a Believer, which had touched the case
containing it. (The Coptic porter was a Christian.) Uncertain, possibly, of Deeping's faith, or fearful of endangering
the success of their efforts by an outrage upon him en route, they
had refrained from this until his arrival at his house. He had
been warned of his impending end by Ahmad Ahmadeen. Who was Ahmadeen? And who was his beautiful associate? I found
myself unable, at present, to answer either of those questions. In
order to gain access to Professor Deeping, who so carefully secluded
himself, a box had been sent to him by ordinary carrier. (As I sat
at my table, Scotland Yard was busy endeavouring to trace the
sender.) Respecting this box we had made an extraordinary discovery. It was of the kind used by Eastern conjurors for what is generally
known as "the Box Trick." That is to say, it could only be opened
(short of smashing it) from the inside! You will remember what we
found within it? Consider this with the new fact, above, and to
what conclusion do you come? Something (it is not possible to speak of someone in connection with
so small a box) had been concealed inside, and had killed Professor
Deeping whilst he was actually engaged in endeavouring to force it
open. This inconceivable creature had then searched the study for
the slipper--or for the key of the safe. Interrupted and trapped
by the arrival of the police, the creature had returned to the box,
re-closed it, and had actually been there when the study was
searched! For a creature so small as the murderous thing in the box to slip
out during the confusion, and at some time prior to Bristol's
arrival, was no difficult matter. The inspector and I were certain
that these were the facts. But what was this creature? I turned to the chapter in "Assyrian Mythology"--"The Tradition
of the Hashishin." The legends which the late Professor Deeping had collected relative
to this sect of religious murderers were truly extraordinary. Of
the cult's extinction at the time of writing he was clearly certain,
but he referred to the popular belief, or Moslem legend, that, since
Hassan of Khorassan, there had always been a Sheikh-al-jebal, and
that a dreadful being known as Hassan of Aleppo was the present
holder of the title. He referred to the fact that De Sacy has shown the word Assassin
to be derived from Hashishin, and quoted El-Idrisi to the same
end. The Hashishin performed their murderous feats under the
influence of hashish, or Indian hemp; and during the state of
ecstasy so induced, according to Deeping, they acquired powers
almost superhuman. I read how they could scale sheer precipices,
pass fearlessly along narrow ledges which would scarce afford
foothold for a rat, cast themselves from great heights unscathed,
and track one marked for death in such a manner as to remain unseen
not only by the victim but by others about him. At this point of
my studies I started, in a sudden nervous panic, and laid my hand
upon my revolver. I thought of the eyes which had seemed to look up from the black
well of the staircase--I thought of the horrible end of this man
whose book lay upon the table ... and I thought I heard a faint
sound outside my study door! The key of Deeping's safe, and his letter to me, lay close by my
hand. I slipped them into a drawer and locked it. With every
nerve, it seemed, strung up almost to snapping point, I mechanically
pursued my reading. "At the time of the Crusades," wrote Deeping, "there was a story
current of this awful Order which I propose to recount. It is one
of the most persistent dealing with the Hashishin, and is related
to-day of the apparently mythical Hassan of Aleppo. I am disposed
to believe that at one time it had a solid foundation, for a
similar practice was common in Ancient Egypt and is mentioned by
Georg Ebers." My door began very slowly to open! Merciful God! What was coming into the room! So very slowly, so gently, nay, all but imperceptibly, did it move,
that had my nerves been less keenly attuned I doubt not I should
have remained unaware of the happening. Frozen with horror, I sat
and watched. Yet my mental condition was a singular one. My direct gaze never quitted the door, but in some strange fashion
I saw the words of the next paragraph upon the page before me! "As making peculiarly efficient assassins, when under the influence
of the drug, and as being capable of concealing themselves where
a normal man could not fail to be detected--"

(At this moment I remembered that my bathroom window was open, and
that the waste-pipe passed down the exterior wall.) "--the Sheikh-al-jebal took young boys of a certain desert tribe,
and for eight hours of every day, until their puberty, confined them
in a wooden frame--"

What looked like a reed was slowly inserted through the opening
between door and doorpost! It was brought gradually around
... until it pointed directly toward me! I seemed to put forth a mighty mental effort, shaking off the icy
hand of fear which held me inactive in my chair. A saving instinct
warned me--and I ducked my head. Something whirred past me and struck the wall behind. Revolver in hand, I leapt across the room, dashed the door open,
and fired blindly--again--and again--and again--down the
passage. And in the brief gleams I saw it! I cannot call it man, but I saw the thing which, I doubt not, had
killed poor Deeping with the crescent-knife and had propelled a
poison-dart at me. It was a tiny dwarf! Neither within nor without a freak exhibition
had I seen so small a human being! A kind of supernatural dread
gripped me by the throat at sight of it. As it turned with animal
activity and bounded into my bathroom, I caught a three-quarter
view of the creature's swollen, incredible head--which was nearly
as large as that of a normal man! Never while my mind serves me can I forget that yellow, grinning
face and those canine fangs--the tigerish, blazing eyes--set in
the great, misshapen head upon the tiny, agile body. Wildly, I fired again. I hurled myself forward and dashed into
the room. Like nothing so much as a cat, the gleaming body (the dwarf was
but scantily clothed) streaked through the open window! Certain death, I thought, must be his lot upon the stones of the
court far below. I ran and looked down, shaking in every limb,
my mind filled with a loathing terror unlike anything I had ever
known. Brilliant moonlight flooded the pavement beneath; for twenty yards
to left and right every stone was visible. The court was empty! Human, homely London moved and wrought intimately about me; but
there, at sight of the empty court below, a great loneliness swept
down like a mantle--a clammy mantle of the fabric of dread. I
stood remote from my fellows, in an evil world peopled with the
creatures of Hassan of Aleppo. Moved by some instinct, as that of a frightened child, I dropped
to my knees and buried my face in trembling hands. CHAPTER VI

THE RING OF THE PROPHET


"There is no doubt," said Mr. Rawson, "that great personal danger
attaches to any contact with this relic. It is the first time I
have been concerned with anything of the kind." Mr. Bristol, of Scotland Yard, standing stiffly military by the
window, looked across at the gray-haired solicitor. We were all
silent for a few moments. "My late client's wishes," continued Mr. Rawson, "are explicit. His last instructions, evidently written but a short time prior to
his death, advise me that the holy slipper of the Prophet is
contained in the locked safe at his house in Dulwich. He was
clearly of opinion that you, Mr. Cavanagh, would incur risk--great
risk--from your possession of the key. Since attempts have been
made upon you, murderous attempts, the late Professor Deeping, my
unfortunate client, evidently was not in error." "Mysterious outrages," said Bristol, "have marked the progress of
the stolen slipper from Mecca almost to London." "I understand," interrupted the solicitor, "that a fanatic known
as Hassan of Aleppo seeks to restore the relic to its former
resting-place." "That is so." "Exactly; and it accounts for the Professor's wish that the safe
should not be touched by any one but a Believer--and for his
instructions that its removal to the Antiquarian Museum and the
placing of the slipper within that institution be undertaken by a
Moslem or Moslems." Bristol frowned. "Any one who has touched the receptacle containing the thing," he
said, "has either been mutilated or murdered. I want to apprehend
the authors of those outrages, but I fail to see why the slipper
should be put on exhibition. Other crimes are sure to follow." "I can only pursue my instructions," said Mr. Rawson dryly. "They
are, that the work be done in such a manner as to expose all
concerned to a minimum of risk from these mysterious people; that
if possible a Moslem be employed for the purpose; and that Mr.
Cavanagh, here, shall always hold the key or keys to the case in
the museum containing the slipper. Will you undertake to look for
some--Eastern workmen, Mr. Bristol? In the course of your
inquiries you may possibly come across such a person." "I can try," replied Bristol. "Meanwhile, I take it, the safe must
remain at Dulwich?" "Certainly. It should be guarded." "We are guarding it and shall guard it," Bristol assured him. "I
only hope we catch someone trying to get at it!" Shortly afterward Bristol and I left the office, and, his duties
taking him to Scotland Yard, I returned to my chambers to survey
the position in which I now found myself. Indeed, it was a strange
one enough, showing how great things have small beginnings; for,
as a result of a steamer acquaintance I found myself involved in a
dark business worthy of the Middle Ages. That Professor Deeping
should have stolen one of the holy slippers of Mohammed was no
affair of mine, and that an awful being known as Hassan of Aleppo
should have pursued it did not properly enter into my concerns; yet
now, with a group of Eastern fanatics at large in England, I was
become, in a sense, the custodian of the relic. Moreover, I
perceived that I had been chosen that I might safeguard myself. What I knew of the matter might imperil me, but whilst I held the
key to the reliquary, and held it fast, I might hope to remain
immune though I must expect to be subjected to attempts. It would
be my affair to come to terms. Contemplating these things I sat, in a world of dark dreams,
unconscious of the comings and goings in the court below,
unconscious of the hum which told of busy Fleet Street so near to
me. The weather, as is its uncomfortable habit in England, had
suddenly grown tropically hot, plunging London into the vapours of
an African spring, and the sun was streaming through my open window
fully upon the table. I mopped my clammy forehead, glancing with distaste at the pile of
work which lay before me. Then my eyes turned to an open quarto
book. It was the late Professor Deeping's "Assyrian Mythology,"
and embodied the result of his researches into the history of the
Hashishin, the religious murderers of whose existence he had been
so skeptical. To the Chief of the Order, the terrible Sheikh Hassan
of Aleppo, he referred as a "fabled being"; yet it was at the hands
of this "fabled being" that he had met his end! How incredible it
all seemed. But I knew full well how worthy of credence it was. Then upon my gloomy musings a sound intruded--the ringing of my door
bell. I rose from my chair with a weary sigh, went to the door,
and opened it. An aged Oriental stood without. He was tall and
straight, had a snow-white beard and clear-cut, handsome features. He wore well-cut European garments and a green turban. As I stood
staring he saluted me gravely. "Mr. Cavanagh?" he asked, speaking in faultless English. "I am he." "I learn that the services of a Moslem workman are required." "Quite correct, sir; but you should apply at the offices of Messrs.
Rawson & Rawson, Chancery Lane." The old man bowed, smiling. "Many thanks; I understood so much. But, my position being a
peculiar one, I wished to speak with you--as a friend of the late
Professor." I hesitated. The old man looked harmless enough, but there was an
air of mystery about the matter which put me on my guard. "You will pardon me," I said, "but the work is scarcely of a kind--"

He raised his thin hand. "I am not undertaking it myself. I wished to explain to you the
conditions under which I could arrange to furnish suitable porters." His patient explanation disposed me to believe that he was merely
some kind of small contractor, and in any event I had nothing to
fear from this frail old man. "Step in, sir," I said, repenting of my brusquerie--and stood
aside for him. He entered, with that Oriental meekness in which there is
something majestic. I placed a chair for him in the study, and
reseated myself at the table. The old man, who from the first had
kept his eyes lowered deferentially, turned to me with a gentle
gesture, as if to apologize for opening the conversation. "From the papers, Mr. Cavanagh," he began, "I have learned of the
circumstances attending the death of Professor Deeping. Your
papers"--he smiled, and I thought I had never seen a smile of
such sweetness--"your papers know all! Now I understand why a
Moslem is required, and I understand what is required of him. But
remembering that the object of his labours would be to place a
holy relic on exhibition for the amusement of unbelievers, can you
reasonably expect to obtain the services of one?" His point of view was fair enough. "Perhaps not," I replied. "For my own part I should wish to see
the slipper back in Mecca, or wherever it came from. But Professor
Deeping--"

"Professor Deeping was a thorn in the flesh of the Faithful!" My visitor's voice was gravely reproachful. "Nevertheless his wishes must be considered," I said, "and the
methods adopted by those who seek to recover the relic are such
as to alienate all sympathy." "You speak of the Hashishin?" asked the old man. "Mr. Cavanagh, in
your own faith you have had those who spilled the blood of infidels
as freely!" "My good sir, the existence of such an organization cannot be
tolerated today! This survival of the dark ages must be stamped
out. However just a cause may be, secret murder is not permissible,
as you, a man of culture, a Believer, and"--I glanced at his
unusual turban--"a descendant of the Prophet, must admit." "I can admit nothing against the Guardian of the Tradition, Mr.
Cavanagh! The Prophet taught that we should smite the Infidel. I
ask you--have you the courage of your convictions?" "Perhaps; I trust so." "Then assist me to rid England of what you have called a survival
of the dark ages. I will furnish porters to remove and carry the
safe, if you will deliver to me the key!" I sprang to my feet. "That is madness!" I cried. "In the first place I should be
compromising with my conscience, and in the second place I should
be defenceless against those who might--"

"I have with me a written promise from one highly placed--one to
whose will Hassan of Aleppo bows!" My mind greatly disturbed, I watched the venerable speaker. I had
determined now that he was some religious leader of Islam in
England, who had been deputed to approach me; and, let me add, I
was sorely tempted to accede to his proposal, for nothing would be
gained by any one if the slipper remained for ever at the museum,
whereas by conniving at its recovery by those who, after all, were
its rightful owners I should be ridding England of a weird and
undesirable visitant. I think I should have agreed, when I remembered that the Hashishin
had murdered Professor Deeping and had mutilated others wholly
innocent of offence. I looked across at the old man. He had drawn
himself up to his great height, and for the first time fully
raising the lids, had fixed upon me the piercing gaze of a pair of
eagle eyes. I started, for the aspect of this majestic figure was
entirely different from that of the old stranger who had stood
suppliant before me a moment ago. "It is impossible," I said. "I can come to no terms with those
who shield murderers." He regarded me fixedly, but did not move. "Es-selam 'aleykum!" I added ("Peace be on you!") closing the
interview in the Eastern manner. The old man lowered his eyes, and saluted me with graceful gravity. "Wa-'aleykum!" he said ("And on you!"). I conducted him to the
door and closed it upon his exit. In his last salute I had noticed
the flashing of a ring which he wore upon his left hand, and he was
gone scarce ten seconds ere my heart began to beat furiously. I
snatched up "Assyrian Mythology" and with trembling fingers turned
to a certain page. There I read--

Each Sheikh of the Assassins is said to be invested with the "Ring
of the Prophet." It bears a green stone, shaped in the form of a
scimitar or crescent. My dreadful suspicion was confirmed. I knew who my visitor had
been. "God in heaven!" I whispered. "It was Hassan of Aleppo!" CHAPTER VII

FIRST ATTEMPT ON THE SAFE


On the following morning I was awakened by the arrival of Bristol. I hastened to admit him. "Your visitor of yesterday," he began, "has wasted no time!" "What has happened?" He tugged irritably at his moustache. "I don't know!" he replied. "Of course it was no surprise to find that there isn't a Mohammedan
who'll lay his little finger on Professor Deeping's safe! There's
no doubt in my mind that every lascar at the docks knows Hassan of
Aleppo to be in England. Some other arrangement will have to be
arrived at, if the thing is ever to be taken to the Antiquarian
Museum. Meanwhile we stand to lose it. Last night--"

He accepted a cigarette, and lighted it carefully. "Last night," he resumed, "a member of P Division was on point
duty outside the late Professor's house, and two C.I.D. men were
actually in the room where the safe is. Result--someone has put
in at least an hour's work on the lock, but it proved too tough a
job!" I stared at him amazedly. "Someone has been at the lock!" I cried. "But that is impossible,
with two men in the room--unless--"

"They were both knocked on the head!" "Both! But by whom! My God! They are not--"

"Oh, no! It was done artistically. They both came round about
four o'clock this morning." "And who attacked them?" "They had no idea. Neither of them saw a thing!" My amazement grew by leaps and bounds. "But, Bristol, one of them
must have seen the other succumb!" "Both did! Their statements tally exactly!" "I quite fail to follow you." "That's not surprising. Listen: When I got on the scene about five
o'clock, Marden and West, the two C.I.D. men, had quite recovered
their senses, though they were badly shaken, and one had a cracked
skull. The constable was conscious again, too." "What! Was he attacked?" "In exactly the same way! I'll give you Marden's story, as he gave
it to me a few minutes after the surgeon had done with him. He said
that they were sitting in the study, smoking, and with both windows
wide open. It was a fearfully hot night." "Did they have lights?" "No. West sat in an armchair near the writing-table; Marden sat by
the window next to the door. I had arranged that every hour one of
them should go out to the gate and take the constable's report. It
was just after Marden had been out at one o'clock that it happened. "They were sitting as I tell you when Marden thought he heard a
curious sort of noise from the gate. West appeared to have heard
nothing; but I have no doubt that it was the sound of the constable's
fall. West's pipe had gone out, and he struck a match to relight
it. As he did so, Marden saw him drop the match, clench both fists,
and with eyes glaring in the moonlight and his teeth coming together
with a snap, drop from his chair. "Marden says that he was half up from his seat when something struck
him on the back of the head with fearful force. He remembered
nothing more until he awoke, with the dawn creeping into the room,
and heard West groaning somewhere beside him. They both had badly
damaged skulls with great bruises behind the ear. It is instructive
to note that their wounds corresponded almost to a fraction of an
inch. They had been stunned by someone who thoroughly understood
his business, and with some heavy, blunt weapon. A few minutes
later came the man to relieve the constable; and the constable was
found to have been treated in exactly the same way!" "But if Marden's account is true--"

"West, as he lost consciousness, saw Marden go in exactly the same
way." "Marden was seated by the open window, but I cannot conjecture how
any one can have got at West, who sat by the table!" "The case of Marden is little less than remarkable; he was some
distance from the window. No one could possibly have reached him
from outside." "And the constable?" "The constable can give us no clue. He was suddenly struck down,
as the others were. I examined the safe, of course, but didn't
touch it, according to instructions. Someone had been at work on
the lock, but it had defied their efforts. I'm fully expecting
though that they'll be back to-night, with different tools!" "The place is watched during the day, of course?" "Of course. But it's unlikely that anything will be attempted in
daylight. Tonight I am going down myself." "Could you arrange that I join you?" "I could, but you can see the danger for yourself?" "It is extraordinarily mysterious." "Mr. Cavanagh, it's uncanny!" said Bristol. "I can understand that
one of these Hashishin could easily have got up behind the man on
duty out in the open. I know, and so do you, that they're past
masters of that kind of thing; but unless they possess the power to
render themselves invisible, it's not evident how they can have got
behind West whilst he sat at the table, with Marden actually
watching him!" "We must lay a trap for them to-night." "Rely upon me to do so. My only fear is that they may anticipate it
and change their tactics. Hassan of Aleppo apparently knows as much
of our plans as we do ourselves." Inspector Bristol, though a man of considerable culture, clearly was
infected with a species of supernatural dread. CHAPTER VIII

THE VIOLET EYES AGAIN


At four o'clock in the afternoon I had heard nothing further from
Bristol, but I did not doubt that he would advise me of his
arrangements in good time. I sought by hard work to forget for a
time the extraordinary business of the stolen slipper; but it
persistently intruded upon my mind. Particularly, my thoughts
turned to the night of Professor Deeping's murder, and to the
bewitchingly pretty woman who had warned me of the impending tragedy. She had bound me to secrecy--a secrecy which had proved irksome,
for it had since appeared to me that she must have been an
accomplice of Hassan of Aleppo. At the time I had been at a loss
to define her peculiar accent, now it seemed evidently enough to
have been Oriental. I threw down my pen in despair, for work was impossible, went
downstairs, and walked out under the arch into Fleet Street. Quite
mechanically I turned to the left, and, still engaged with idle
conjectures, strolled along westward. Passing the entrance to one of the big hotels, I was abruptly
recalled to the realities--by a woman's voice. "Wait for me here," came musically to my ears. I stopped, and turned. A woman who had just quitted a taxi-cab was
entering the hotel. The day was hot and thunderously oppressive,
and this woman with the musical voice wore a delicate costume of
flimsiest white. A few steps upward she paused and glanced back. I had a view of a Greek profile, and for one magnetic instant looked
into eyes of the deepest and most wonderful violet. Then, shaking off inaction, I ran up the steps and overtook the
lady in white as a porter swung open the door to admit her. We
entered together. "Madame," I said in a low tone, "I must detain you for a moment. There is something I have to ask." She turned, exhibiting the most perfect composure, lowered her
lashes and raised them again, the gaze of the violet eyes sweeping
me from head to foot with a sort of frigid scorn. "I fear you have made a mistake, sir. We have never met before!" Her voice betrayed no trace of any foreign accent! "But," I began--and paused. I felt myself flush; for this encounter in the foyer of an hotel,
with many curious onlookers, was like to prove embarrassing if my
beautiful acquaintance persisted in her attitude. I fully realized
what construction would be put upon my presence there, and foresaw
that forcible and ignominious ejection must be my lot if I failed
to establish my right to address her. She turned away, and crossed in the direction of the staircase. A sunbeam sought out a lock of hair that strayed across her brow,
and kissed it to a sudden glow like that which lurks in the heart
of a blush rose. That wonderful sheen, which I had never met with elsewhere in
nature, but which no artifice could lend, served to remove my last
frail doubt which had survived the evidence of the violet eyes. I
had been deceived by no strange resemblance; this was indeed the
woman who had been the harbinger of Professor Deeping's death. In
three strides I was beside her again. Curious glances were set
upon me, and I saw a servant evidently contemplating approach; but
I ignored all save my own fixed purpose. "You must listen to what I have to say!" I whispered. "If you
decline, I shall have no alternative but to call in the detective
who holds a warrant for your arrest!" She stood quite still, watching me coolly. "I suppose you would
wish to avoid a scene?" I added. "You have already made me the object of much undesirable attention,"
she replied scornfully. "I do not need your assurance that you
would disgrace me utterly! You are talking nonsense, as you must
be aware--unless you are insane. But if your object be to force
your acquaintance upon me, your methods are novel, and, under the
circumstances, effective. Come, sir, you may talk to me--for
three minutes!" The musical voice had lost nothing of its imperiousness, but for
one instant the lips parted, affording a fleeting glimpse of pearl
beyond the coral. Her sudden change of front was bewildering. Now, she entered the
lift and I followed her. As we ascended side by side I found it
impossible to believe that this dainty white figure was that of an
associate of the Hashishin, that of a creature of the terrible
Hassan of Aleppo. Yet that she was the same girl who, a few days
after my return from the East, had shown herself conversant with
the plans of the murderous fanatics was beyond doubt. Her accent
on that occasion clearly had been assumed, with what object I could
not imagine. Then, as we quitted the lift and entered a cosy
lounge, my companion seated herself upon a Chesterfield, signing to
me to sit beside her. As I did so she lay back smiling, and regarding me from beneath her
black lashes. Thus, half veiled, her great violet eyes were most
wonderful. "Now, sir," she said softly, "explain yourself." "Then you persist in pretending that we have not met before?" "There is no occasion for pretence," she replied lightly; and I
found myself comparing her voice with her figure, her figure with
her face, and vainly endeavouring to compute her age. Frankly,
she was bewildering--this lovely girl who seemed so wholly a woman
of the world. "This fencing is useless." "It is quite useless! Come, I know New York, London, and I know
Paris, Vienna, Budapest. Therefore I know mankind! You thought I
was pretty, I suppose? I may be; others have thought so. And you
thought you would like to make my acquaintance without troubling
about the usual formalities? You adopted a singularly brutal
method of achieving your object, but I love such insolence in a man. Therefore I forgave you. What have you to say to me?" I perceive that I had to deal with a bold adventuress, with a
consummate actress, who, finding herself in a dangerous situation,
had adopted this daring line of defence, and now by her personal
charm sought to lure me from my purpose. But with the scimitar of Hassan of Aleppo stretched over me, with
the dangers of the night before me, I was in no mood for a veiled
duel of words, for an interchange of glances in thrust and parry,
however delightful such warfare might have been with so pretty an
adversary. For a long time I looked sternly into her eyes; but their violet
mystery defied, whilst her red-lipped smile taunted me. "Unfortunately," I said, with slow emphasis, "you are protected by
my promise, made on the occasion of our previous meeting. But
murder has been done, so that honour scarcely demands that I respect
my promise further--"

She raised her eyebrows slightly. "Surely that depends upon the quality of the honour!" she said. "I believe you to be a member of a murderous organization, and
unless you can convince me that I am wrong, I shall act accordingly." At that she leaned toward me, laying her hand on my arm. "Please do not be so cruel," she whispered, "as to drag me into a
matter with which truly I have no concern. Believe me, you are
utterly mistaken. Wait one moment, and I will prove it." She rose, and before I could make move to detain her, quitted the
room; but the door scarcely had closed ere I was afoot. The
corridor beyond was empty. I ran on. The lift had just descended. A dark man whom I recognized stood near the closed gate. "Quick!" I said, "I am Cavanagh of the Report! Did you see a lady
enter the lift?" "I did, Mr. Cavanagh," answered the hotel detective; for this was he. In such a giant inn as this I knew full well that one could come and
go almost with impunity, though one had no right to the hospitality
of the establishment; and it was with a premonition respecting what
his answer would be, that I asked the man--

"Is she staying here?" "She is not. I have never seen her before!" The girl with the violet eyes had escaped, taking all her secrets
with her! CHAPTER IX

SECOND ATTEMPT ON THE SAFE


"You see," said Bristol, "the Hashishin must know that the safe
won't remain here unopened much longer. They will therefore
probably make another attempt to-night." "It seems likely," I replied; and was silent. Outside the open
windows whispered the shrubbery, as a soft breeze stole through the
bushes. Beyond, the moon made play in the dim avenue. From the
old chapel hard by the sweet-toned bell proclaimed midnight. Our
vigil was begun. In this room it was that Professor Deeping had
met death at the hands of the murderous Easterns; here it was that
Marden and West had mysteriously been struck down the night before. To-night was every whit as hot, and Bristol and I had the windows
widely opened. My companion was seated where the detective, Marden,
had sat, in a chair near the westerly window, and I lay back in
the armchair that had been occupied by West. I may repeat here that the house of the late Professor Deeping was
more properly a cottage, surrounded by a fairly large piece of
ground, for the most part run wild. The room used as a study was
on the ground floor, and had windows on the west and on the south. Those on the west (French windows) opened on a loggia; those on the
south opened right into the dense tangle of a neglected shrubbery. The place possessed an oppressive atmosphere of loneliness, for
which in some measure its history may have been responsible. The silence, seemingly intensified by each whisper that sped through
the elms and crept about the shrubbery, grew to such a stillness
that I told myself I had experienced nothing like it since crossing
with a caravan I had slept in the desert. Yet noisy, whirling
London was within gunshot of us; and this, though hard enough to
believe, was a reflection oddly comforting. Only one train of
thought was possible, and this I pursued at random. By what means were Marden and West struck down? In thus exposing
ourselves, in order that we might trap the author or authors of the
outrage, did we act wisely? "Bristol," I said suddenly, "it was someone who came through the
open window." "No one," he replied, "came through the windows. West saw
absolutely nothing. But if any one comes that way to-night, we
have him!" "West may have seen nothing; but how else could any one enter?" Bristol offered no reply; and I plunged again into a maze of
speculation. Powerful mantraps were set in such a way that any one or anything,
ignorant of their positions, coming up to the windows must
unavoidably be snared. These had been placed in position with
much secrecy after dusk, and the man on duty at the gate stood
with his back to the wall. No one could approach him except from
the front. My thoughts took a new turn. Was the girl with the violet eyes an ally of the Hashishin? Thus
far, although she so palpably had tricked me, I had found myself
unable to speak of her to Bristol; for the idea had entered my mind
that she might have learned of the plan to murder Deeping without
directly being implicated. Now came yet another explanation. The
publicity given to that sensational case might have interested some
third party in the fate of the stolen slipper! Could it be that
others, in no way connected with the dreadful Hassan of Aleppo,
were in quest of the slipper? Scotland Yard had taken care to ensure that the general public be
kept in ignorance of the existence of such an organization as the
Hashishin, but I must assume that this hypothetical third party
were well aware that they had Hassan, as well as the authorities,
to count with. Granting the existence of such a party, my beautiful
acquaintance might be classified as one of its members. I spoke
again. "Bristol," I said, "has it occurred to you that there may be others,
as well as Hassan of Aleppo, seeking to gain possession of the
sacred slipper?" "It has not," he replied. "In the strictest sense of the expression,
they would be out for trouble! What gave you the idea?" "I hardly know," I returned evasively, for even now I was loath to
betray the mysterious girl with the wonderful eyes. The chapel bell sounding the half-hour, Bristol rose with a sigh
that might have been one of relief, and went out to take the report
of the man on duty at the gate. As his footsteps died away along
the elm avenue, it came to me how, in the darkness about, menace
lurked; and I felt myself succumbing to the greatest dread
experienced by man--the dread of the unknown. All that I knew of the weird group of fanatics--survivals of a dim
and evil past--who must now be watching this cottage as bloodlustful
devotees watch a shrine violated, burst upon my mind. I peopled the
still blackness with lurking assassins, armed with the murderous
knowledge of by-gone centuries, armed with invisible weapons which
struck down from afar, supernaturally. I glanced toward the corner of the room where the safe stood,
reliquary of a worthless thing for which much blood had been spilled. Then sounded footsteps along the avenue, and my fear whispered that
they were not those of Bristol but of one who had murdered him, and
who came guilefully, to murder me! I snatched the revolver from my pocket and crossed the darkened room. Just to the right of one of the French windows I stood looking out
across the loggia to the end of the avenue. The night was a bright
one, and the room was flooded with a reflected mystic light, but
outside the moon paved the avenue with pearl, and through the trees
I saw a figure approaching. Was it Bristol? It had his build, it had his gait; but my fears
remained. Then the figure crossed the patch of shrubbery and stepped
on to the loggia. "Mr. Cavanagh!" I laughed dryly at my own cowardice, but my heart was still beating
abnormally. "Here I am, Bristol, in a ghastly funk!" "I don't wonder! They may be on us any time now. All's well at
the gate, but Morris says he heard, or thought he heard something
at the side of the chapel opposite, a while ago." "Wind in the bushes?" "It may have been; but he says there was no breeze at the time." We resumed our seats. "Bristol," I said, "now that the danger grows imminent, doesn't it
seem to you foolhardy for us thus to expose ourselves?" "Perhaps it is," he agreed; "but how otherwise are we likely to
learn what happened to Marden and West?" "The enemy may adopt different measures to-night." "I think not. Our dispositions are the same, and I credit them with
cunning enough to know it. At the same time I credit ourselves with
having kept the existence of the steel traps completely secret. They
will assume (so I've reasoned) that we intend to rely entirely upon
our superior vigilance, therefore they will try the same game as last
night." Silence fell. The moon rays, creeping around from the right of the avenue, crossing
the shrubbery and encroaching upon the low wall of the loggia, now
flooded its floor. Against the silvern light, Bristol appeared to
me in black silhouette. The breeze, too, seemed now to blow from a
slightly different direction. It came through the windows on my
right, beyond which lay the unkempt bushes which extended on that
side to the wall of the grounds. So we sat, until the moonlight poured fully in upon Bristol's back. So we sat when the clock chimed the hour of one. Bristol arose and once more went out to the gate. He had arranged
to visit Morris's post every half-hour. Again I experienced the
nervous dread that he would be attacked in the avenue; but again he
returned unscathed. "All's well," he said. But from his tones I knew that he had not forgotten that it was at
this hour Marden and West had suffered mysterious attack. Neither of us, I think, was disposed to talk. We both were
unwilling to break the silence, wherein, with all our ears, we
listened for the slightest disturbance. And now my attention turned anew to the course of the slowly creeping
moon rays. In my mind an idea was struggling for definition. There
was something significant in the lunar lighting of the room. Why, I
asked myself, had the attack been made at one o'clock? Did the time
signify anything? If so, what? I looked toward Bristol. His figure, the chair upon which he sat, were sharply outlined by
the cold light. The wall behind me, and to my left, was illuminated
brilliantly; but no light fell directly upon me. The idea was taking shape. From the loggia and the avenue Bristol,
I reasoned, must be clearly visible. From the shrubbery on the
south, through the other windows could I be seen? Yes, silhouetted
against the moonlight! A faint sound, quite indescribable, came to my ears from somewhere
outside-beyond. "My God!" whispered Bristol. "Did you hear it?" "Yes! What?" "It must have been Morris!--"

Bristol was half standing, one hand upon the arm of the chair, the
other concealed, but grasping his revolver as I well knew. I, too,
had my revolver in my hand, and as I twisted in my seat, preparatory
to rising, in sheer nervousness I dropped the weapon upon the
carpet. With an exclamation of dismay, I stooped quickly to recover it. As I did so something whistled past my ear, so closely as almost to
touch it--and struck with a dull thud upon the wall beyond! "Bristol!" I whispered. But as I raised my eyes to him he seemed to crumple up, and fell
loosely forward into the patch of moonlight spread upon the floor! "God in heaven!" I said aloud. In a cold sweat of fear I crouched there, for it had become evident
to me that, as I bent, I was entirely in shadow. There was a rustling in the bushes on the left; but before I could
turn in that direction, my attention was claimed elsewhere. Over
into the loggia leapt an almost naked brown figure! It was that of a small but strongly built man, who carried a short,
exceedingly thick bamboo rod in his hand. My fear was too great to
admit of my accurately observing anything at that time, but I
noticed that some kind of leather thong or loop was attached to the
end of the squat cane. The panic fear of the supernatural was strongly upon me, and I was
unable to realize that this Eastern apparition was a creature of
flesh and blood. With my nerves strung up to snapping point, I
crouched watching him. He entered the room, bending over the body
of Bristol. A hot breath fanned my cheek! At that my overwrought nerves betrayed me. I uttered a stifled cry,
looking upward ... and into a pair of gleaming eyes which looked
down into mine! A second brown man (who must have entered by one of the windows
overlooking the shrubbery) was bending over me! Scarce knowing what I did, I raised my revolver and blazed straight
into the dimly-seen face. Down upon me silently dropped a naked
body, and something warm came flowing over my hand. But, knowing my
foes to be of flesh and blood, feeling myself at handgrips now with
a palpable enemy, I threw off the body, leapt up and fired, though
blindly, at the flying shape that flashed across the loggia--and
was lost in the shadow pools under the elms. Upon the din of my shooting fell silence like a cloak. A moment I
listened, tense, still; then I turned to the table and lighted the
lamp. In its light I saw Bristol lying like a dead man. Close beside him
was a big and heavy lump of clay. It had been shaped as a ball,
but now it was flattened out curiously. Bending over my unfortunate
companion and learning that, though unconscious, he lived, I learnt,
too, how the Hashishin contrived to strike men insensible without
approaching them; I learnt that the one whom I had shot, who lay in
his blood almost on the spot where Professor Deeping once had lain,
was an expert slinger. The contrivance which he carried, as did the other who had escaped,
was a sling, of the ancient Persian type. In place of stones, heavy
lumps of clay were used, which operated much the same as a sand-bag,
whilst enabling the operator to work from a considerable distance. Hidden, over by the ancient chapel it might be, one of this evil
twain had struck down Morris, the constable; from the shelter of the
trees, from many yards away, they had shot their singular missiles
through the open windows at Bristol and myself. Bristol had
succumbed, and now, with a redness showing through his close-cut
hair immediately behind the right ear, lay wholly unconscious at my
feet. It had been a divine accident which had caused me to drop my
revolver, and, stooping to recover it, unknowingly to frustrate the
design of the second slinger upon myself. The light of the lamp
fell upon the face of the dead Hashishin. He lay forward upon his
hands, crouching almost, but with his face, his dreadful,
featureless face, twisted up at me from under his left shoulder. God knows he deserved his end; but that mutilated face is often
grinning, bloodily, in my dreams. And then as I stood, between that horrid exultation which is born
of killing and the panic which threatened me out of the darkness,
I saw something advancing ... slowly ... slowly ... from the
elmen shades toward the loggia. It was a shape--it was a shadow. Silent it came--on--and on. Where the dusk lay deepest it paused, undefined; for I could give
it no name of man or spirit. But a horror seemed to proceed from
it as light from a lamp. I groped about the table near to me, never taking my eyes from
that sinister form outside. As my fingers closed upon the
telephone, distant voices and the sound of running footsteps
(of those who had heard the shots) came welcome to my ears. 