

E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations. See 21904-h.htm or 21904-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/9/0/21904/21904-h/21904-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/9/0/21904/21904-h.zip)





THE MILLIONAIRE BABY

by

ANNA KATHARINE GREEN

Author of "The Filigree Ball," "The Leavenworth Case," Etc. A. L. Burt Company,
Publishers, New York

Copyright 1905
The Bobbs-Merrill Company
January

Press of
Braunworth & Co.
Bookbinders and Printers
Brooklyn, N. Y. [Illustration: "HUSH! THERE IS NO DOUBT ON THAT TOPIC; THE CHILD IS
DEAD. LET THAT BE UNDERSTOOD BETWEEN US." ]




CONTENTS


        I Two Little Shoes

       II "A Fearsome Man"

      III A Charming Woman

       IV Chalk-Marks

        V The Old House in Yonkers

       VI Doctor Pool

      VII "Find the Child!" VIII "Philo! Philo! Philo!" IX The Bungalow

        X Temptation

       XI The Secret of the Old Pavilion

      XII Behind the Wall

     XIII "We Shall Have to Begin Again"

      XIV Espionage

       XV A Phantasm

      XVI "An All-Conquering Beauty"

     XVII In the Green Boudoir

    XVIII "You Look As If--As If--"

      XIX Frenzy

       XX "What Do You Know?" XXI Providence

     XXII On the Second Terrace

    XXIII A Coral Bead

     XXIV "Shall I Give Him My Word, Harry?" XXV The Work of an Instant

     XXVI "He Will Never Forgive"

    XXVII The Final Struggle




THE MILLIONAIRE BABY




I

TWO LITTLE SHOES


The morning of August eighteenth, 190-, was a memorable one to me. For
two months I had had a run of bad luck. During that time I had failed to
score in at least three affairs of unusual importance, and the result
was a decided loss in repute as well as great financial embarrassment. As I had a mother and two sisters to support and knew but one way to do
it, I was in a state of profound discouragement. This was before I took
up the morning papers. After I had opened and read them, not a man in
New York could boast of higher hopes or greater confidence in his power
to rise by one bold stroke from threatened bankruptcy to immediate
independence. The paragraph which had occasioned this amazing change must have passed
under the eyes of many of you. It created a wide-spread excitement at
the time and raised in more than one breast the hope of speedy fortune. It was attached to, or rather introduced, the most startling feature of
the week, and it ran thus:

     A FORTUNE FOR A CHILD. _By cable from Southampton._

     A reward of five thousand dollars is offered, by Philo Ocumpaugh,
     to whoever will give such information as will lead to the recovery,
     alive or dead, of his six-year-old daughter, Gwendolen, missing
     since the afternoon of August the 16th, from her home in -----
     on-the-Hudson, New York, U. S. A.

     Fifty thousand dollars additional and no questions asked if she is
     restored unharmed within the week to her mother at Homewood. All communications to be addressed to Samuel Atwater, -----
     on-the-Hudson. A minute description of the child followed, but this did not interest
me, and I did not linger over it. The child was no stranger to me. I
knew her well and consequently was quite aware of her personal
characteristics. It was the great amount offered for her discovery and
restoration which moved me so deeply. Fifty thousand dollars! A fortune
for any man. More than a fortune to me, who stood in such need of ready
money. I was determined to win this extraordinary sum. I had my reason
for hope and, in the light of this unexpectedly munificent reward,
decided to waive all the considerations which had hitherto prevented me
from stirring in the matter. There were other reasons less selfish which gave impetus to my resolve. I had done business for the Ocumpaughs before and been well treated in
the transaction. I recognized and understood both Mr. Ocumpaugh's
peculiarities and those of his admired and devoted wife. As man and
woman they were kindly, honorable and devoted to many more interests
than those connected with their own wealth. I also knew their hearts to
be wrapped up in this child,--the sole offspring of a long and happy
union, and the actual as well as prospective inheritor of more millions
than I shall ever see thousands, unless I am fortunate enough to solve
the mystery now exercising the sympathies of the whole New York public. You have all heard of this child under another name. From her birth she
has been known as the Millionaire Baby, being the direct heir to three
fortunes, two of which she had already received. I saw her first when
she was three years old--a cherubic little being, lovely to look upon
and possessing unusual qualities for so young a child. Indeed, her
picturesque beauty and appealing ways would have attracted all eyes and
won all hearts, even if she had not represented in her small person the
wealth both of the Ocumpaugh and Rathbone families. There was an
individuality about her, combined with sensibilities of no ordinary
nature, which fully accounted for the devoted affection with which she
was universally regarded; and when she suddenly disappeared, it was easy
to comprehend, if one did not share, the thrill of horror which swept
from one end of our broad continent to the other. Those who knew the
parents, and those who did not, suffered an equal pang at the awful
thought of this petted innocent lost in the depths of the great unknown,
with only the false caresses of her abductors to comfort her for the
deprivation of all those delights which love and unlimited means could
provide to make a child of her years supremely happy. Her father--and this was what gave the keen edge of horror to the whole
occurrence--was in Europe when she disappeared. He had been cabled at
once and his answer was the proffered reward with which I have opened
this history. An accompanying despatch to his distracted wife announced
his relinquishment of the project which had taken him abroad and his
immediate return on the next steamer sailing from Southampton. As this
chanced to be the fastest on the line, we had reason to expect him in
six days; meanwhile--

But to complete my personal recapitulations. When the first news of this
startling abduction flashed upon my eyes from the bulletin boards, I
looked on the matter as one of too great magnitude to be dealt with by
any but the metropolitan police; but as time passed and further details
of the strange and seemingly inexplicable affair came to light, I began
to feel the stirring of the detective instinct within me (did I say that
I was connected with a private detective agency of some note in the
metropolis?) and a desire, quite apart from any mere humane interest in
the event itself, to locate the intelligence back of such a desperate
crime: an intelligence so keen that, up to the present moment, if we may
trust the published accounts of the affair, not a clue had been
unearthed by which its author could be traced, or the means employed for
carrying off this petted object of a thousand cares. To be sure, there was a theory which eliminated all crime from the
occurrence as well as the intervention of any one in the child's fate:
she might have strayed down to the river and been drowned. But the
probabilities were so opposed to this supposition, that the police had
refused to embrace it, although the mother had accepted it from the
first, and up to the present moment, or so it was stated, had refused to
consider any other. As she had some basis for this conclusion--I am
still quoting the papers, you understand--I was not disposed to ignore
it in the study I proceeded to make of the situation. The details, as I
ran them over in the hurried trip I now made up the river to ----, were
as follows:

On the afternoon of Wednesday, August sixteenth, 190--, the guests
assembled in Mrs. Ocumpaugh's white and gold music-room were suddenly
thrown into confusion by the appearance among them of a young girl in a
state of great perturbation, who, running up to the startled hostess,
announced that Gwendolen, the petted darling of the house, was missing
from the bungalow where she had been lying asleep, and could not be
found, though a dozen men had been out on search. The wretched mother, who, as it afterward transpired, had not only given
the orders by which the child had been thus removed from the excitement
up at the house, but had actually been herself but a few moments before
to see that the little one was well cared for and happy, seemed struck
as by a mortal blow at these words and, uttering a heart-rending scream,
ran out on the lawn. A crowd of guests rushed after her, and as they
followed her flying figure across the lawn to the small copse in which
lay hidden this favored retreat, they could hear, borne back on the
wind, the wild protests of the young nurse, that she had left the child
for a minute only and then to go no farther than the bench running along
the end of the bungalow facing the house; that she had been told she
could sit there and listen to the music, but that she never would have
left the child's side for a minute if she had not supposed she would
hear her least stir--protests which the mother scarcely seemed to heed,
and which were presently lost in the deep silence which fell on all, as,
brought to a stand in the thick shrubbery surrounding the bungalow, they
saw the mother stagger up to the door, look in and turn toward them with
death in her face. "The river!" she gasped, "the river!" and heedless of all attempt to
stop her, heedless even of the efforts made by the little one's nurse to
draw her attention to the nearness of a certain opening in the high
hedge marking off the Ocumpaugh grounds on this side, she ran down the
bank in the direction of the railway, but fainted before she had more
than cleared the thicket. When they lifted her up, they all saw the
reason for this. She had come upon a little shoe which she held with
frantic clutch against her breast--her child's shoe, which, as she
afterward acknowledged, she had loosened with her own hand on the little
one's foot. Of course, after this the whole hillside was searched down to the fence
which separated it from the railroad track. But no further trace of the
missing child was found, nor did it appear possible to any one that she
could have strayed away in this direction. For not only was the bank
exceedingly steep and the fence at its base impassable, but a gang of
men, working as good fortune would have it, at such a point on the road
below as to render it next to impossible for her to have crossed the
track within a half-mile either way without being observed, had one and
all declared that not one of them had seen her or any other person
descend the slope. This, however, made but little impression on the mother. She would
listen to no hints of abduction, but persisted in her declaration that
the river had swallowed her darling, and would neither rest nor turn her
head from its waters till some half a dozen men about the place had been
set systematically to work to drag the stream. Meanwhile, the police had been notified and the whole town aroused. The
search, which had been carried on up to this time in a frantic but
desultory way, now became methodical. Nor was it confined to the
Ocumpaugh estate. All the roads and byways within half a mile either way
were covered by a most careful investigation. All the near-by houses
were entered, especially those which the child was most in the habit of
frequenting, but no one had seen her, nor could any trace of her
presence be found. At five o'clock all hope of her return was abandoned
and, much against Mrs. Ocumpaugh's wish, who declared that the news of
the child's death would affect her father far less than the dreadful
possibilities of an abduction, the exact facts of the case had been
cabled to Mr. Ocumpaugh. The night and another day passed, bringing but little relief to the
situation. Not an eye had as yet been closed in Homewood, nor had the
search, ceased for an instant. Not an inch of the great estate had been
overlooked, yet men could still be seen beating the bushes and peering
into all the secluded spots which once had formed the charm of this
delightful place. As on the land, so on the river. All the waters in the
dock had been dragged, yet the work went on, some said under the very
eye of Mrs. Ocumpaugh. But there was no result as yet. In the city the interest was intense. The telegraph at police
headquarters had been clicking incessantly for thirty-six hours under
the direction, some said, of the superintendent himself. Everything
which could be done had been done, but as yet the papers were able to
report nothing beyond some vague stories of a child, with its face very
much bound up, having been seen at the heels of a woman in the Grand
Central Station in New York, and hints of a covered wagon, with a crying
child inside, which had been driven through Westchester County at a
great pace shortly before sunset on the previous day, closely followed
by a buggy with the storm-apron up, though the sun shone and there was
not a cloud in the sky; but nothing definite, nothing which could give
hope to the distracted mother or do more than divide the attention of
the police between two different but equally tenable theories. Then came
the cablegram from Mr. Ocumpaugh, which threw amateur as well as
professional detectives into the field. Among the latter was myself;
which naturally brings me back once more to my own conclusions. Of one thing I felt sure. Very early in my cogitations, before we had
quitted the Park Avenue tunnel in fact, I had decided in my own mind
that if I were to succeed in locating the lost heiress, it must be by
subtler methods than lay open to the police. I was master of such
methods (in this case at least), and though one of many owning to
similar hopes on this very train which was rushing me through to
Homewood, I had no feeling but that of confidence in a final success. How well founded this confidence was, will presently appear. The number of seedy-looking men with a mysterious air who alighted in my
company at ---- station and immediately proceeded to make their way up
the steep street toward Homewood, warned me that it would soon be
extremely difficult for any one to obtain access to the parties most
interested in the child's loss. Had I not possessed the advantage of
being already known to Mrs. Ocumpaugh, I should have immediately given
up all hope of ever obtaining access to her presence; and even with this
fact to back me, I approached the house with very little confidence in
my ability to win my way through the high iron gates I had so frequently
passed before without difficulty. And indeed I found them well guarded. As I came nearer, I could see man
after man being turned away, and not till my card had been handed in,
and a hurried note to boot, did I obtain permission to pass the first
boundary. Another note secured me admission to the house, but there my
progress stopped. Mrs. Ocumpaugh had already been interviewed by five
reporters and a special agent from the New York police. She could see no
one else at present. If, however, my business was of importance, an
opportunity would be given me to see Miss Porter. Miss Porter was her
companion and female factotum. As I had calculated upon having a half-dozen words with the mother
herself, I was greatly thrown out by this; but going upon the principle
that "half a loaf was better than no bread," I was about to express a
desire to see Miss Porter, when an incident occurred which effectually
changed my mind in this regard. The hall in which I was standing and which communicated with the side
door by which I had entered, ended in a staircase, leading, as I had
reason to believe, to the smaller and less pretentious rooms in the rear
of the house. While I hesitated what reply to give the girl awaiting my
decision, I caught the sound of soft weeping from the top of this
staircase, and presently beheld the figure of a young woman coming
slowly down, clad in coat and hat and giving every evidence both in
dress and manner of leaving for good. It was Miss Graham, a young woman
who held the position of nursery-governess to the child. I had seen her
before, and had no small admiration for her, and the sensations I
experienced at the sight of her leaving the house where her services
were apparently no longer needed, proved to me, possibly for the first
time, that I had more heart in my breast than I had ever before
realized. But it was not this which led me to say to the maid standing
before me that I preferred to see Mrs. Ocumpaugh herself, and would call
early the next day. It was the thought that this sorrowing girl would
have to pass the gauntlet of many prying eyes on her way to the station
and that she might be glad of an escort whom she knew and had shown some
trust in. Also,--but the reasons behind that also will soon become
sufficiently apparent. I was right in supposing that my presence on the porch outside would be
a pleasing surprise to her. Though her tears continued to flow she
accepted my proffered companionship with gratitude, and soon we were
passing side by side across the lawn toward a short cut leading down the
bank to the small flag-station used by the family and by certain favored
neighbors. As we threaded the shrubbery, which is very thick about the
place, she explained to me the cause of her abrupt departure. The sight
of her, it seems, had become insupportable to Mrs. Ocumpaugh. Though no
blame could be rightfully attached to her, it was certainly true that
the child had been carried off while in her charge, and however hard it
might be for _her_, few could blame the mother for wishing her removed
from the house desolated by her lack of vigilance. But she was a good
girl and felt the humiliation of her departure almost in the light of a
disgrace. As we came again into an open portion of the lawn, she stopped short and
looked back. "Oh!" she cried, gripping me by the arm, "there is Mrs. Ocumpaugh still
at the window. All night she has stood there, except when she flew down
to the river at the sound of some imaginary call from the boats. She
believes, she really believes, that they will yet come upon Gwendolen's
body in the dock there." Following the direction of her glance, I looked up. Was that Mrs.
Ocumpaugh--that haggard, intent figure with eyes fixed in awful
expectancy on the sinister group I could picture to myself down at the
water's edge? Never could I have imagined such a look on features I had
always considered as cold as they were undeniably beautiful. As I took
in the misery it expressed, that awful waiting for an event momently
anticipated, and momently postponed, I found myself, without reason and
simply in response to the force of her expression, unconsciously sharing
her expectation, and with a momentary forgetfulness of all the
probabilities, was about to turn toward the spot upon which her glances
were fixed, when a touch on my arm recalled me to myself. "Come!" whispered my trembling companion. "She may look down and see us
here." I yielded to her persuasion and turned away into the cluster of trees
that lay between us and that opening in the hedge through which our
course lay. Had I been alone I should not have budged till I had seen
some change--any change--in the face whose appearance had so deeply
affected me. "Mrs. Ocumpaugh certainly believes that the body of her child lies in
the water," I remarked, as we took our way onward as rapidly as
possible. "Do you know her reasons for this?" "She says, and I think she is right so far, that the child has been bent
for a long time on fishing; that she has heard her father talk
repeatedly of his great luck in Canada last year and wished to try the
sport for herself; that she has been forbidden to go to the river, but
must have taken the first opportunity when no eye was on her to do so;
and--and--Mrs. Ocumpaugh shows a bit of string which she found last
night in the bushes alongside the tracks when she ran down, as I have
said, at some imaginary shout from the boats--a string which she
declares she saw rolled up in Gwendolen's hand when she went into the
bungalow to look at her. Of course, it may not be the same, but Mrs.
Ocumpaugh thinks it is, and--"

"Do you think it possible, after all, that the child did stray down to
the water?" "No," was the vehement disclaimer. "Gwendolen's feet were excessively
tender. She could not have taken three steps in only one shoe. I should
have heard her cry out." "What if she went in some one's arms?" "A stranger's? She had a decided instinct against strangers. Never could
any one she did not know and like have carried her so far as that
without her waking. Then those men on the track,--they would have seen
her. No, Mr. Trevitt, it was not in _that_ direction she went." The force of her emphasis convinced me that she had an opinion of her
own in regard to this matter. Was it one she was ready to impart? "In what direction, then?" I asked, with a gentleness I hoped would
prove effective. Her impulse was toward a frank reply. I saw her lips part and her eyes
take on the look which precedes a direct avowal, but, as chance would
have it, we came at that moment upon the thicket inclosing the bungalow,
and the sight of its picturesque walls, showing brown through the
verdure of the surrounding shrubbery, seemed to act as a check upon her,
for, with a quick look and a certain dry accent quite new in her speech,
she suddenly inquired if I did not want to see the place from which
Gwendolen had disappeared. Naturally I answered in the affirmative and followed her as she turned
aside into the circular path which embraces this hidden retreat; but I
had rather have heard her answer to my question, than to have gone
anywhere or seen anything at that moment. Yet, when in full view of the
bungalow's open door, she stopped to point out to me the nearness of the
place to that opening in the hedge we had just been making for, and when
she even went so far as to indicate the tangled little path by which
that opening could be reached directly from the farther end of the
bungalow, I considered that my question had been answered, though in
another way than I anticipated, even before I noted the slight flush
which rose to her cheek under my earnest scrutiny. As it is important for the exact location of the bungalow to be
understood, I subjoin a diagram of this part of the ground:

[Illustration: LAWN EXTENDING TO THE HIGHWAY. A The Ocumpaugh mansion. B The Bungalow. C Mrs. Carew's house. D Private
path. E Gap in hedge leading to the Ocumpaugh grounds. F Gap leading
into Mrs. Carew's grounds. G Bench at end of bungalow.] As I took this all in, I ventured to ask some particulars of the family
living so near the Ocumpaughs. "Who occupies that house?" I asked, pointing to the sloping roofs and
ornamental chimneys arising just beyond us over the hedge-rows. "Oh, that is Mrs. Carew's home. She is a widow and Mrs. Ocumpaugh's
dearest friend. How she loved Gwendolen! How we all loved her! And now,
that _wretch_--"

She burst into tears. They were genuine ones; so was her grief. I waited till she was calm again, then I inquired very softly:

"What wretch?" "You have not been inside," she suggested, pointing sharply to the
bungalow. I took the implied rebuke and entered the door she indicated. A man was
sitting within, but he rose and went out when he saw us. He wore a
policeman's badge and evidently recognized her or possibly myself. I
noted, however, that he did not go far from the doorway. "It is only a den," remarked Miss Graham. I looked about me. She had described it perfectly: a place to lounge in
on an August day like the present. Walls of Georgia pine across one of
which hung a series of long dark rugs; a long, low window looking toward
the house, a few articles of bamboo furniture describe the place. Among
the latter was a couch. It was drawn up underneath the window, on the
other side of which ran the bench where my companion declared she had
been sitting while listening to the music. "Wouldn't you think my attention would have been caught by the sound of
any one moving about here?" she cried, pointing to the couch and then to
the window. "But the window was closed and the door, as you see, is
round the corner from the bench." "A person with a very stealthy step, apparently." "Very," she admitted. "Oh, how can I ever forgive myself! how can I
ever, ever forgive myself!" As she stood wringing her hands in sight of that empty couch, I cast a
scrutinizing glance about me, which led me to remark:

"This interior looks new; much newer than the outside. It has quite a
modern air." "Yes, the bungalow is old, very old; but this room, or den, or whatever
you might call it, was all remodeled and fitted up as you see it now
when the new house went up. It had long been abandoned as a place of
retreat, and had fallen into such decay that it was a perfect eyesore to
all who saw it. Now it is likely to be abandoned again, and for what a
reason! Oh, the dreadful place! How I hate it, now Gwendolen is gone!" "One moment. I notice another thing. This room does not occupy the whole
of the bungalow." Either she did not hear me or thought it unnecessary to reply; and
perceiving that her grief had now given way to an impatience to be gone,
I did not press the matter, but led the way myself to the door. As we
entered the little path which runs directly to that outlet in the hedge
marked E, I ventured to speak again:

"You have reasons, or so it appears, for believing that the child was
carried off through this very path?" The reply was impetuous:

"How else could she have been spirited away so quickly? Besides,--" here
her eye stole back at me over her shoulder,--"I have since remembered
that as I ran out of the bungalow in my fright at finding the child
gone, I heard the sound of wheels on Mrs. Carew's driveway. It did not
mean much to me then, for I expected to find the child somewhere about
the grounds; but _now_, when I come to think, it means everything, for a
child's cry mingled with it (or I imagined that it did) and that
child--"

"But," I forcibly interposed, "the police should know this." "They do; and so does Mrs. Ocumpaugh; but she has only the one idea, and
nothing can move her." I remembered the wagon with the crying child inside which had been seen
on the roads the previous evening, and my heart fell a little in spite
of myself. "Couldn't Mrs. Carew tell us something about this?" I asked, with a
gesture toward the house we were now passing. "No. Mrs. Carew went to New York that morning and had only just returned
when we missed Gwendolen. She had been for her little nephew, who has
lately been made an orphan, and she was too busy making him feel at home
to notice if a carriage had passed through her grounds." "Her servants then?" "She had none. All had been sent away. The house was quite empty." I thought this rather odd, but having at this moment reached the long
flight of steps leading down the embankment, I made no reply till we
reached the foot. Then I observed:

"I thought Mrs. Carew was very intimate with Mrs. Ocumpaugh." "She is; they are more like sisters than mere friends." "Yet she goes to New York the very day her friend gives a musicale." "Oh, she had good reasons for that. Mrs. Carew is planning to sail this
week for Europe, and this was her only opportunity for getting her
little nephew, who is to go with her. But I don't know as she will sail,
now. She is wild with grief over Gwendolen's loss, and will not feel
like leaving Mrs. Ocumpaugh till she knows whether we shall ever see the
dear child again. But, I shall miss my train." Here her step visibly hastened. As it was really very nearly due, I had not the heart to detain her. But
as I followed in her wake I noticed that for all her hurry a curious
hesitancy crept into her step at times, and I should not have been
surprised at any moment to see her stop and confront me on one of the
two remaining long flights of steps leading down the steep hillside. But we both reached the base without her having yielded to this impulse,
and presently we found ourselves in full view of the river and the small
flag-station located but a few rods away toward the left. As we turned
toward the latter, we both cast an involuntary look back at the
Ocumpaugh dock, where a dozen men could be seen at work dragging the
river-bed with grappling irons. It made a sadly suggestive picture, and
the young girl at my side shuddered violently as we noted the expression
of morbid curiosity on the faces of such onlookers, men and women, as
were drawn up at the end of the small point on which the boat-house
stood. But I had another reason than this for urging her on. I had noticed how,
at the sight of her slight figure descending the slope, some half-dozen
men or so had separated themselves from this group, with every
appearance of intending to waylay and question her. She noticed this
too, and drawing up more closely to my side, exclaimed with marked
feeling:

"Save me from these men and I will tell you something that no one--"

But here she stopped, here our very thoughts stopped. A shout had risen
from the group at the water-edge; a shout which made us both turn, and
even caused the men who had started to follow us to wheel about and rush
back to the dock with every appearance of intense excitement. "What is it? What can it be?" faltered my greatly-alarmed companion. "They have found something. See! what is that the man in the boat is
holding up? It looks like--"

But she was already half-way to the point, outstripping the very men
whose importunities she had shrunk from a moment before. I was not far
behind her, and almost immediately we found ourselves wedged among the
agitated group leaning over the little object which had been tossed
ashore into the first hand outstretched to receive it. It was a second little shoe--filled with sand and dripping with water,
but recognizable as similar to the one already found on the preceding
day high up on the bank. As this fact was borne in on us all, a groan of
pity broke from more than one pair of lips, and eye after eye stole up
the hillside to that far window in the great pile above us where the
mother's form could be dimly discerned swaying in an agitation caught
from our own excitement. But there was one amongst us whose glance never left that little shoe. The train she had been so anxious to take whistled and went thundering
by, but she never moved or noticed. Suddenly she reached out her hand. "Let me see it, please," she entreated. "I was her nurse; let me take it
in my hand." The man who held it passed it over. She examined it long and closely. "Yes, it is hers," said she. But in another moment she had laid it down
with what I thought was a very peculiar look. Instantly it was caught up and carried with a rush up the slope to where
Mrs. Ocumpaugh could be seen awaiting it with outstretched arms. But I
did not linger to mark her reception of it. Miss Graham had drawn me to
one side and was whispering in my ear:

"I must talk to you. I can not keep back another moment what I think or
what I feel. Some one is playing with Mrs. Ocumpaugh's fears. That shoe
is Gwendolen's, but it is not the mate of the one found on the bank
above. That was for the left foot _and so is this one_. Did you not
notice?" II

"A FEARSOME MAN"


The effect of this statement upon me was greater than even she had
contemplated. "You thought the child had been stolen for the reward she would bring?" she continued. "She was not; she was taken out of pure hate, and that is
why I suffer so. What may they not do to her! In what hole hide her! My
darling, O my darling!" She was going off into hysterics, but the look and touch I gave her
recalled her to herself. "We need to be calm," I urged. "You, because you have something of
importance to impart, and I, because of the action I must take as soon
as the facts you have concealed become known to me. What gives you such
confidence in this belief, which I am sure is not shared by the police,
and who is the _some one_ who, as you say, is playing upon Mrs.
Ocumpaugh's fears? A short time ago it was as _the wretch_ you spoke of
him. Are not _some one_ and _the wretch_ one and the same person, and
can you not give him now a name?" We had been moving all this time in the direction of the station and had
now reached the foot of the platform. Pausing, she cast a last look up
the bank. The trees were thick and hid from our view the Ocumpaugh
mansion, but in imagination she beheld the mother moaning over that
little shoe. "I shall never return there," she muttered; "why do I hesitate so to
speak!" Then in a burst, as I watched her in growing excitement:
"She--Mrs. Ocumpaugh--begged me not to tell what she believed had
nothing to do with our Gwendolen's loss. But I can not keep silence. This proof of a conspiracy against herself certainly relieves me from
any promise I may have made her. Mr. Trevitt, I am positive that I know
who carried off Gwendolen." This was becoming interesting, intensely interesting to me. Glancing
about and noting that the group down at the water-edge had become
absorbed again in renewed efforts toward further discoveries, I beckoned
her to follow me into the station. It was but a step, but it gave me
time to think. What was I encouraging this young girl to do? To reveal
to _me_, who had no claim upon her but that of friendship, a secret
which had not been given to the police? True, it might not be worth
much, but it was also true that it might be worth a great deal. Did she
know how much? I wanted money--few wanted it more--but I felt that I
could not listen to her story till I had fairly settled this point. I
therefore hastened to interpose a remark:

"Miss Graham, you are good enough to offer to reveal some fact hitherto
concealed. Do you do this because you have no closer friend than myself,
or because you do not know what such knowledge may be worth to the
person you give it to--in money, I mean?" "In money? I am not thinking of money," was her amazed reply; "I am
thinking of Gwendolen." "I understand, but you should think of the practical results as well. Have you not heard of the enormous reward offered by Mr. Ocumpaugh?" "No; I--"

"Five thousand dollars for information; and fifty thousand to the one
who will bring her back within the week unharmed. Mr. Ocumpaugh cabled
to that effect yesterday." "It is a large sum," she faltered, and for a moment she hesitated. Then,
with a sweet and candid look which sank deep into my heart, she added
gravely: "I had rather not think of money in connection with Gwendolen. If what I have to tell leads to her recovery, you can be trusted, I
know, to do what is right toward me. Mr. Trevitt, the man who stole her
from her couch and carried her away through Mrs. Carew's grounds in a
wagon or otherwise, is a long-haired, heavily whiskered man of sixty or
more years of age. His face is deeply wrinkled, but chiefly marked by a
long scar running down between his eyebrows, which are so shaggy that
they would quite hide his eyes if they were not lit up with an
extraordinary expression of resolution, carried almost to the point of
frenzy; a fearsome man, making your heart stand still when he pauses to
speak to you." Startled as I had seldom been, for reasons which will hereafter appear,
I surveyed her in mingled wonder and satisfaction. "His name?" I demanded. "I do not know his name." Again I stopped to look at her. "Does Mrs. Ocumpaugh?" "I do not think so. She only knows what I told her." "And what did you tell her?" "Ah! who are these?" Two or three persons had entered the station, probably to wait for the
next train. "No one who will molest you." But she was not content till we had withdrawn to where the time-table
hung up on the opposite wall. Turning about as if to consult it, she
told the following story. I never see a time-table now but I think of
her expression as she stood there looking up as if her mind were fixed
on what she probably did not see at all. "Last Wednesday--no, it was on the Wednesday preceding--I was taking a
ride with Gwendolen on one of the side roads branching off toward
Fordham. We were in her own little pony cart, and as we seldom rode
together like this, she had been chattering about a hundred things till
her eyes danced in her head and she looked as lovely as I had ever seen
her. But suddenly, just as we were about to cross a small wooden bridge,
I saw her turn pale and her whole sensitive form quiver. 'Some one I
don't like,' she cried. 'There is some one about whom I don't like. Drive on, Ellie, drive on.' But before I could gather up the reins a
figure which I had not noticed before stepped from behind a tree at the
farther end of the bridge, and advancing into the middle of the road
with arms thrown out, stopped our advance. I have told you how he
looked, but I can give you no idea of the passionate fury lighting up
his eyes, or the fiery dignity with which he held his place and kept us
subdued to his will till he had looked the shrinking child all over, and
laughed, not as a madman laughs, oh, much too slow and ironically for
that! but like one who takes an unholy pleasure in mocking the happy
present with evil prophecy. Nothing that I can say will make you see him
as I saw him in that one instant, and though there was much in the
circumstance to cause fear, I think it was more awe than fright we felt,
so commanding was his whole appearance and so forcible the assurance
with which he held us there till he was ready to move. Gwendolen cried
out, but the imploring sound had no effect upon him; it only reawakened
his mirth and led him to say, in a clear, cold, mocking tone which I
hear yet, 'Cry out, little one, for your short day is nearly over. Silks
and feathers and carriages and servants will soon be a half-forgotten
memory to you; and right it is that it should be so. Ten days, little
one, only ten days more.' And with that he moved, and, slipping aside
behind the tree, allowed us to drive on. Mr. Trevitt, yesterday saw the
end of those ten days, and where is she now? Only that man knows. He is
one man in a thousand. Can not you find him?" She turned; a train was coming, a train which it was very evident she
felt it her duty to take. I had no right to detain her, but I found time
for a question or two. "And you told Mrs. Ocumpaugh this?" "The moment we arrived home." "And she? What did she think of it?" "Mrs. Ocumpaugh is not a talkative woman. She grew very white and
clasped the child passionately in her arms. But the next minute she had
to all appearance dismissed the whole occurrence from her thoughts. 'Some socialistic fanatic,' she called him and merely advised me to stop
driving with Gwendolen for the present." "Didn't you recall the matter to her when you found the child missing?" "Yes; but then she appeared to regard it in a superstitious way only. It
was a warning of death, she said, and the man an irresponsible
clairvoyant. When I tried to urge my own idea upon her and describe how
I thought he might have obtained access to the bungalow and carried her
off, while still asleep, to some vehicle awaiting them in Mrs. Carew's
grounds, she only rebuked me for my folly and bade me keep still about
the whole occurrence, saying that I should only be getting some poor
half-demented old wretch into trouble for something for which he was not
in the least responsible." "A very considerate woman," I remarked; to which Miss Graham made reply
as the train came storming up:

"Nobody knows how considerate, even if she has dismissed me rather
suddenly from her service. Don't let that wretch"--again she used the
word--"deceive her or you into thinking that the little one perished in
the water. Gwendolen is alive, I say. Find him and you will find her. I
saw his resolution in his eye." Here she made a rush for the cars, and I had time only to get her future
address before the train started and all further opportunity of
conversation between us was over for that day. I remained behind because I was by no means through with my
investigations. What she had told me only convinced me of the necessity
I had already recognized of making myself master of all that could be
learned at Homewood before undertaking the very serious business of
locating the child or even the aged man just described to me, and who I
was now sure had been the chief, if not the sole, instrument in her
abduction. III

A CHARMING WOMAN


Stopping only long enough to send a telegram to my partner in New York,
(for which purpose I had to walk along the tracks to the main station) I
returned by the short cut to Homewood. My purpose in doing this was
twofold. I should have a chance of seeing if the men were still at work
in the river, and I should also have the added opportunity of quietly
revisiting the bungalow, on the floor of which I had noted some
chalk-marks, which I felt called for a closer examination than I had
given them. As I came in view of the dock, I saw that the men were still
busy, but at a point farther out in the river, as if all hope had been
abandoned of their discovering anything more inshore. But the
chalk-marks in the bungalow were almost forgotten by me in the interest
I experienced in a certain adventure which befell me on my way there. I had just reached the opening in the hedge communicating with Mrs.
Carew's grounds, when I heard steps on the walk inside and a woman's
rich voice saying:

"There, that will do. You must play on the other side of the house,
Harry. And Dinah, see that he does so, and that he does not cross the
hall again till I come back. The sight of so merry a child might kill
Mrs. Ocumpaugh if she happened to look this way." Moved by the tone, which was one in a thousand, I involuntarily peered
through the outlet I was passing, in the hope of catching a glimpse of
its owner, and thus was favored with the sight of a face which instantly
fixed itself in my memory as one of the most enchanting I had ever
encountered. Not from its beauty, yet it may have been beautiful; nor
from its youth, for the woman before me was not youthful, but from the
extraordinary eloquence of its expression caught at a rare moment when
the heart, which gave it life, was full. She was standing half-way down
the path, throwing kisses to a little boy who was leaning toward her
from an upper window. The child was laughing with glee, and it was this
laugh she was trying to check; but her countenance, as she made the
effort, was almost as merry as his, and yet was filled with such solemn
joy--such ecstasy of motherhood I should be inclined to call it, if I
had not been conscious that this must be Mrs. Carew and the child her
little nephew--that in my admiration for this exhibition of pure
feeling, I forgot to move on as she advanced into the hedge-row, and so
we came face to face. The result was as extraordinary to me as all the
rest. Instantly all the gay abandonment left her features, and she
showed me a grave, almost troubled, countenance, more in keeping with
her severe dress, which was as nearly like mourning as it could be and
not be made of crape. It was such a sudden change and of so complete a character, that I was
thrown off my guard for a moment and probably betrayed the curiosity I
undoubtedly felt; for she paused as she reached me, and, surveying me
very quietly but very scrutinizingly too, raised again that marvelous
voice of hers and pointedly observed:

"This is a private path, sir. Only the friends of Mrs. Ocumpaugh or of
myself pass here." This was a speech calculated to restore my self-possession. With a bow
which evidently surprised her, I answered with just enough respect to
temper my apparent presumption:

"I am here in the interests of Mrs. Ocumpaugh, to assist her in finding
her child. Moments are precious; so I ventured to approach by the
shorter way." "Pardon me!" The words did not come instantly, but after some
hesitation, during which she kept her eyes on my face in a way to rob me
of all thought save that she possessed a very strong magnetic quality,
to which it were well for a man like myself to yield. "You will be my
friend, too, if you succeed in restoring Gwendolen." Then quickly, as
she crossed to the Ocumpaugh grounds: "You do not look like a member of
the police. Are you here at Mrs. Ocumpaugh's bidding, and has she at
last given up all expectation of finding her child in the river?" I, too, thought a minute before answering, then I put on my most candid
expression, for was not this woman on her way to Mrs. Ocumpaugh, and
would she not be likely to repeat what she heard me say? "I do not know how Mrs. Ocumpaugh feels at present. But I know what her
dearest wish is--to see her child again alive and well. That wish I
shall do my best to gratify. It is true that I am not a police
detective, but I have an agency of my own, well-known to both Mrs. and
Mr. Ocumpaugh. All its resources will be devoted to this business and I
hope to succeed, madam. If, as I suspect, you are on your way to Mrs.
Ocumpaugh, please tell her that Robert Trevitt, of Trevitt and Jupp,
hopes to succeed." "I _will_," she emphasized. Then stepping back to me in all the grace of
her thrilling personality, she eagerly added: "If there is any
information I can give, do not be afraid to ask me. I love children, and
would give anything in the world to see Mrs. Ocumpaugh as happy with
Gwendolen again as I am with my little nephew. Are you quite sure that
there is any possibility of this? I was told that the child's shoe has
been found in the river; but almost immediately following this
information came the report that there was something odd about this
shoe, and that Mrs. Ocumpaugh had gone into hysterics. Do _you_ know
what they meant by that? I was just going over to see." I did know what they meant, but I preferred to seem ignorant. "I have not seen Mrs. Ocumpaugh," I evasively rejoined. "But _I_ don't
look for the child to be drawn from the water." "Nor I," she repeated, with a hoarse catch in her breath. "It is
thirty-six hours since we lost her. Time enough for the current to have
carried her sweet little body far away from here." I surveyed the lady before me in amazement. "Then _you_ think she strayed down to the water?" "Yes; it would madden me to believe otherwise; loving her so well, and
her parents so well, I dare not think of a worse fate." Taking advantage of her amiability and the unexpected opportunity it
offered for a leading question, I hereupon ventured to say: "You were
not at home, I hear, when she vanished from the bungalow." "No; that is, if it happened before three o'clock. I arrived from the
station just as the clock was striking the hour, and having my little
nephew with me, I was too much occupied in reconciling him to his new
home, to hear or see anything outside. Most unfortunate!" she mourned,
"most unfortunate! I shall never cease reproaching myself. A tragedy at
my door"--here she glanced across the shrubbery at the bungalow--"and I
occupied with my own affairs!" With a flush, the undoubted result of her own earnestness, she turned as
if to go. But I could not let her depart without another question:

"Excuse me, Mrs. Carew, but you gave me permission to seem importunate. With the exception of her nurse, you were the one person nearest the
bungalow at the time. Didn't you hear a carriage drive through your
grounds at about the hour the alarm was first started? I know you have
been asked this before, but not by me; and it is a very important fact
to have settled; very important for those who wish to discover this
child at once." For reply she gave me a look of very honest amazement. "Of course I did," she replied. "I came in a carriage myself from the
station and naturally heard it drive away." At her look, at her word, the thread which I had seized with such
avidity seemed to slip from my fingers. Had little Miss Graham's theory
no better foundation than this? and were the wheels she heard only those
of Mrs. Carew's departing carriage? I resolved to press the matter even
if I ran the risk of displeasing her. "Mrs. Carew--for it must be Mrs. Carew I am addressing--did your little
nephew cry when you first brought him to the house?" "I think he did," she admitted slowly; "I think he did." I must have given evidence of the sudden discouragement this brought me,
for her lips parted and her whole frame trembled with sudden
earnestness. "Did you think--did any one think--that those cries came from Gwendolen? That she was carried out through my grounds? Could any one have thought
that?" "I have been told that the nursery-governess did." "Little Miss Graham? Poor girl! she is but defending herself from
despair. She is ready to believe everything but that the child is dead." Was it so? Was I following the false light of a will-o'-the-wisp? No,
no; the strange coincidence of the threat made on the bridge with the
disappearance of the child on the day named, was at least real. The
thread had not altogether escaped from my hands. It was less tangible,
but it was still there. "You may be right," I acquiesced, for I saw that her theories were
entirely opposed to those of Miss Graham. "But we must try everything,
_everything_." I was about to ask whether she had ever seen in the adjoining grounds,
or on the roads about, an old man with long hair and a remarkable scar
running down between his eyebrows, when a young girl in the cap and
apron of a maid-servant came running through the shrubbery from the
Ocumpaugh house, and, seeing Mrs. Carew, panted out:

"Oh, do come over to the house, Mrs. Carew. Mrs. Ocumpaugh has been told
that the two shoes which have been found, one on the bank and the other
in the river, are not mates, and it has quite distracted her. She has
gone to her room and will let no one else in. We can hear her moaning
and crying, but we can do nothing. Perhaps she will see you. She called
for you, I know, before she shut her door." "I will go." Mrs. Carew had turned quite pale, and from standing upright
in the road, had moved so as to gain support from one of the hedges. I expected to see her turn and go as soon as her trembling fit was over,
but she did not, though she waved the girl away as if she intended to
follow her. Had I not learned to distrust my own impression of people's
motives from their manners and conduct, I should have said that she was
waiting for me to precede her. "Two shoes and not mates!" she finally exclaimed. "What does she mean?" "Simply that another shoe has been drawn up from the river-bottom which
does not mate the one picked up near the bungalow. Both are for the left
foot." "Ah!" gasped this sympathetic woman. "And what inference can we draw
from that?" I should not have answered her; but the command in her eyes or the
thrilling effect of her manner compelled me, and I spoke the truth at
once, just as I might have done to Mrs. Ocumpaugh, or, better still, to
Mr. Ocumpaugh, if either had insisted. "But one," said I. "There is a conspiracy on the part of one or more
persons to delude Mrs. Ocumpaugh into believing the child dead. They
blundered over it, but they came very near succeeding." "Who blundered, and what is the meaning of the conspiracy you hint at? Tell me. Tell me what such men as you think." Her plastic features had again shown a change. She was all anxiety now;
cheeks burning, eyes blazing--a very beautiful woman. "We think that the case looks serious. We think from the very mystery it
displays, that there is a keen intelligence back of this crime. I can
not go any further than that. The affair is as yet too obscure." "You amaze me!" she faltered, making an effort to collect her thoughts. "I have always thought, just as Mrs. Ocumpaugh has, that the child had
somehow found her way to the water and was drowned. But if all this is
true we shall have to face a worse evil. A conspiracy against such a
tender little being as that! A conspiracy, and for what? Not to extort
money, or why these blundering efforts to make the child appear dead?" She was the same sympathetic woman, agitated by real feeling as before,
yet at this moment--I do not understand now just why--I became aware of
an inner movement of caution against too great a display of candor on my
own part. "Madam, it is all a mystery at present. I am sure that the police will
tell you the same. But another day may bring developments." "Let us hope so!" was her ardent reply, accompanied by a gesture, the
freedom of which suited her style and person as it would not have done
those of a less impressionable woman. And, seeing that I had no
intention of leaving the spot where I stood, she moved at last from
where she held herself upright against the hedge, and entered the
Ocumpaugh grounds. "Will you call in to see me to-morrow?" she asked,
pausing to look back at a turn in the path. "I shall not sleep to-night
for thinking of those possible developments." "Since you permit me," I returned; "that is, if I am still here. Affairs
may call me away at any moment." "Yes, and so with me. Affairs may call me away also. I was to sail on
Saturday for Liverpool. Only Mrs. Ocumpaugh's distress detains me. If
the situation lightens, if we hear any good news to-night, or even early
to-morrow, I shall continue my preparations, which will take me again to
New York." "I will call if you are at home." She gave me a slight nod and vanished. Why did I stand a good three minutes where she had left me, thinking,
but not getting anything from my thoughts, save that I was glad that I
had not been betrayed into speaking of the old man Miss Graham had met
on the bridge? Yet it might have been well, after all, if I had done so,
if only to discover whether Mrs. Ocumpaugh had confided this occurrence
to her most intimate friend. IV

CHALK-MARKS


My next move was toward the bungalow. Those chalk-marks still struck me
as being worthy of investigation, and not only they, but the bungalow
itself. That certainly merited a much closer inspection than I had been
able to give it under Miss Graham's eye. It was not quite a new place to me, nor was I so ignorant of its history
(and it had a history as I had appeared to be in my conversation with
Miss Graham). Originally it had been a stabling place for horses; and
tradition said that it had once harbored for a week the horse of General
Washington. This was when the house on the knoll above had been the seat
and home of one of our most famous Revolutionary generals. Later, as the
trees grew up around this building, it attracted the attention of a new
owner, William Ocumpaugh, the first of that name to inhabit Homewood,
and he, being a man of reserved manners and very studious habits, turned
it into what we would now call, as Miss Graham did, a den, but which he
styled a pavilion, and used as a sort of study or reading-room. His son, who inherited it, Judge Philo Ocumpaugh, grandfather of the
present Philo, was as studious as his father, but preferred to read and
write in the quaint old library up at the house, famous for its wide
glass doors opening on to the lawn, and its magnificent view of the
Hudson. His desk, which many remember (it has a place in the present
house, I believe), was so located that for forty years or more he had
this prospect ever before him, a prospect which included the sight of
his own pavilion, around which, for no cause apparent to his
contemporaries, he had caused a high wall to be built, effectually
shutting in both trees and building. This wall has since been removed; but I have often heard it spoken of,
and always with a certain air of mystery; possibly because, as I have
said, there seemed no good reason for its erection, the place holding no
treasure and the gate standing always open; possibly because of its
having been painted, in defiance of all harmony with everything about
the place, a dazzling white; and possibly because it had not been raised
till after the death of the judge's first wife, who, some have said,
breathed her last within the precincts it inclosed. However that may be, there seems to be no doubt that this place exerted,
very likely against his will, for he never visited it, a singular
fascination over the secretive mind of this same upright but strangely
taciturn ancestor of the Ocumpaughs. For during the forty years in which
he wrote and read at this desk, the shutters guarding the door
overlooking those decaying walls were never drawn to, or so the
tradition runs; and when he died, it was found that, by a clause in his
will, this pavilion, hut or bungalow, all of which names it bore at
different stages of its existence, was recommended to the notice of his
heirs as an object which they were at liberty to leave in its present
forsaken condition, though he did not exact this, but which was never,
under any circumstances or to serve any purpose, to be removed from its
present site, or even to suffer any demolition save such as came with
time and the natural round of the seasons, to whose tender mercies he
advised it to be left. In other words, it was to stand, and to stand
unmolested, till it fell of its own accord, or was struck to the earth
by lightning--a tragic alternative in the judgment of those who knew it
for a structure of comparative insignificance, and one which, in the
minds of many, and perhaps I may say in my own, appeared to point to
some serious and unrevealed cause not unlinked with the almost forgotten
death of that young wife to which I have just alluded. This was years ago, far back in the fifties, and his son, who was a
minor at his death, grew up and assumed his natural proprietorship. The
hut--it was nothing but a hut now--had remained untouched--a ruin no
longer habitable. The spirit, as well as the letter, of that particular
clause in his father's will had so far been literally obeyed. The walls
being of stone, had withstood decay, and still rose straight and firm;
but the roof had begun to sag, and whatever of woodwork yet remained
about it had rotted and fallen away, till the building was little more
than a skeleton, with holes for its windows and an open gap for its
door. As for the surrounding wall, it no longer stood out, an incongruous
landmark, from its background of trees and shrubbery. Young shoots had
started up and old branches developed till brick and paint alike were
almost concealed from view by a fresh girdle of greenery. And now comes the second mystery. Sometime after this latter Ocumpaugh had attained his majority--his name
was Edwin, and he was, as you already imagine, the father of the present
Philo--he made an attempt--a daring one it was afterward called--to
brighten this neglected spot and restore it to some sort of use, by
giving a supper to his friends within its broken-down walls. This supper was no orgy, nor were the proprieties in any way
transgressed by so harmless a festivity; yet from this night a singular
change was observed in this man. Pleasure no longer charmed him, and
instead of repeating the experiment I have just described, he speedily
evinced such an antipathy to the scene of his late revel that only from
the greatest necessity would he ever again visit that part of the
grounds. What did it mean? What had occurred on that night of innocent enjoyment
to disturb or alarm him? Had some note in his own conscience been struck
by an act which, in his cooler moments, he may have looked upon as a
species of sacrilege? Or had some whisper from the past reached him amid
the feasting, the laughing and the jesting, to render these old walls
henceforth intolerable to him? He never said, but whatever the cause of
this sudden aversion, the effect was deep and promised to be lasting. For, one morning, not long after this event, a party of workmen was seen
leaving these grounds at daybreak, and soon it was noised about that a
massive brick partition had been put up across the interior of this same
pavilion, completely shutting off, for no reason that any one could see,
some ten feet of what had been one long and undivided room. It was a strange act enough; but when, a few days later, it was followed
by one equally mysterious, and they saw the encircling wall which had
been so carefully raised by Judge Ocumpaugh ruthlessly pulled down, and
every sign of its former presence there destroyed, wonder filled the
highway and the curiosity of neighbors and friends passed all bounds. But no explanations were volunteered then or ever. People might query
and peer, but they learned nothing. What was left open to view told no
tales beyond the old one, and as for the single window which was the
sole opening into the shut-off space, it was then, as now, so completely
blocked up by a network of closely impacted vines, that it offered
little more encouragement than the wall itself to the eyes of such
curiosity-mongers as crept in by way of the hedge-rows to steal a look
at the hut, and if possible gain a glimpse of an interior which had
suddenly acquired, by the very means taken to shut it off from every
human eye, a new importance pointing very decidedly toward the tragic. But soon even this semblance of interest died out or was confined to
strange tales whispered under breath on weird nights at neighboring
firesides, and the old neglect prevailed once more. The whole place--new
brick and old stone--seemed doomed to a common fate under the hand of
time, when the present Philo Ocumpaugh, succeeding to the property,
brought new wealth and business enterprise into the family, and the old
house on the hill was replaced by the marble turrets of Homewood, and
this hut--or rather the portion open to improvement--was restored to
some sort of comfort, and rechristened the bungalow. Was fate to be appeased by this effort at forgetfulness? No. In
emulation of the long abandoned portion so hopelessly cut off by that
dividing wall, this brightly-furnished adjunct to the great house had
linked itself in the minds of men to a new mystery--the mystery which I
had come there to solve, if wit and patience could do it, aided by my
supposedly unshared knowledge of a fact connecting me with this family's
history in a way it little dreamed of. Naturally, my first look was at the building itself. I have described
its location and the room from which the child was lost. What I wanted
to see now, after studying those chalk-marks, was whether that partition
which had been put in, was as impassable as was supposed. The policeman on guard having strolled a few feet away, I approached the
open doorway without hindrance, and at once took that close look I had
promised myself, of the marks which I had observed scrawled broadly
across the floor just inside the threshold. They were as interesting and
fully as important as I had anticipated. Though nearly obliterated by
the passing of the policeman's feet across them, I was still enabled to
read the one word which appeared to me significant. If you will glance at the following reproduction of a snap-shot which I
took of this scrawl, you will see what I mean. [Illustration]

The significant character was the 16. Taken with the "ust," there could
be no doubt that the whole writing had been a record of the date on
which the child had disappeared: August 16, 190-. This in itself was of small consequence if the handwriting had not
possessed those marked peculiarities which I believed belonged to but
one man--a man I had once known--a man of reverend aspect, upright
carriage and a strong distinguishing mark, like an old-time scar,
running straight down between his eyebrows. This had been my thought
when I first saw it. It was doubly so on seeing it again after the
doubts expressed by Miss Graham of a threatening old man who possessed
similar characteristics. Satisfied on this point, I turned my attention to what still more
seriously occupied it. The three or four long rugs, which hung from the
ceiling across the whole wall at my left, evidently concealed the
mysterious partition put up in Mr. Ocumpaugh's father's time directly
across this portion of the room. Was it a totally unbroken partition? I
had been told so; but I never accept such assertions without a personal
investigation. Casting a glance through the doorway and seeing that it would take my
dreaming friend, the policeman, some two or three minutes yet to find
his way back to his post, I hastily lifted these rugs aside, one after
the other, and took a look behind them. A stretch of Georgia pine, laid,
as I readily discovered by more than one rap of my knuckles, directly
over the bricks it was intended to conceal, was visible under each; from
end to end a plain partition with no indications of its having been
tampered with since the alterations were first made. Dismissing from my mind one of those vague possibilities, which add such
interest to the calling of a detective, I left the place, with my full
thought concentrated on the definite clue I had received from the
chalk-marks. But I had not walked far before I met with a surprise which possibly
possessed a significance equal to anything I had already observed, if
only I could have fully understood it. On the path into which I now entered, I encountered again the figure of
Mrs. Carew. Her face was turned full on mine, and she had evidently
retraced her steps to have another instant's conversation with me. The
next moment I was sure of this. Her eyes, always magnetic, shone with
increasing brightness as I advanced to meet her, and her manner, while
grave, was that of a woman quite conscious of the effect she produced by
her least word or action. "I have returned to tell you," said she, "that I have more confidence in
your efforts than in those of the police officers around here. If
Gwendolen's fate is determined by any one it will be by you. So I want
to be of aid to you if I can. Remember that. I may have said this to you
before, but I wish to impress it upon you." There was a flutter in her movements which astonished me. She was
surveying me in a straightforward way, and I could not but feel the fire
and force of her look. Happily she was no longer a young woman or I
might have misunderstood the disturbance which took place in my own
breast as I waited for the musical tones to cease. "You are very good," I rejoined. "I need help, and shall be only too
glad to receive your assistance." Yet I did question her, though I presently found myself walking toward
the house at her side. She may not have expected me to presume so far. Certainly she showed no dissatisfaction when, at a parting in the path,
I took my leave of her and turned my face in the direction of the gates. A strange sweet woman, with a power quite apart from the physical charms
which usually affect men of my age, but one not easily read nor parted
from unless one had an imperative errand, as I had. This errand was to meet and forestall the messenger boy whom I momently
expected with the answer to my telegram. That an opportunity for gossip
was likewise afforded by the motley group of men and boys drawn up near
one of the gate-posts, gave an added interest to the event which I was
quite ready to appreciate. Approaching this group, I assimilated myself
with it as speedily as possible, and, having some tact for this sort of
thing, soon found myself the recipient of various gratuitous opinions as
to the significance of the find which had offered such a problem both to
the professional and unprofessional detective. Two mis-mated shoes! Had
Gwendolen Ocumpaugh by any chance worn such? No--or the ones mating them
would have been found in her closet, and this, some one shouted out, had
not been done. Only the one corresponding to that fished up from the
waters of the dock had come to light; the other, the one which the child
must really have worn, was no nearer being found than the child herself. What did it all mean? No one knew; but all attempted some sort of
hazardous guess which I was happy to see fell entirely short of the
mark. There was not a word of the vindictive old man described by Miss Graham,
till I myself introduced the topic. My reason or rather my excuse for
introducing it was this:

On the gate-post near me I had observed the remnants of a strip of paper
which had been pasted there and afterward imperfectly torn off. It had
an unsightly look, but I did not pay much attention to it till some
movement in the group forced me a little nearer to the post, when I was
surprised enough to see that this scrap of paper showed signs of words,
and that these words gave evidence of being a date written in the very
hand I now had no difficulty in recognizing as that of the old man
uppermost in my own mind, even if he were not the one whom Miss Graham
had seen on the bridge. This date--strange to say--was the same
significant one already noted on the floor of the bungalow--a fact which
I felt merited an explanation if any one about me could give it. Waiting, therefore, for a lull in the remarks passing between the
stable-men and other employees about the place, I drew the attention of
the first man who would listen, to the half torn-off strip of paper on
the post, and asked if that was the way the Ocumpaughs gave notice of
their entertainments. He started, then turned his back on me. "That wasn't put there for the entertainment," he growled; "that was
pasted up there by some one who wanted to show off his writin'. There
don't seem to be no other reason." As the man who spoke these words had thereby proved himself a blockhead,
I edged away from him as soon as possible toward a very decent looking
fellow who appeared to have more brains than speech. "Do you know who pasted that date upon the post?" I inquired. He answered very directly. "No, or I should have been laying for him long before this. Why, it is
not only there you can see it. I found it pinned to the carriage
cushions one day just as I was going to drive Mrs. Ocumpaugh out." (Evidently I had struck upon the coachman.) "And not only that. One of
the girls up at the house--one as I knows pretty well--tells me--I don't
care who hears it now--that it was written across a card which was left
at the door for Mrs. Ocumpaugh, and all in the same handwriting, which
is not a common one, as you can see. This means something, seeing it was
the date when our bad luck fell on us." He had noted that. "You don't mean to say that these things were written and put about
before the date you see on them." "But I do. Would we have noticed since? But who are you, sir, if I may
ask? One of them detective fellows? If so, I have a word to say: Find
that child or Mrs. Ocumpaugh's blood will be on your head! She'll not
live till Mr. Ocumpaugh comes home unless she can show him his child." "Wait!" I called out, for he was turning away toward the stable. "You
know who wrote those slips?" "Not a bit of it. No one does. Not that anybody thinks much about them
but me." "The police must," I ventured. "May be, but they don't say anything about it. Somehow it looks to me as
if they were all at sea." "Possibly they are," I remarked, letting him go as I caught sight of a
small boy coming up the road with several telegrams in his hand. "Is one of those directed to Robert Trevitt?" I asked, crowding up with
the rest, as his small form was allowed to slip through the gate. "Spec's there is," he replied, looking them over and handing me one. I carried it to one side and hastily tore it open. It was, as I
expected, from my partner, and read as follows:

     Man you want has just returned after two days' absence. Am on
     watch. Saw him just alight from buggy with what looked like
     sleeping child in his arms. Closed and fastened front door after
     him. Safe for to-night. Did I allow my triumph to betray itself? I do not think so. The question
which kept down my elation was this: Would I be the first man to get
there? V

THE OLD HOUSE IN YONKERS


The old man whose handwriting I had now positively identified was a
former employer of mine. I had worked in his office when a lad. He was a
doctor of very fair reputation in Westchester County, and I recognized
every characteristic of his as mentioned by Miss Graham, save the frenzy
which she described as accompanying his address. In those days he was calm and cold and, while outwardly scrupulous,
capable of forgetting his honor as a physician under a sufficiently
strong temptation. I had left him when new prospects opened, and in the
years which had elapsed had contented myself with the knowledge that his
shingle still hung out in Yonkers, though his practice was nothing to
what it used to be when I was in his employ. Now I was going to see him
again. That his was the hand which had stolen Gwendolen seemed no longer open
to doubt. That she was under his care in the curious old house I
remembered in the heart of Yonkers, seemed equally probable; but why so
sordid a man--one who loved money above everything else in the
world--should retain the child one minute after the publication of the
bountiful reward offered by Mr. Ocumpaugh, was what I could not at first
understand. Miss Graham's theory of hate had made no impression on me. He was heartless and not likely to be turned aside from any project he
had formed, but he was not what I considered vindictive where nothing
was to be gained. Yet my comprehension of him had been but a boy's
comprehension, and I was now prepared to put a very different estimate
on one whose character had never struck me as being an open one, even
when my own had been most credulous. That my enterprise, even with the knowledge I possessed of this man,
promised well or held out any prospects of easy fulfilment, I no longer
allowed myself to think. If money was his object--and what other could
influence a man of his temperament?--the sum offered by Mr. Ocumpaugh,
large though it was, had apparently not sufficed to satisfy his greed. He was holding back the child, or so I now believed, in order to wring a
larger, possibly a double, amount from the wretched mother. Fifty
thousand was a goodly sum, but one hundred thousand was better; and this
man had gigantic ideas where his cupidity was concerned. I remember how
firmly he had once stood out for ten thousand dollars when he had been
offered five; and I began to see, though in an obscure way as yet, how
it might very easily be a part of his plan to work Mrs. Ocumpaugh up to
a positive belief in the child's death before he came down upon her for
the immense reward he had fixed his heart upon. The date he had written
all over the place might thus find some explanation in a plan to weaken
her nerve before pressing his exorbitant claims upon her. Nothing was clear, yet everything was possible in such a nature; and
anxious to enter upon the struggle both for my own sake and that of the
child of whose condition under that terrible eye I scarcely dared to
think, I left Homewood in haste and took the first train for Yonkers. Though the distance was not great, I had fully arranged my plans before
entering the town where so many of my boyish years had been spent. I
knew the old fox well enough, or thought I did, to be certain that I
should have anything but an easy entrance into his house, in case it
still harbored the child whom my partner had seen carried in there. I
anticipated difficulties, but was concerned about none but the
possibility of not being able to bring myself face to face with him. Once in his presence, the knowledge which I secretly possessed of an old
but doubtful transaction of his, would serve to make him mine even to
the point of yielding up the child he had forcibly abducted. But would
he accord me an interview? Could I, without appeal to the police--and
you can readily believe I was not anxious to allow them to put their
fingers in my pie--force him to open his door and let me into his house,
which, as I well recalled, he locked up at nine--after which he would
receive no one, not even a patient? It was not nine yet, but it was very near that hour. I had but twenty
minutes in which to mount the hill to the old house marked by the
doctor's sign and by another peculiarity of so distinct a nature that it
would serve to characterize a dwelling in a city as large as New
York--though I doubt if New York can show its like from the Battery to
the Bronx. The particulars of this I will mention later. I have first to
relate the relief I felt when, on entering the old neighborhood, I heard
in response to a few notes of a certain popular melody which I had
allowed to leave my lips, an added note or two which warned me that my
partner was somewhere hidden among the alleys of this very
unaristocratic quarter. Indeed, from the sound, I judged him to be in
the rear of the doctor's house and, being anxious to hear what he had to
say before advancing upon the door which might open my way to easy
fortune or complete defeat, I paused a few steps off and waited for his
appearance. He was at my elbow before I had either seen or heard him. He was always
light of foot, but this time he seemed to have no tread at all. "Still here," was his comforting assurance. "Both?" I whispered back. "Both." "Any one else?" "No. A boy drove away the buggy and has not come back. Sawbones keeps no
girl." "Is the child quiet? Has there been no alarm?" "Not a breath." "No cops in the neighborhood? No spies around?" "Not one. We've got it all this time. But--"

"Hush!" "There's nobody." "Yes, the doctor; he's fastening up his house. I must hasten; nothing
would induce me to let that innocent remain under his roof all night." "It's not the windows he is at." "What then?" "The door, the big front door." "The--"

"Yes." I gave my partner a surprised look, undoubtedly lost in the darkness,
and drew a step nearer the house. "It's just the same old gloom-box," I exclaimed, and paused for an
instant to mark the changes which had taken place in the surroundings. They were very few and I turned back to fix my eye on the front door
where a rattling sound could be heard, as of some one fingering the
latch. It was this door which formed the peculiarity of the house. In
itself it was like any other that was well-fashioned and solid, but it
opened upon space--that is, if it was ever opened, which I doubted. The
stoop and even the railing which had once guarded it, had all been
removed, leaving a bare front, with this inhospitable entrance shut
against every one who had not the convenience for mounting to it by a
ladder. There was another way in, but this was round on one side, and
did not present itself to the eye unless one approached from the west
end of the street; so that to half the passers-by the house looked like
a deserted one till they came abreast of the flagged path which led to
the office door. As the windows had never been unclosed in my day and
were not now, I took it for granted that they had remained thus
inhospitably shut during all the years of my absence, which certainly
offered but little encouragement to a man bent on an errand which would
soon take him into those dismal precincts. "What goes on behind those shuttered windows?" thought I. "I know of one
thing, but what else?" The one thing was the counting of money and the
arranging of innumerable gold pieces on the great top of a baize-covered
table in what I should now describe as the back parlor. I remembered how
he used to do it. I caught him at it once, having crept up one windy
night from my little room off the office to see what kept the doctor up
so late. As I now stood listening in the dark street to those strange touches on
a door disused for years, I recalled the tremor with which I rounded the
top of the stair that night of long ago and the mingled fear and awe
with which I recognized, not only such a mint of money as I had never
seen out of the bank before, but the greedy and devouring passion with
which he pushed the glittering coins about and handled the bank-notes
and gloated over the pile it all made when drawn together by his hooked
fingers, till the sound, perhaps, of my breathing in the dark hall
startled him with a thought of discovery, and his two hands came
together over that pile with a gesture more eloquent even than the look
with which he seemed to penetrate the very shadows in the silent space
wherein I stood. It was a vision short, but inexpressibly vivid, of the
miser incarnate, and having seen it and escaped detection, as was my
undeserved luck that night, I needed never to ask again why he had been
willing to accept risks from which most men shrink from fear if not from
conscience. He loved money, not as the spender loves it, openly and with
luxurious instincts, but secretly and with a knavish dread of discovery
which spoke of treasure ill acquired. And now he was seeking to add to his gains, and I stood on the outside
of his house listening to sounds I did not understand, instead of
attempting to draw him to the office-door by ringing the bell he never
used to disconnect till nine. "Do you know that I don't quite like the noises which are being made up
there?" came in a sudden whisper to my ear. "Supposing it was the child
trying to get out! She does not know there is no stoop; she seemed
sleeping or half-dead when he carried her in, and if by any chance she
has got hold of the key and the door should open--"

"Hush!" I cried, starting forward in horror of the thought he had
suggested. "It _is_ opening. I see a thread of light. What does it mean,
Jupp? The child? No; there is more than a child's strength in that push. Hist!" Here I drew him flat against the wall. The door above had swung
back and some one was stamping on the threshold over our heads in what
appeared to be an outburst of ungovernable fury. That it was the doctor I could not doubt. But why this anger; why this
mad gasping after breath and the half-growl, half-cry, with which he
faced the night and the quiet of a street which to his glance, passing
as it did over our heads, must have appeared altogether deserted? We
were consulting each other's faces for some explanation of this
unlooked-for outbreak, when the door above us suddenly slammed to and we
heard a renewal of that fumbling with lock and key which had first drawn
our attention. But the hand was not sure or the hall was dark, for the
key did not turn in the lock. Suddenly awake to my opportunity, I
wheeled Jupp about and, making use of his knee and back, climbed up till
I was enabled to reach the knob and turn it just as the man within had
stepped back, probably to procure more light. The result was that the door swung open and I stumbled in, falling
almost face downward on the marble floor faintly checkered off to my
sight in the dim light of a lamp set far back in a bare and dismal hall. I was on my feet again in an instant and it was in this manner, and with
all the disadvantages of a hatless head and a disordered countenance,
that I encountered again my old employer after five years of absence. He did not recognize me. I saw it by the look of alarm which crossed his
features and the involuntary opening of his lips in what would certainly
have been a loud cry if I had not smiled and cried out with false
gaiety:

"Excuse me, doctor, I never came in by that door before. Pardon my
awkwardness. The step is somewhat high from the street." My smile is my own, they say; at all events it served to enlighten him. "Bob Trevitt," he exclaimed, but with a growl of displeasure I could
hardly condemn under the circumstances. I hastened to push my advantage, for he was looking very threateningly
toward the door which was swaying gently and in an inviting way to a man
who if old, had more power in his arms than I had in my whole body. "_Mr._ Trevitt," I corrected; "and on a very important errand. I am here
on behalf of Mrs. Ocumpaugh, whose child you have at this moment under
your roof." VI

DOCTOR POOL


It was a direct attack and for a minute I doubted if I had not made a
mistake in making it so suddenly and without gloves. His face purpled,
the veins on his forehead started out, his great form shook with an ire
that in such domineering natures as his can only find relief in a blow. But the right hand did not rise nor the heavy fist fall. With admirable
self-restraint he faced me for a moment, without attempting either
protest or denial. Then his blazing eyes cooled down, and with a sudden
gesture which at once relaxed his extreme tension of nerve and muscle,
he pointed toward the end of the hall and remarked with studied
politeness:

"My office is below, as you know. Will you oblige me by following me
there?" I feared him, for I saw that studiously as he sought to hide his
impressions, he too regarded the moment as one of critical significance. But I assumed an air of perfect confidence, merely observing as I left
the neighborhood of the front door and the proximity of Jupp:

"I have friends on the outside who are waiting for me; so you must not
keep me too long." He was bending to take up the lamp from a small table near the basement
stair as I threw out these words in apparent carelessness, and the flash
which shot from under his shaggy brows was thus necessarily heightened
by the glare in which he stood. Yet with all allowances made I marked
him down in my own mind as dangerous, and was correspondingly surprised
when he turned on the top step of the narrow staircase I remembered so
vividly from the experience I have before named, and in the mildest of
accents remarked:

"These stairs are a trifle treacherous. Be careful to grasp the
hand-rail as you come down." Was the game deeper than I thought? In all my remembrance of him I had
never before seen him look benevolent, and it alarmed me, coming as it
did after the accusation I had made. I felt tempted to make a stand and
demand that the interview be held then and there. For I knew his
subterranean office very well, and how difficult it would be to raise a
cry there which could be heard by any one outside. Still, with a
muttered, "Thank you," I proceeded to follow him down, only stopping
once in the descent to listen for some sound by which I could determine
in which room of the many I knew to be on this floor the little one lay,
on whose behalf I was incurring a possible bullet from the pistol I once
saw lurking amongst bottles and corks in one of the innumerable drawers
of the doctor's table. But all was still around and overhead; too still
for my peace of mind, in which dreadful visions began to rise of a
drugged or dying child, panting out its innocent breath in darkness and
solitude. Yet no. With those thousands to be had for the asking, any man
would be a fool to injure or even seriously to frighten a child upon
whose good condition they depended; much less a miser whose whole heart
was fixed on money. The clock struck as I put foot on the landing; so much can happen in
twenty minutes when events crowd and the passions of men reach their
boiling-point! I expected to see the old man try that door, even to
double bolt it as in the years gone by. But he merely threw a look that
way and proceeded on down the three or four steps which led into the
species of basement where he had chosen to fix his office. In another
moment that dim and dismal room broke upon my view under the vague light
of the small and poorly-trimmed lamp he carried. I saw again its musty
walls covered with books, where there were shelves laden with bottles
and a loose array of miscellaneous objects I had often handled but out
of which I never could make any meaning. I recognized it all and
detected but few changes. But these were startling ones. The old lounge
standing under the two barred windows which I had often likened in my
own mind to those of a jail, had been recovered; and lying on the table,
which I had always regarded with a mixture of awe and apprehension, I
perceived something which I had never seen there before: a Bible, with
its edges worn and its leaves rumpled as if often and eagerly handled. I was so struck by this last discovery that I stopped, staring, in the
doorway, looking from the sacred volume to his worn but vigorous figure
drawn up in the middle of the room, with the lamp still in his hand and
his small but brilliant eyes fixed upon mine with a certain ironical
glitter in them, which gave me my first distrust of the part I had come
there to play. "We will waste no words," said he, setting down the lamp, and seizing
with his disengaged hand the long locks of his flowing beard. "In what
respect are you a messenger from Mrs. Ocumpaugh, and what makes you
think I have her child in this house?" I found it easier to answer the last question first. "I know the child is here," I replied, "because my partner saw you bring
her in. I have gone into the detective business since leaving you." "Ah!" There was an astonishing edge to his smile and I felt that I should have
to make the most of that old discovery of mine, if I were to hold my own
with this man. "And may I ask," he coldly continued, "how you have succeeded in
connecting me with this young child's disappearance?" "It's straight as a string," I retorted. "You threatened the child to
its face in the hearing of its nurse some two weeks ago, on a certain
bridge where you stopped them. You even set the day when the little
Gwendolen should pass from luxury to poverty." Here I cast an
involuntary glance about the room where the only sign of comfort was the
newly upholstered lounge. "That day was the sixteenth, and we all know
what happened on that date. If this is not plain enough--" I had seen
his lip curl--"allow me to add, by way of explanation, that you have
seen fit to threaten Mrs. Ocumpaugh herself with this date, for I know
well the hand which wrote _August 16_ on the bungalow floor and in
various other places about Homewood where her eye was likely to fall." And I let my own fall on a sort of manuscript lying open not far from
the Bible, which still looked so out of place to me on this
pagan-hearted old miser's table. "Such chirography as yours is not to be
mistaken," I completed, with a short gesture toward the disordered
sheets he had left spread out to every eye. "I see. A detective without doubt. Did you play the detective here?" The last question leaped like a shot from his lips. "You have not denied the threats to which I have just called your
attention," was my cautious reply. "What need of that?" he retorted. "Are you not a--_detective_?" There was sarcasm, as well as taunt in the way he uttered that last
word. I was conscious of being at a loss, but put a bold front on the
matter and proceeded as if conscious of no secret misgiving. "Can you deny as well that you have been gone two days from this place? That during this time a doctor's buggy, drawn by a horse I should know
by description, having harnessed him three times a day for two years,
was seen by more than one observer in the wake of a mysterious wagon
from the interior of which a child's crying could be heard? The wagon
did not drive up to this house to-night, but the buggy did, and from it
you carried a child which you brought with you into this house." With a sudden down-bringing of his old but powerful hand on the top of
the table before him, he seemed about to utter an oath or some angry
invective. But again he controlled himself, and eying me without any
show of shame or even of desire to contradict any of my assertions, he
quietly declared:

"You are after that reward, I observe. Well, you won't get it. Like many
others of your class you can follow a trail, but the insight to start
right and to end in triumphant success is given only to a genius, and
you are not a genius." With a blush I could not control, I advanced upon him, crying:

"You have forestalled me. You have telegraphed or telephoned to Mr.
Atwater--"

"I have not left my house since I came in here three hours ago." "Then--" I began. But he hushed me with a look. "It is not a matter of money," he declared almost with dignity. "Those
who think to reap dollars from the distress which has come upon the
Ocumpaugh family will eat ashes for their pains. Money will be spent,
but none of it earned, unless you, or such as you, are hired at so much
an hour to--follow trails." Greatly astounded not only by the attitude he took, but by the calm and
almost indifferent way in which he mentioned what I had every reason to
believe to be the one burning object of his existence, I surveyed him
with undisguised astonishment till another thought, growing out of the
silence of the many-roomed house above us, gripped me with secret dread;
and I exclaimed aloud and without any attempt at subterfuge:

"She is dead, then! the child is dead!" "I do not know," was his reply. The four words were uttered with undeniable gloom. "You do not know?" I echoed, conscious that my jaw had fallen, and that
I was staring at him with fright in my eyes. "No. I wish I did. I would give half of my small savings to know where
that innocent baby is to-night. Sit down!" he vehemently commanded. "You
do not understand me, I see. You confound the old Doctor Pool with the
new." "I confound nothing," I violently retorted in strong revulsion against
what I had now come to look upon as the attempt of a subtile actor to
turn aside my suspicions and brave out a dangerous situation by a
ridiculous subterfuge. "I understand the miser whom I have beheld
gloating over his hoard in the room above, and I understand the doctor
who for money could lend himself to a fraud, the secret results of which
are agitating the whole country at this moment." "So!" The word came with difficulty. "So you _did_ play the detective,
even as a boy. Pity I had not recognized your talents at the time. But
no--" he contradicted himself with great rapidity; "I was not a redeemed
soul then; I might have done you harm. I might have had more if not
worse sins to atone for than I have now." And with scant appearance of
having noted the doubtful manner in which I had received this
astonishing outburst, he proceeded to cry aloud and with a commanding
gesture: "Quit this. You have undertaken more than you can handle. You,
a messenger from Mrs. Ocumpaugh? Never. You are but the messenger of
your own cupidity; and cupidity leads by the straightest of roads
directly down to hell." "This you proved six long years ago. Lead me to the child I believe to
be in this house or I will proclaim aloud the pact you entered into
then--a pact to which I was an involuntary witness whose word, however,
will not go for less on that account. Behind the curtain still hanging
over that old closet I stood while--"

His hand had seized my arm with a grip few could have proceeded under. "Do you mean--"

The rest was whispered in my ear. I nodded and felt that he was mine now. But the laugh which the next
minute broke from his lips dashed my assurance. "Oh, the ways of the world!" he cried. Then in a different tone and not
without reverence: "Oh, the ways of God!" I made no reply. For every reason I felt that the next word must come
from him. It was an unexpected one. "That was Doctor Pool unregenerate and more heedful of the things of
this world than of those of the world to come. You have to deal with
quite a different man now. It is of that very sin I am now repenting in
sackcloth and ashes. I live but to expiate it. Something has been done
toward accomplishing this, but not enough. I have been played upon,
used. This I will avenge. New sin is a poor apology for an old one." I scarcely heeded him. I was again straining my ears to catch a
smothered sob or a frightened moan. "What are you listening for?" he asked. "For the sound of little Gwendolen's voice. It is worth fifty thousand
dollars, you remember. Why shouldn't I listen for it? Besides, I have a
real and uncontrollable sympathy for the child. I am determined to
restore her to her home. Your blasphemous babble of a changed heart does
not affect me. You are after a larger haul than the sum offered by Mr.
Ocumpaugh. You want some of Mrs. Ocumpaugh's fortune. I have suspected
it from the first." "I want? Little you know what I want"--then quickly, convincingly: "You
are strangely deceived. Little Miss Ocumpaugh is not here." "What is that I hear, then?" was the quick retort with which I hailed
the sigh, unmistakably from infantile lips, which now rose from some
place very much nearer us than the hollow regions overhead toward which
my ears had been so long turned. "That!" He flashed with uncontrollable passion, and if I am not mistaken
clenched his hands so violently as to bury his nails in his flesh. "Would you like to see what that is? Come!" --and taking up the lamp, he
moved, much to my surprise as well as to my intense interest, toward the
door of the small cupboard where I had myself slept when in his service. That he still meditated some deviltry which would call for my full
presence of mind to combat successfully, I did not in the least doubt. Yet the agitation under which I crossed the floor was more the result of
an immediate anticipation of seeing--and in this place of all others in
the world--the child about whom my thoughts had clung so persistently
for forty-two hours, than of any results to myself in the way of injury
or misfortune. Though the room was small and my passage across it
necessarily short, I had time to remember Mrs. Ocumpaugh's pitiful
countenance as I saw it gazing in agony of expectation from her window
overlooking the river, and to catch again the sounds, less true and yet
strangely thrilling, of Mrs. Carew's voice as she said: "A tragedy at my
doors and I occupied with my own affairs!" Nor was this all. A
recollection of Miss Graham's sorrow came up before my eyes also, and,
truest of all, most penetrating to me of all the loves which seemed to
encompass this rare and winsome infant, the infinite tenderness with
which I once saw Mr. Ocumpaugh lift her to his breast, during one of my
interviews with him at Homewood. All this before the door had swung open. Afterward, I saw nothing and
thought of nothing but the small figure lying in the spot where I had
once pillowed my own head, and with no more luxuries or even comforts
about her than had been my lot under this broad but by no means
hospitable roof. A bare wall, a narrow cot, a table with a bottle and glass on it and the
child in the bed--that was all. But God knows, it was enough to me at
that breathless moment; and advancing eagerly, I was about to stoop over
the little head sunk deep in its pillow, when the old man stepped
between and with a short laugh remarked:

"There's no such hurry. I have something to say first, in explanation of
the anger you have seen me display; an anger which is unseemly in a man
professing to have conquered the sins and passions of lost humanity. I
did follow this child. You were right in saying that it was my horse and
buggy which were seen in the wake of the wagon which came from the
region of Homewood and lost itself in the cross-roads running between
the North River and the Sound. For two days and a night I followed it,
through more difficulties than I could relate in an hour, stopping in
lonely woods, or at wretched taverns, watching, waiting for the transfer
of the child, whose destination I was bound to know even if it cost me a
week of miserable travel without comfortable food or decent lodging. I
could hear the child cry out from time to time--an assurance that I was
not following a will-o'-the-wisp--but not till to-day, not till very
late to-day, did any words pass between me and the man and woman who
drove the wagon. At Fordham, just as I suspected them of making final
efforts to escape me, they came to a halt and I saw the man get out. "I immediately got out too. As we faced each other, I demanded what the
matter was. He appeared reckless. 'Are you a doctor?' he asked. I
assured him that I was. At which he blurted out: 'I don't know why
you've been following us so long, and I don't care. I've got a job for
you. A child in our wagon is ill.'"

With a start I attempted to look over the old man's shoulder toward the
bed. But the deep, if irregular, breathing of the child reassured me,
and I turned to hear the doctor out. "This gave me my chance. 'Let me see her,' I cried. The man's eye
lowered. I did not like his face at all. 'If it's anything serious,' he
growled, 'I shall cut. It isn't my flesh and blood nor yet my old
woman's there. You'll have to find some place for the brat besides my
wagon if it's anything that won't get cured without nu'ssin'. So come
along and have a look.' I followed him, perfectly determined to take the
child under my own care, sick or well. 'Where were you going to take
her?' I asked. I didn't ask who she was; why should I? 'I don't know as
I am obliged to tell,' was his surly reply. 'Where we are going
oursel's,' he reluctantly added. 'But not to nu'ss. I've no time for
nu'ssin' brats, nor my wife neither. We have a journey to make. Sarah!' --this to his wife, for by this time we were beside the
wagon,--'lift up the flap and hold the youngster's hand out. Here's a
doctor who will tell us if it's fever or not.' A puny hand and wrist
were thrust out. I felt the pulse and then held out my arms. 'Give me
the child,' I commanded. 'She's sick enough for a hospital.' A grunt
from the woman within, an oath from the man, and a bundle was presently
put in my arms, from which a little moan escaped as I strode with it
toward my buggy. 'I do not ask your name,' I called back to the man who
reluctantly followed me. 'Mine is Doctor Pool and I live in Yonkers.' He
muttered something about not peachin' on a poor man who was really doin'
an unfortunate a kindness, and then slunk hurriedly back and was gone,
wagon, wife and all, by the time I had whipped up my tired old nag and
turned about toward Yonkers. But I had the child safe and sound in my
arms, and my fears of its fate were relieved. It was not well, but I
anticipated nothing serious. When it moaned I pressed it a little closer
to my breast and that was all. In three-quarters of an hour we were in
Yonkers. In fifteen minutes I had it on this bed, and had begun to
unroll the shawl in which it was closely wrapped. Did you ever see the
child about whom there has been all this coil?" "Yes, about three years ago." "Three years! I have seen her within a fortnight; yet I could carry that
young one in my arms for a whole hour without the least suspicion that I
was making a fool of myself." Quickly slipping aside, he allowed me to approach the bed and take my
first look at the sleeping child's face. It was a sweet one but I did
not need the hint he had given me to find the features strange, and
lacking every characteristic of those of Gwendolen Ocumpaugh. Yet as the
cutting off of the hair will often change the whole aspect of the
face--and this child's hair was short--I was stooping in great
excitement to notice more particularly the contour of cheek and chin
which had given individuality to the little heiress, when the doctor
touched me on the arm and drew my attention to a pair of little trousers
and a shirt which were hanging on the door behind me. "Those are the clothes I came upon under that great shawl. The child I
have been following and whom I have brought into my house under the
impression it was Gwendolen Ocumpaugh is not even a girl." VII

"FIND THE CHILD!" I could well understand the wrath to which this man had given way, by
the feeling which now took hold of my own breast. "A boy!" I exclaimed. "A boy." Still incredulous, I leaned over the child and lifted into the full
light of the lamp one of the little hands I saw lying outside of the
coverlet. There was no mistaking it for a girl's hand, let alone a
little lady's. "So we are both fools!" I vociferated in my unbounded indignation,
careful however to lay the small hand gently back on the panting breast. And turning away both from the doctor and his small patient, I strolled
back into the office. The bubble whose gay colors I had followed with such avidity had burst
in my face with a vengeance. But once from under the influence of the doctor's sarcastic eye, my
better nature reasserted itself. Wheeling about, I threw this question
back:

"If that is a boy and a stranger, where is Gwendolen Ocumpaugh?" A moan from the bed and a hurried movement on the part of the doctor,
who took this opportunity to give the child another dose of medicine,
were my sole response. Waiting till the doctor had finished his task and
drawn back from the bedside, I repeated the question and with increased
emphasis:

"Where, then, is Gwendolen Ocumpaugh?" Still the doctor did not answer, though he turned my way and even
stepped forward; his long visage, cadaverous from fatigue and the shock
of his disappointment, growing more and more somber as he advanced. When he came to a stand by the table, I asked again:

"Where is the child idolized by Mr. Ocumpaugh and mourned to such a
degree by his almost maddened wife that they say she will die if the
little girl is not found?" The threat in my tones brought a response at last,--a response which
astonished me. "Have I not said that I do not know? Do you not believe me? Do you think
me as blind to-day to truth and honor as I was six years ago? Have you
no idea of repentance and regeneration from sin? You are a detective. Find me that child. You shall have money--hundreds--thousands--if you
can bring me proofs of her being yet alive. If the Hudson has swallowed
her--" here his figure rose, dilated and took on a majesty which
impressed itself upon me through all my doubts--"I will have vengeance
on whoever has thus dared the laws of God and man as I would on the
foulest murderer in the foulest slums of that city which breeds
wickedness in high places as in low. I lock hands no longer with Belial. Find me the child, or make me at least to know the truth!" There was no doubting the passion which drove these words hot from his
lips. I recognized at last the fanatic whom Miss Graham had so
graphically described in relating her extraordinary adventure on the
bridge; and met him with this one question, which was certainly a vital
one:

"Who dropped a shoe from the little one's closet, into the water under
the dock? Did you?" "No." His reply came quick and sharp. "But," I insisted, "you have had something to do with this child's
disappearance." He did not answer. A sullen look was displacing the fire of resolve in
the eyes I saw sinking slowly before mine. "I will not acknowledge it," he muttered; adding, however, in what was
little short of a growl: "Not yet, not till it becomes my duty to avenge
innocent blood." "You foretold the date." "Drop it." "You were in league with the abductor," I persisted. "I declare to your
face, in spite of all the vaunted scruples with which you seek to blind
me to your guilt, that you were in league with the abductor, knowing
what money Mrs. Ocumpaugh would pay. Only he was too smart for you, and
perhaps too unscrupulous. You would stop short of murder, now that you
have got religion. But his conscience is not so nice and so you fear--"

"You do not know what I fear and I am not going to tell you. It is
enough that I am conscious of my own uprightness and that I say, Find
the child! You have incentive enough." It was true and it was growing stronger every minute. "Confine yourself to such clues as are apparent to every eye," he now
admonished me with an eagerness that seemed real. "If they are pointed
by some special knowledge you believe yourself to have gained, that is
all the better--perhaps. I do not propose to say." I saw that he had uttered his ultimatum. "Very good," said I. "I have, nevertheless, one more question to ask
which relates to those very clues. You can not refuse to answer it if
you are really desirous of aiding me in my efforts. Where did you first
come upon the wagon which you followed so many hours in the belief that
it held Gwendolen Ocumpaugh?" He mused a moment with downcast head, his nervous frame trembling with
the force with which he threw his whole weight on the hand he held
outspread on the table before him. Then he calmly replied:

"I will tell you that. At the gate of Mrs. Carew's grounds. You know
them? They adjoin the Ocumpaughs' on the left." My surprise made me lower my head but not so quickly that I did not
catch the oblique glint of his eye as he mentioned the name which I was
so little prepared to hear in this connection. "I was in my buggy on the highroad," he continued. "There was a constant
passing by of all kinds of vehicles on their way to and from the
Ocumpaugh entertainment, but none that attracted my attention till I
caught sight of the covered wagon I have endeavored to describe, being
driven out of the adjoining grounds. 