



Produced by Andrew Wainwright, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                  THE

                            H E R A P A T H

                            P R O P E R T Y


                                   BY
                             J. S. FLETCHER


                                NEW YORK
                           ALFRED . A . KNOPF
                                MCMXXII




                          COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
                         ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.

                       _Published October, 1921_

                      _Second Printing, May, 1922_

                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

       I JACOB HERAPATH IS MISSING, 9
      II IS IT MURDER? 18
     III BARTHORPE TAKES CHARGE, 27
      IV THE PRESSMAN, 36
       V THE GLASS AND THE SANDWICH, 45
      VI THE TAXI-CAB DRIVER, 54
     VII IS THERE A WILL? 64
    VIII THE SECOND WITNESS, 74
      IX GREEK AGAINST GREEK, 83
       X MR. BENJAMIN HALFPENNY, 91
      XI THE SHADOW, 100
     XII FOR TEN PER CENT, 109
    XIII ADJOURNED, 118
     XIV THE SCOTTISH VERDICT, 127
      XV YOUNG BRAINS, 136
     XVI NAMELESS FEAR, 145
    XVII THE LAW, 154
   XVIII THE ROSEWOOD BOX, 163
     XIX WEAVING THE NET, 172
      XX THE DIAMOND RING, 181
     XXI THE DESERTED FLAT, 190
    XXII YEA AND NAY, 199
   XXIII THE ACCUSATION, 208
    XXIV COLD STEEL, 217
     XXV PROFESSIONAL ANALYSIS, 226
    XXVI THE REMAND PRISON, 235
   XXVII THE LAST CHEQUE, 244
  XXVIII THE HOTEL RAVENNA, 253
    XXIX THE NOTE IN THE PRAYER-BOOK, 263
     XXX THE WHITE-HAIRED LADY, 273
    XXXI THE INTERRUPTED DINNER-PARTY, 283
   XXXII THE YORKSHIRE PROVERB, 290
  XXXIII BURCHILL FILLS THE STAGE, 294
   XXXIV DAVIDGE'S TRUMP CARD, 304
    XXXV THE SECOND WARRANT, 312




                                 THE

                               HERAPATH

                               PROPERTY




CHAPTER I

JACOB HERAPATH IS MISSING


This was the third week of Selwood's secretaryship to Jacob Herapath. Herapath was a well-known man in London. He was a Member of Parliament,
the owner of a sort of model estate of up-to-date flats, and something
of a crank about such matters as ventilation, sanitation, and lighting. He himself, a bachelor, lived in one of the best houses in Portman
Square; when he engaged Selwood as his secretary he made him take a
convenient set of rooms in Upper Seymour Street, close by. He also
caused a telephone communication to be set up between his own house and
Selwood's bedroom, so that he could summon his secretary at any hour of
the night. Herapath occasionally had notions about things in the small
hours, and he was one of those active, restless persons who, if they get
a new idea, like to figure on it at once. All the same, during those
three weeks he had not once troubled his secretary in this fashion. No
call came to Selwood over that telephone until half-past seven one
November morning, just as he was thinking of getting out of bed. And the
voice which then greeted him was not Herapath's. It was a rather anxious,
troubled voice, and it belonged to one Kitteridge, a middle-aged man, who
was Herapath's butler. In the act of summoning Selwood, Kitteridge was evidently interrupted by
some person at his elbow; all that Selwood made out was that Kitteridge
wanted him to go round at once. He dressed hurriedly, and ran off to
Herapath's house; there in the hall, near the door of a room which
Herapath used as a study and business room, he found Kitteridge talking
to Mountain, Herapath's coachman, who, judging by the state of his
attire, had also been called hurriedly from his bed. "What is it, Kitteridge?" demanded Selwood. "Mr. Herapath ill?" The butler shook his head and jerked his thumb towards the open door of
the study. "The fact is, we don't know where Mr. Herapath is, sir," he answered. "He hasn't slept in his bed, and he isn't in the house." "Possibly he didn't come home last night," suggested Selwood. "He may
have slept at his club, or at an hotel." The butler and the coachman looked at each other--then the coachman, a
little, sharp-eyed man who was meditatively chewing a bit of straw,
opened his tightly-compressed lips. "He did come home, sir," he said. "I drove him home--as usual. I saw him
let himself into the house. One o'clock sharp, that was. Oh, yes, he
came home!" "He came home," repeated Kitteridge. "Look here, sir." He led the way
into the study and pointed to a small table set by the side of
Herapath's big business desk. "You see that tray, Mr. Selwood? That's
always left out, there, on that table, for Mr. Herapath every night. A
small decanter of whiskey, a syphon, a few sandwiches, a dry biscuit or
two. Well, there you are, sir--he's had a drink out of that glass, he's
had a mouthful or so of sandwiches. Oh, yes, he came home, but he's not
at home now! Charlesworth--the valet, you know, sir--always goes into
Mr. Herapath's room at a quarter past seven every morning; when he went
in just now he found that Mr. Herapath wasn't there, and the bed hadn't
been slept in. So--that's where things stand." Selwood looked round the room. The curtains had not yet been drawn
aside, and the electric light cast a cold glare on the various
well-known objects and fittings. He glanced at the evidences of the
supper tray; then at the blotting-pad on Herapath's desk; there he might
have left a note for his butler or his secretary. But there was no note
to be seen. "Still, I don't see that there's anything to be alarmed about,
Kitteridge," he said. "Mr. Herapath may have wanted to go somewhere by a
very early morning train----"

"No, sir, excuse me, that won't do," broke in the butler. "I thought of
that myself. But if he'd wanted to catch a night train, he'd have taken
a travelling coat, and a rug, and a bag of some sort--he's taken nothing
at all in that way. Besides, I've been in this house seven years, and I
know his habits. If he'd wanted to go away by one of the very early
morning trains he'd have kept me and Charlesworth up, making ready for
him. No, sir! He came home, and went out again--must have done. And--it's uncommonly queer. Seven years I've been here, as I say, and he
never did such a thing before." Selwood turned to the coachman. "You brought Mr. Herapath home at one o'clock?" he said. "Alone?" "He was alone, sir," replied the coachman, who had been staring around him
as if to seek some solution of the mystery. "I'll tell you all that
happened--I was just beginning to tell Mr. Kitteridge here when you come
in. I fetched Mr. Herapath from the House of Commons last night at a
quarter past eleven--took him up in Palace Yard at the usual spot, just as
the clock was striking. 'Mountain,' he says, 'I want you to drive round to
the estate office--I want to call there.' So I drove there--that's in
Kensington, as you know, sir. When he got out he says, 'Mountain,' he
says, 'I shall be three-quarters of an hour or so here--wrap the mare up
and walk her about,' he says. I did as he said, but he was more than
three-quarters--it was like an hour. Then at last he came back to the
brougham, just said one word, 'Home!' and I drove him here, and the clocks
were striking one when he got out. He said 'Good night,' and I saw him
walk up the steps and put his key in the latch as I drove off to our
stables. And that's all I know about it." Selwood turned to the butler. "I suppose no one was up at that time?" he inquired. "Nobody, sir," answered Kitteridge. "There never is. Mr. Herapath, as
you've no doubt observed, is a bit strict in the matter of rules, and
it's one of his rules that everybody in the house must be in bed by
eleven-thirty. No one was ever to sit up for him on any occasion. That's
why this supper-tray was always left ready. His usual time for coming in
when he'd been at the House was twelve o'clock." "Everybody in the house might be in bed," observed Selwood, "but not
everybody might be asleep. Have you made any inquiry as to whether
anybody heard Mr. Herapath moving about in the night, or leaving the
house? Somebody may have heard the hall door opened and closed, you
know." "I'll make inquiry as to that, sir," responded Kitteridge, "but I've
heard nothing of the sort so far, and all the servants are aware by now
that Mr. Herapath isn't in the house. If anybody had heard anything----"

Before the butler could say more the study door opened and a girl came
into the room. At sight of her Selwood spoke hurriedly to Kitteridge. "Have you told Miss Wynne?" he whispered. "Does she know?" "She may have heard from her maid, sir," replied Kitteridge in low
tones. "Of course they're all talking of it. I was going to ask to see
Miss Wynne as soon as she was dressed." By that time the girl had advanced towards the three men, and Selwood
stepped forward to meet her. He knew her as Herapath's niece, the
daughter of a dead sister of whom Herapath had been very fond; he knew,
too, that Herapath had brought her up from infancy and treated her as a
daughter. She was at this time a young woman of twenty-one or two, a
pretty, eminently likeable young woman, with signs of character and
resource in eyes and lips, and Selwood had seen enough of her to feel
sure that in any disturbing event she would keep her head. She spoke
calmly enough as the secretary met her. "What's all this, Mr. Selwood?" she asked. "I understand my uncle is not
in the house. But there's nothing alarming in that, Kitteridge, is
there? Mr. Herapath may have gone away during the night, you know." "Kitteridge thinks that highly improbable," replied Selwood. "He says
that Mr. Herapath had made no preparation for a sudden journey, has
taken no travelling coat or rug, or luggage of any sort." "Did he come in from the House?" she asked. "Perhaps not?" Kitteridge pointed to the supper-tray and then indicated the coachman. "He came in as usual, miss," he replied. "Or rather an hour later than
usual. Mountain brought him home at one o'clock, and he saw him let
himself in with his latch-key." Peggie Wynne turned to the coachman. "You're sure that he entered the house?" she asked. "As sure as I could be, miss," replied Mountain. "He was putting his key
in the door when I drove off." "He must have come in," said Kitteridge, pointing to the tray. "He had
something after he got in." "Well, go and tell the servants not to talk, Kitteridge," said Peggie. "My uncle, no doubt, had reasons for going out again. Have you said
anything to Mr. Tertius?" "Mr. Tertius isn't down yet, miss," answered the butler. He left the room, followed by the coachman, and Peggie turned to
Selwood. "What do you think?" she asked, with a slight show of anxiety. "You don't know of any reason for this, do you?" "None," replied Selwood. "And as to what I think, I don't know
sufficient about Mr. Herapath's habits to be able to judge." "He never did anything like this before," she remarked. "I know that he
sometimes gets up in the middle of the night and comes down here, but I
never knew him to go out. If he'd been setting off on a sudden journey
he'd surely have let me know. Perhaps----"

She paused suddenly, seeing Selwood lift his eyes from the papers
strewn about the desk to the door. She, too, turned in the same
direction. A man had come quietly into the room--a slightly-built, little man,
grey-bearded, delicate-looking, whose eyes were obscured by a pair of
dark-tinted spectacles. He moved gently and with an air of habitual
shyness, and Selwood, who was naturally observant, saw that his lips and
his hands were trembling slightly as he came towards them. "Mr. Tertius," said Peggie, "do you know anything about Uncle Jacob? He
came in during the night--one o'clock--and now he's disappeared. Did he
say anything to you about going away early this morning?" Mr. Tertius shook his head. "No--no--nothing!" he answered. "Disappeared! Is it certain he came in?" "Mountain saw him come in," she said. "Besides, he had a drink out of
that glass, and he ate something from the tray--see!" Mr. Tertius bent his spectacled eyes over the supper tray and remained
looking at what he saw there for a while. Then he looked up, and at
Selwood. "Strange!" he remarked. "And yet, you know, he is a man who does things
without saying a word to any one. Have you, now, thought of telephoning
to the estate office? He may have gone there." Peggie, who had dropped into the chair at Herapath's desk, immediately
jumped up. "Of course we must do that at once!" she exclaimed. "Come to the
telephone, Mr. Selwood--we may hear something." She and Selwood left the room together. When they had gone, Mr. Tertius
once more bent over the supper tray. He picked up the empty glass,
handling it delicately; he held it between himself and the electric
light over the desk; he narrowly inspected it, inside and out. Then he
turned his attention to the plate of sandwiches. One sandwich had been
taken from the plate and bitten into--once. Mr. Tertius took up that
sandwich with the tips of his delicately-shaped fingers. He held that,
too, nearer the light. And having looked at it he hastily selected an
envelope from the stationery cabinet on the desk, carefully placed the
sandwich within it, and set off to his own rooms in the upper part of
the house. As he passed through the hall he heard Selwood at the
telephone, which was installed in a small apartment at the foot of the
stairs--he was evidently already in communication with some one at the
Herapath Estate Office. Mr. Tertius went straight to his room, stayed there a couple of minutes,
and went downstairs again. Selwood and Peggie Wynne were just coming
away from the telephone; they looked up at him with faces grave with
concern. "We're wanted at the estate office," said Selwood. "The caretaker was
just going to ring us up when I got through to him. Something is
wrong--wrong with Mr. Herapath." CHAPTER II

IS IT MURDER? It struck Selwood, afterwards, as a significant thing that it was
neither he nor Mr. Tertius who took the first steps towards immediate
action. Even as he spoke, Peggie was summoning the butler, and her
orders were clear and precise. "Kitteridge," she said quietly, "order Robson to bring the car round at
once--as quickly as possible. In the meantime, send some coffee into the
breakfast-room--breakfast itself must wait until we return. Make haste,
Kitteridge." Selwood turned on her with a doubtful look. "You--you aren't going down there?" he asked. "Of course I am!" she answered. "Do you think I should wait here--wondering
what had happened? We will all go--come and have some coffee, both of you,
while we wait for the car." The two followed her into the breakfast-room and silently drank the
coffee which she presently poured out for them. She, too, was silent,
but when she had left the room to make ready for the drive Mr. Tertius
turned to Selwood. "You heard--what?" he asked. "Nothing definite," answered Selwood. "All I heard was that Mr.
Herapath was there, and there was something seriously wrong, and would
we go down at once." Mr. Tertius made no comment. He became thoughtful and abstracted, and
remained so during the journey down to Kensington. Peggie, too, said
nothing as they sped along; as for Selwood, he was wondering what had
happened, and reflecting on this sudden stirring up of mystery. There was
mystery within that car--in the person of Mr. Tertius. During his three
weeks' knowledge of the Herapath household Selwood had constantly wondered
who Mr. Tertius was, what his exact relationship was, what his position
really was. He knew that he lived in Jacob Herapath's house, but in a
sense he was not of the family. He seldom presented himself at Herapath's
table, he was rarely seen about the house; Selwood remembered seeing him
occasionally in Herapath's study or in Peggie Wynne's drawing-room. He had
learnt sufficient to know that Mr. Tertius had rooms of his own in the
house; two rooms in some upper region; one room on the ground-floor. Once
Selwood had gained a peep into that ground-floor room, and had seen that
it was filled with books, and that its table was crowded with papers, and
he had formed the notion that Mr. Tertius was some book-worm or antiquary,
to whom Jacob Herapath for some reason or other gave house-room. That
he was no relation Selwood judged from the way in which he was always
addressed by Herapath and by Peggie Wynne. To them as to all the servants
he was Mr. Tertius--whether that was his surname or not, Selwood did not
know. There was nothing mysterious or doubtful about the great pile of buildings
at which the automobile presently stopped. They were practical and
concrete facts. Most people in London knew the famous Herapath Flats--they
had aroused public interest from the time that their founder began
building them. Jacob Herapath, a speculator in real estate, had always cherished a
notion of building a mass of high-class residential flats on the most
modern lines. Nothing of the sort which he contemplated, he said,
existed in London--when the opportunity came he would show the building
world what could and should be done. The opportunity came when a parcel
of land in Kensington fell into the market--Jacob Herapath made haste to
purchase it, and he immediately began building on it. The result was a
magnificent mass of buildings which possessed every advantage and
convenience--to live in a Herapath flat was to live in luxury. Incidentally, no one could live in one who was not prepared to pay a
rental of anything from five to fifteen hundred a year. The gross rental
of the Herapath Flats was enormous--the net profits were enough to make
even a wealthy man's mouth water. And Selwood, who already knew all
this, wondered, as they drove away, where all this wealth would go if
anything had really happened to its creator. The entrance to the Herapath estate office was in an archway which led
to one of the inner squares of the great buildings. When the car stopped
at it, Selwood saw that there were police within the open doorway. One
of them, an inspector, came forward, looking dubiously at Peggie Wynne. Selwood hastened out of the car and made for him. "I'm Mr. Herapath's secretary--Mr. Selwood," he said, drawing the
inspector out of earshot. "Is anything seriously wrong?--better tell me
before Miss Wynne hears. He isn't--dead?" The inspector gave him a warning look. "That's it, sir," he answered in a low voice. "Found dead by the
caretaker in his private office. And it's here--Mr. Selwood, it's either
suicide or murder. That's flat!" Selwood got his two companions inside the building and into a waiting-room. Peggie turned on him at once. "I see you know," she said. "Tell me at once what it is. Don't be afraid,
Mr. Selwood--I'm not likely to faint nor to go into hysterics. Neither is
Mr. Tertius. Tell us--is it the worst?" "Yes," said Selwood. "It is." "He is dead?" she asked in a low voice. "You are sure? Dead?" Selwood bent his head by way of answer; when he looked up again the girl
had bent hers, but she quickly lifted it, and except that she had grown
pale, she showed no outward sign of shock or emotion. As for Mr.
Tertius, he, too, was calm--and it was he who first broke the silence. "How was it?" he asked. "A seizure?" Selwood hesitated. Then, seeing that he had to deal with two people who
were obviously in full control of themselves, he decided to tell the
truth. "I'm afraid you must be prepared to hear some unpleasant news," he said,
with a glance at the inspector, who just then quietly entered the room. "The police say it is either a case of suicide or of murder." Peggie looked sharply from Selwood to the police official, and a sudden
flush of colour flamed into her cheeks. "Suicide?" she exclaimed. "Never! Murder? That may be. Tell me what you
have found," she went on eagerly. "Don't keep things back!--don't you
see I want to know?" The inspector closed the door and came nearer to where the three were
standing. "Perhaps I'd better tell you what we do know," he said. "Our station was
rung up by the caretaker here at five minutes past eight. He said Mr.
Herapath had just been found lying on the floor of his private room, and
they were sure something was wrong, and would we come round. I came
myself with one of our plain-clothes men who happened to be in, and our
surgeon followed us a few minutes later. We found Mr. Herapath lying
across the hearthrug in his private room, quite dead. Close by----" He
paused and looked dubiously at Peggie. "The details are not pleasant,"
he said meaningly. "Shall I omit them?" "No!" answered Peggie with decision. "Please omit nothing. Tell us
all." "There was a revolver lying close by Mr. Herapath's right hand,"
continued the inspector. "One chamber had been discharged. Mr. Herapath
had been shot through the right temple, evidently at close quarters. I
should say--and our surgeon says--he had died instantly. And--I think
that's all I need say just now." Peggie, who had listened to this with unmoved countenance, involuntarily
stepped towards the door. "Let us go to him," she said. "I suppose he's still here?" But there Selwood, just as involuntarily, asserted an uncontrollable
instinct. He put himself between the door and the girl. "No!" he said firmly, wondering at himself for his insistence. "Don't! There's no need for that--yet. You mustn't go. Mr. Tertius----"

"Better not just yet, miss," broke in the inspector. "The doctor is
still here. Afterwards, perhaps. If you would wait here while these
gentlemen go with me." Peggie hesitated a moment; then she turned away and sat down. "Very well," she said. The inspector silently motioned the two men to follow him; with his hand
on the door Selwood turned again to Peggie. "You will stay here?" he said. "You won't follow us?" "I shall stay here," she answered. "Stop a minute--there's one thing
that should be thought of. My cousin Barthorpe----"

"Mr. Barthorpe Herapath has been sent for, miss--he'll be here
presently," replied the inspector. "The caretaker's telephoned to him. Now gentlemen." He led the way along a corridor to a room with which Selwood was
familiar enough--an apartment of some size which Jacob Herapath used as
a business office and kept sacred to himself and his secretary. When he
was in it no one ever entered that room except at Herapath's bidding;
now there were strangers in it who had come there unbidden, and Herapath
lay in their midst, silent for ever. They had laid the lifeless body on
a couch, and Selwood and Mr. Tertius bent over it for a moment before
they turned to the other men in the room. The dead face was calm enough;
there was no trace of sudden fear on it, no signs of surprise or anger
or violent passion. "If you'll look here, gentlemen," said the police-inspector, motioning
them towards the broad hearthrug. "This is how things were--nothing had
been touched when we arrived. He was lying from there to here--he'd
evidently slipped down and sideways out of that chair, and had fallen
across the rug. The revolver was lying a few inches from his right hand. Here it is." He pulled open a drawer as he spoke and produced a revolver which he
carefully handled as he showed it to Selwood and Mr. Tertius. "Have either of you gentlemen ever seen that before?" he asked. "I
mean--do you recognize it as having belonged to--him? You don't? Never
seen it before, either of you? Well, of course he might have kept a
revolver in his private desk or in his safe, and nobody would have
known. We shall have to make an exhaustive search and see if we can find
any cartridges or anything. However, that's what we found--and, as I
said before, one chamber had been discharged. The doctor here says the
revolver had been fired at close quarters." Mr. Tertius, who had watched and listened with marked attention, turned
to the police surgeon. "The wound may have been self-inflicted?" he asked. "From the position of the body, and of the revolver, there is strong
presumption that it was," replied the doctor. "Yet--it may not have been?" suggested Mr. Tertius, mildly. The doctor shrugged his shoulders. It was easy to see what his own
opinion was. "It may not have been--as you say," he answered. "But if he was shot by
some other person--murdered, that is--the murderer must have been
standing either close at his side, or immediately behind him. Of this I
am certain--he was sitting in that chair, at his desk, when the shot was
fired." "And--what would the immediate effect be?" asked Mr. Tertius. "He would probably start violently, make as if to rise, drop forward
against the desk and gradually--but quickly--subside to the floor in the
position in which he was found," replied the doctor. "As he fell he
would relinquish his grip on the revolver--it is invariably a tight grip
in these cases--and it would fall--just where it was found." "Still, there is nothing to disprove the theory that the revolver may
have been placed--where it was found?" suggested Mr. Tertius. "Oh, certainly it may have been placed there!" said the doctor, with
another shrug of the shoulders. "A cool and calculating murderer may
have placed it there, of course." "Just so," agreed Mr. Tertius. He remained silently gazing at the
hearthrug for a while; then he turned to the doctor again. "Now, how
long do you think Mr. Herapath had been dead when you were called to the
body?" he asked. "Quite eight hours," answered the doctor promptly. "Eight hours!" exclaimed Mr. Tertius. "And you first saw him at----"

"A quarter past eight," said the doctor. "I should say he died just
about midnight." "Midnight!" murmured Mr. Tertius. "Midnight? Then----"

Before he could say more, a policeman, stationed in the corridor
outside, opened the door of the room, and glancing at his inspector,
announced the arrival of Mr. Barthorpe Herapath. CHAPTER III

BARTHORPE TAKES CHARGE


The man who strode into the room as the policeman threw the door open for
him immediately made two distinct impressions on the inspector and the
doctor, neither of whom had ever seen him before. The first was that he
instantly conveyed a sense of alert coolness and self-possession; the
second that, allowing for differences of age, he was singularly like the
dead man who lay in their midst. Both were tall, well-made men; both were
clean-shaven; both were much alike as to feature and appearance. Apart
from the fact that Jacob Herapath was a man of sixty and grey-haired, and
his nephew one of thirty to thirty-five and dark-haired, they were very
much alike--the same mould of nose, mouth, and chin, the same strength of
form. The doctor noted this resemblance particularly, and he involuntarily
glanced from the living to the dead. Barthorpe Herapath bent over his dead uncle for no more than a minute. His face was impassive, almost stern as he turned to the others. He
nodded slightly to Mr. Tertius and to Selwood; then he gave his
attention to the officials. "Yes?" he said inquiringly and yet with a certain tone of command. "Now
tell me all you know of this." He stood listening silently, with concentrated attention, as the
inspector put him in possession of the facts already known. He made no
comment, asked no questions, until the inspector had finished; then he
turned to Selwood, almost pointedly ignoring Mr. Tertius. "What is known of this in Portman Square, Mr. Selwood?" he inquired. "Tell me, briefly." Selwood, who had only met Barthorpe Herapath once or twice, and who had
formed an instinctive and peculiar dislike to him, for which he could
not account, accepted the invitation to be brief. In a few words he told
exactly what had happened at Jacob Herapath's house. "My cousin is here, then?" exclaimed Barthorpe. "Miss Wynne is in the larger waiting-room down the corridor," replied
Selwood. "I will go to her in a minute," said Barthorpe. "Now, inspector, there
are certain things to be done at once. There will, of course, have to be
an inquest--your people must give immediate notice to the coroner. Then--the body--that must be properly attended to--that, too, you will
see about. Before you go away yourself, I want you to join me in
collecting all the evidence we can get on the spot. You have one of your
detective staff here?--good. Now, have you searched--him?" The inspector drew open a drawer in the front desk which occupied the
centre of the room, and pointed to some articles which lay within. "Everything that we found upon him is in there," he answered. "You see
there is not much--watch and chain, pocket articles, a purse, some loose
money, a pocket-book, a cigar-case--that's all. One matter I should have
expected to find, we didn't find." "What's that?" asked Barthorpe quickly. "Keys," answered the inspector. "We found no keys on him--not even a
latch-key. Yet he must have let himself in here, and I understand from
the caretaker that he must have unlocked this door after he'd entered by
the outer one." Barthorpe made no immediate answer beyond a murmur of perplexity. "Strange," he said after a pause, during which he bent over the open
drawer. "However, that's one of the things to be gone into. Close that
drawer, lock it up, and for the present keep the key yourself--you and I
will examine the contents later. Now for these immediate inquiries. Mr.
Selwood, will you please telephone at once to Portman Square and tell
Kitteridge to send Mountain, the coachman, here--instantly. Tell
Kitteridge to come with him. Inspector, will you see to this arrangement
we spoke of, and also tell the caretaker that we shall want him
presently? Now I will go to my cousin." He strode off, still alert, composed, almost bustling in his demeanour,
to the waiting-room in which they had left Peggie--a moment later,
Selwood, following him down the corridor, saw him enter and close the
door. And Selwood cursed himself for a fool for hating to think that
these two should be closeted together, for disliking the notion that
Barthorpe Herapath was Peggie Wynne's cousin--and now, probably, her
guardian protector. For during those three weeks in which he had been
Jacob Herapath's secretary, Selwood had seen a good deal of his
employer's niece, and he was already well over the verge of falling in
love with her, and was furious with himself for daring to think of a
girl who was surely one of the richest heiresses in London. He was angry
with himself, too, for disliking Barthorpe, for he was inclined to
cultivate common-sense, and common-sense coldly reminded him that he did
not know Barthorpe Herapath well enough to either like or dislike him. Half an hour passed--affairs suggestive of the tragedy of the night went
on in the Herapath Estate Office. Two women in the garb of professional
nurses came quietly, and passed into the room where Herapath lay dead. A
man arrayed in dismal black came after them, summoned by the police who
were busy at the telephone as soon as Selwood had finished with it. Selwood himself, having summoned Kitteridge and Mountain, hung about,
waiting. He heard the police talking in undertones of clues and
theories, and of a coroner's inquest, and the like; now and then he
looked curiously at Mr. Tertius, who had taken a seat in the hall and
was apparently wrapped in meditation. And still Barthorpe Herapath
remained closeted with Peggie Wynne. A taxi drove up and deposited the butler and the coachman at the door. Selwood motioned them inside. "Mr. Barthorpe Herapath wants both of you," he said curtly. "I suppose
he will ask for you presently." Kitteridge let out an anxious inquiry. "The master, sir?" he exclaimed. "Is----"

"Good heavens!" muttered Selwood. "I--of course, you don't know. Mr.
Herapath is dead." The two servants started and stared at each other. Before either could
speak Barthorpe Herapath suddenly emerged from the waiting-room and
looked round the hall. He beckoned to the inspector, who was talking in
low tones with the detective, at a little distance. "Now, inspector," he said, "will you and your officer come in? And the
caretaker--and you, Kitteridge, and you, Mountain. Mr. Selwood, will you
come in, too?" He stood at the door while those he had invited inside passed into the
room where Peggie still sat. And as he stood there, and Selwood wound up
the little procession, Mr. Tertius rose and also made as if to join the
others. Barthorpe stopped him by intruding himself between him and the
door. "This is a private inquiry of my own, Mr. Tertius," he said, with a
meaning look. Selwood, turning in sheer surprise at this announcement, so pointed and
so unmistakable, saw a faint tinge of colour mount to the elder man's
usually pale cheeks. Mr. Tertius stopped sharply and looked at Barthorpe
in genuine surprise. "You do not wish me to enter--to be present?" he faltered. "Frankly, I don't," said Barthorpe, with aggressive plainness. "There
will be a public inquiry--I can't stop you from attending that." Mr. Tertius drew back. He stood for a moment staring hard at Barthorpe;
then, with a slight, scarcely perceivable bow, he turned away, crossed
the hall, and went out of the front door. And Barthorpe Herapath
laughed--a low, sneering laugh--and following the other men into the
waiting-room, locked the door upon those assembled there. As if he and
they were assembled on some cut-and-dried business matter, he waved them
all to chairs, and himself dropped into one at the head of the table,
close to that in which Peggie was sitting. "Now, inspector," he began, "you and I must get what we may as well call
first information about this matter. There will be a vast amount of
special and particular investigation later on, but I want us, at the
very outset, while facts are fresh in the mind, to get certain
happenings clearly before us. And for this reason--I understand that the
police-surgeon is of opinion that my uncle committed suicide. With all
respect to him--I'm sorry he's gone before I could talk to him--that
theory cannot be held for an instant! My cousin, Miss Wynne, and I knew
our uncle far too well to believe that theory for a single moment, and
we shall combat it by every means in our power when the inquest is held. No--my uncle was murdered! Now I want to know all I can get to know of
his movements last night. And first I think we'll hear what the
caretaker can tell us. Hancock," he continued, turning to an elderly man
who looked like an ex-soldier, "I understand you found my uncle's body?" The caretaker, obviously much upset by the affairs of the morning,
pulled himself up to attention. "I did, sir," he replied. "What time was that?" "Just eight o'clock, sir--that's my usual time for opening the office." "Tell us exactly how you found him, Hancock." "I opened the door of Mr. Herapath's private room, sir, to pull up the
blinds and open the window. When I walked in I saw him lying across the
hearth-rug. Then I noticed the--the revolver." "And of course that gave you a turn. What did you do? Go into the room?" "No, sir! I shut the door again, went straight to the telephone and rang
up the police-station. Then I waited at the front door till the
inspector there came along." "Was the front door fastened as usual when you went to it at that time?" "It was fastened as it always is, sir, by the latch. It was Mr. Herapath's
particular orders that it never should be fastened any other way at night,
because he sometimes came in at night, with his latch-key." "Just so. Now these offices are quite apart and distinct from the rest
of the building--mark that, inspector! There's no way out of them into
the building, nor any way out of the building into them. In fact, the
only entrance into these offices is by the front door. Isn't that so,
Hancock?" "That's quite so, sir--only that one door." "No area entrance or side-door?" "None, sir--nothing but that." "And the only tenants in here--these offices--at night are you and your
wife, Hancock?" "That's all, sir." "Now, where are your rooms?" "We've two rooms in the basement, sir--living-room and kitchen--and two
rooms on the top floor--a bedroom and a bathroom." "On the top-floor. How many floors are there?" "Well, sir, there's the basement--then there's this--then there's two
floors that's used by the clerks--then there's ours." "That's to say there are two floors between your bedroom and this ground
floor?" "Yes, sir--two." "Very well. Now, about last night. What time did you and your wife go to
bed?" "Eleven o'clock, sir--half an hour later than usual." "You'd previously looked round, I suppose?" "Been all round, sir--I always look into every room in the place last
thing at night--thoroughly." "Are you and your wife sound sleepers?" "Yes, sir--both of us. Good sleepers." "You heard no sound after you got to bed?" "Nothing, sir--neither of us." "No recollection of hearing a revolver shot?--not even as if it were a
long way off?" "No, sir--we never heard anything--nothing unusual, at any rate." "You heard no sound of doors opening or being shut, nor of any
conveyance coming to the door?" "No, sir, nothing at all." "Well, one or two more questions, Hancock. You didn't go into the room
after first catching sight of the body? Just so--but you'd notice
things, even in a hurried glance. Did you notice any sign of a
struggle--overturned chair or anything?" "No, sir. I did notice that Mr. Herapath's elbow chair, that he always
sat in at his desk, was pushed back a bit, and was a bit on one side as
it were. That was all." "And the light--the electric light? Was that on?" "No, sir." "Then all you can tell us comes to this--that you never heard anything,
and had no notion of what was happening, or had happened, until you came
down in the morning?" "Just so, sir. If I'd known what was going on, or had gone on, I should
have been down at once." Barthorpe nodded and turned to the coachman. "Now, Mountain," he said. "We want to hear your story. Be careful about
your facts--what you can tell us is probably of the utmost importance." CHAPTER IV

THE PRESSMAN


The coachman, thus admonished, unconsciously edged his chair a little
nearer to the table at which Barthorpe Herapath sat, and looked
anxiously at his interrogator. He was a little, shrewd-eyed fellow, and
it seemed to Selwood, who had watched him carefully during the informal
examination to which Barthorpe had subjected the caretaker, that he had
begun to think deeply over some new presentiment of this mystery which
was slowly shaping itself in his mind. "I understand, Mountain, that you fetched Mr. Herapath from the House of
Commons last night?" began Barthorpe. "You fetched him in the brougham,
I believe?" "Yes, sir," answered the coachman. "Mr. Herapath always had the brougham
at night--and most times, too, sir. Never took kindly to the motor,
sir." "Where did you meet him, Mountain?" "Usual place, sir--in Palace Yard--just outside the Hall." "What time was that?" "Quarter past eleven, exactly, sir--the clock was just chiming the
quarter as he came out." "Was Mr. Herapath alone when he came out?" "No sir. He came out with another gentleman--a stranger to me, sir. The
two of 'em stood talking a bit a yard or two away from the brougham." "Did you hear anything they said?" "Just a word or two from Mr. Herapath, sir, as him and the other
gentleman parted." "What were they?--tell us the words, as near as you can remember." "Mr. Herapath said, 'Have it ready for me tomorrow, and I'll look in at
your place about noon.' That's all, sir." "What happened then?" "The other gentleman went off across the Yard, sir, and Mr. Herapath came
to the brougham, and told me to drive him to the estate office--here,
sir." "You drove him up to this door, I suppose?" "No, sir. Mr. Herapath never was driven up to the door--he always got
out of the brougham in the road outside and walked up the archway. He
did that last night." "From where you pulled up could you see if there was any light in these
offices?" "No, sir--I pulled up just short of the entrance to the archway." "Did Mr. Herapath say anything to you when he got out?" "Yes, sir. He said he should most likely be three-quarters of an hour
here, and that I'd better put a rug over the mare and walk her about." "Then I suppose he went up the archway. Now, did you see anybody about
the entrance? Did you see any person waiting as if to meet him? Did he
meet anybody?" "I saw no one, sir. As soon as he'd gone up the archway I threw a rug
over the mare and walked her round and round the square across the
road." "You heard and saw nothing of him until he came out again?" "Nothing, sir." "And how long was he away from you?" "Nearer an hour than three-quarters, sir." "Were you in full view of the entrance all that time?" "No, sir, I wasn't. Some of the time I was--some of it I'd my back to
it." "You never saw any one enter the archway during the time Mr. Herapath
was in the office?" "No, sir." "All the same, some one could have come here during that time without
your seeing him?" "Oh, yes, sir!" "Well, at last Mr. Herapath came out. Where did he rejoin you?" "In the middle of the road, sir--right opposite that statue in the
Square gardens." "Did he say anything particular then?" "No, sir. He walked sharply across, opened the door, said 'Home' and
jumped in." "You didn't notice anything unusual about him?" "Nothing, sir--unless it was that he hung his head down rather as he
came across--same as if he was thinking hard, sir." "You drove straight home to Portman Square, then. What time did you get
there?" "Exactly one o'clock, sir." "You're certain about that time?" "Certain, sir. It was just five minutes past one when I drove into our
mews." "Now, then, be careful about this, Mountain. I want to know exactly what
happened when you drove up to the house. Tell us in your own way." The coachman looked round amongst the listeners as if he were a little
perplexed. "Why, sir," he answered, turning back to Barthorpe, "there
was nothing happened! At least, I mean to say, there was nothing
happened that didn't always happen on such occasions--Mr. Herapath got
out of the brougham, shut the door, said 'Good night,' and went up the
steps, taking his latch-key out of his pocket as he crossed the
pavement, sir. That was all, sir." "Did you actually see him enter the house?" "No, sir," replied Mountain, with a decisive shake of the head. "I
couldn't say that I did that. I saw him just putting the key in the
latch as I drove off." "And that's all you know?" "That's all I know, sir--all." Barthorpe, after a moment's hesitation, turned to the police-inspector. "Is there anything that occurs to you?" he asked. "One or two things occur to me," answered the inspector. "But I'm not
going to ask any questions now. I suppose all you want at present is to
get a rough notion of how things were last night?" "Just so," assented Barthorpe. "A rough notion--that's it. Well,
Kitteridge, it's your turn. Who found out that Mr. Herapath wasn't in
the house this morning?" "Charlesworth, sir--Mr. Herapath's valet," replied the butler. "He
always called Mr. Herapath at a quarter past seven every morning. When
he went into the bedroom this morning Mr. Herapath wasn't there, and the
bed hadn't been slept in. Then Charlesworth came and told me, sir, and
of course I went to the study at once, and then I saw that, wherever Mr.
Herapath might be then, he certainly had been home." "You judged that from--what?" asked Barthorpe. "Well, sir, it's been the rule to leave a supper-tray out for Mr.
Herapath. Not much, sir--whisky and soda, a sandwich or two, a dry
biscuit. I saw that he'd had something, sir." "Somebody else might have had it--eh?" "Yes, sir, but then you see, I'd had Mountain fetched by that time, and
he told me that he'd seen Mr. Herapath letting himself in at one
o'clock. So of course I knew the master had been in." Barthorpe hesitated, seemed to ponder matters for a moment, and then
rose. "I don't think we need go into things any further just now," he
said. "You, Kitteridge, and you, Mountain, can go home. Don't talk--that
is, don't talk any more than is necessary. I suppose," he went on,
turning to the inspector when the two servants and the caretaker had
left the room. "I suppose you'll see to all the arrangements we spoke
of?" "They're being carried out already," answered the inspector. "Of
course," he added, drawing closer to Barthorpe and speaking in lower
tones, "when the body's been removed, you'll join me in making a
thorough inspection of the room? We haven't done that yet, you know, and
it should be done. Wouldn't it be best," he continued with a glance at
Peggie and a further lowering of his voice, "if the young lady went back
to Portman Square?" "Just so, just so--I'll see to it," answered Barthorpe. "You go and keep
people out of the way for a few minutes, and I'll get her off." He
turned to his cousin when the two officers had left the room and
motioned her to rise. "Now, Peggie," he said, "you must go home. I shall
come along there myself in an hour or two--there are things to be done
which you and I must do together. Mr. Selwood--will you take Miss Wynne
out to the car? And then, please, come back to me--I want your
assistance for a while." Peggie walked out of the room and to the car without demur or comment. But as she was about to take her seat she turned to Selwood. "Why didn't Mr. Tertius come into the room just now?" she demanded. Selwood hesitated. Until then he had thought that Peggie had heard the
brief exchange of words between Barthorpe and Mr. Tertius at the door. "Didn't you hear what was said at the door when we were all coming in?" he asked suddenly, looking attentively at her. "I heard my cousin and Mr. Tertius talking, but I couldn't catch what
was said," she replied. "If you did, tell me--I want to know." "Mr. Barthorpe Herapath refused to admit Mr. Tertius," said Selwood. "Refused?" she exclaimed. "Refused?" "Refused," repeated Selwood. "That's all I know." Peggie sat down and gave him an enigmatic look. "You, of course, will come back to the house when--when you've finished
here?" she said. "I don't know--I suppose--really, I don't know," answered Selwood. "You
see, I--I, of course, don't know exactly where I am, now. I suppose I
must take my orders from--your cousin." Peggie gave him another look, more enigmatic than the other. "That's nonsense!" she said sharply. "Of course, you'll come. Do
whatever it is that Barthorpe wants just now, but come on to Portman
Square as soon as you've done it--I want you. Go straight home, Robson,"
she went on, turning to the chauffeur. Selwood turned slowly and unwillingly back to the office door as the car
moved off. And as he set his foot on the first step a young man came
running up the entry--not hurrying but running--and caught him up and
hailed him. "Mr. Selwood?" he said, pantingly. "You'll excuse me--you're Mr.
Herapath's secretary, aren't you?--I've seen you with him. I'm Mr.
Triffitt, of the _Argus_--I happened to call in at the police-station
just now, and they told me of what had happened here, so I rushed along. Will you tell me all about it, Mr. Selwood?--it'll be a real scoop for
me--I'll hustle down to the office with it at once, and we'll have a
special out in no time. And whether you know it or not, that'll help the
police. Give me the facts, Mr. Selwood!" Selwood stared at the ardent collector of news; then he motioned him to
follow, and led him into the hall to where Barthorpe Herapath was
standing with the police-inspector. "This is a newspaper man," he said laconically, looking at Barthorpe. "Mr. Triffitt, of the _Argus_. He wants the facts of this affair." Barthorpe turned and looked the new-comer up and down. Triffitt, who had
almost recovered his breath, pulled out a card and presented it with a
bow. And Barthorpe suddenly seemed to form a conclusion. "All right!" he said. "Mr. Selwood, you know all the facts. Take Mr.
Triffitt into that room we've just left, and give him a resume of them. And--listen! we can make use of the press. Mention two matters, which
seem to me to be of importance. Tell of the man who came out of the
House of Commons with my uncle last night--ask him if he'll come
forward. And, as my uncle must have returned to this office after he'd
been home, and as he certainly wouldn't walk here, ask for information
as to who drove him down to Kensington from Portman Square. Don't tell
this man too much--give him the bare outlines on how matters stand." The reporter wrote at lightning speed while Selwood, who had some
experience of condensation, gave him the news he wanted. Finding that he
was getting a first-class story, Triffitt asked no questions and made no
interruptions. But when Selwood was through with the account, he looked
across the table with a queer glance of the eye. "I say!" he said. "This is a strange case!" "Why so strange?" asked Selwood. "Why? Great Scott!--I reckon it's an uncommonly strange case," exclaimed
Triffitt. "It's about a dead certainty that Herapath was in his own
house at Portman Square at one o'clock, isn't it?" "Well?" said Selwood. "And yet according to the doctor who examined him at eight o'clock he'd
been dead quite eight hours!" said Triffitt. "That means he died at
twelve o'clock--an hour before he's supposed to have been at his house! Queer! But all the queerer, all the better--for me! Now I'm off--for the
present. This'll be on the streets in an hour, Mr. Selwood. Nothing like
the press, sir!" Therewith he fled, and the secretary suddenly found himself confronting
a new idea. If the doctor was right and Jacob Herapath had been shot
dead at midnight, how on earth could he possibly have been in Portman
Square at one o'clock, an hour later? CHAPTER V

THE GLASS AND THE SANDWICH


Mr. Tertius, dismissed in such cavalier fashion by Barthorpe Herapath,
walked out of the estate office with downcast head--a superficial
observer might have said that he was thoroughly crestfallen and
brow-beaten. But by the time he had reached the road outside, the two
faint spots of colour which had flushed his cheeks when Barthorpe turned
him away had vanished, and he was calm and collected enough when, seeing
a disengaged taxi-cab passing by, he put up his hand and hailed it. The
voice which bade the driver go to Portman Square was calm enough,
too--Mr. Tertius had too much serious work immediately in prospect to
allow himself to be disturbed by a rudeness. He thought deeply about that work as the taxi-cab whirled him along; he
was still thinking about it when he walked into the big house in Portman
Square. In there everything was very quiet. The butler was away at
Kensington; the other servants were busily discussing the mystery of
their master in their own regions. No one was aware that Mr. Tertius had
returned, for he let himself into the house with his own latch-key, and
went straight into Herapath's study. There, if possible, everything was
still quieter--the gloom of the dull November morning seemed to be
doubly accentuated in the nooks and corners; there was a sense of
solitude which was well in keeping with Mr. Tertius's knowledge of what
had happened. He looked at the vacant chair in which he had so often
seen Jacob Herapath sitting, hard at work, active, bustling, intent on
getting all he could out of every minute of his working day, and he
sighed deeply. But in the moment of sighing Mr. Tertius reflected that there was no
time for regret. It was a time--his time--for action; there was a thing
to do which he wanted to do while he had the room to himself. Therefore
he went to work, carefully and methodically. For a second or two he
stood reflectively looking at the supper tray which still stood on the
little table near the desk. With a light, delicate touch he picked up
the glass which had been used and held it up to the light. He put it
down again presently, went quietly out of the study to the dining-room
across the hall, and returned at once with another glass precisely
similar in make and pattern to the one which he had placed aside. Into
that clear glass he poured some whisky, afterwards mixing with it some
soda-water from the syphon--this mixture he poured away into the soil of
a flower-pot which stood in the window. And that done he placed the
second glass on the tray in the place where the first had stood, and
picking up the first, in the same light, gingerly fashion, he went
upstairs to his own rooms at the top of the house. Five minutes later Mr. Tertius emerged from his rooms. He then carried
in his hand a small, square bag, and he took great care to handle it
very carefully as he went downstairs and into the square. At the corner
of Orchard Street he got another taxi-cab and bade the driver go to
Endsleigh Gardens. And during the drive he took the greatest pains to
nurse the little bag on his knee, thereby preserving the equilibrium of
the glass inside it. Ringing the bell of one of the houses in Endsleigh Gardens, Mr. Tertius
was presently confronted by a trim parlourmaid, whose smile was ample
proof that the caller was well-known to her. "Is the Professor in, Mary?" asked Mr. Tertius. "And if he is, is he
engaged?" The trim parlourmaid replied that the Professor was in, and that she
hadn't heard that he was particularly engaged, and she immediately
preceded the visitor up a flight or two of stairs to a door, which in
addition to being thickly covered with green felt, was set in flanges of
rubber--these precautions being taken, of course, to ensure silence in
the apartment within. An electric bell was set in the door; a moment or
two elapsed before any response was made to the parlourmaid's ring. Then
the door automatically opened, the parlourmaid smiled at Mr. Tertius and
retired; Mr. Tertius walked in; the door closed softly behind him. The room in which the visitor found himself was a large and lofty one,
lighted from the roof, from which it was also ventilated by a patent
arrangement of electric fans. Everything that met the view betokened
science, order, and method. The walls, destitute of picture or ornament,
were of a smooth neutral tinted plaster; where they met the floor the
corners were all carefully rounded off so that no dust could gather in
cracks and crevices; the floor, too, was of smooth cement; there was no
spot in which a speck of dust could settle in improper peace. A series
of benches ran round the room, and gave harbourings to a collection of
scientific instruments of strange appearance and shape; two large
tables, one at either end of the room, were similarly equipped. And at a
desk placed between them, and just then occupied in writing in a
note-book, sat a large man, whose big muscular body was enveloped in a
brown holland blouse or overall, fashioned something like a smock-frock
of the old-fashioned rural labourer. He lifted a colossal, mop-like head
and a huge hand as Mr. Tertius stepped across the threshold, and his
spectacled eyes twinkled as their glance fell on the bag which the
visitor carried so gingerly. "Hullo, Tertius!" exclaimed the big man, in a deep, rich voice. "What
have you got there? Specimens?" Mr. Tertius looked round for a quite empty space on the adjacent bench,
and at last seeing one, set his bag down upon it, and sighed with
relief. "My dear Cox-Raythwaite!" he said, mopping his forehead with a bandanna
handkerchief which he drew from the tail of his coat. "I am thankful to
have got these things here in--I devoutly trust!--safety. Specimens? Well, not exactly; though, to be sure, they may be specimens of--I don't
quite know what villainy yet. Objects?--certainly! Perhaps, my dear
Professor, you will come and look at them." The Professor slowly lifted his six feet of muscle and sinew out of his
chair, picked up a briar pipe which lay on his desk, puffed a great
cloud of smoke out of it, and lounged weightily across the room to his
visitor. "Something alive?" he asked laconically. "Likely to bite?" "Er--no!" replied Mr. Tertius. "No--they won't bite. The fact is," he
went on, gingerly opening the bag, "this--er--this, or these are they." Professor Cox-Raythwaite bent his massive head and shoulders over the
little bag and peered narrowly into its obscurity. Then he started. "Good Lord!" he exclaimed. "A glass tumbler! And--is it a sandwich? Why,
what on earth----"

He made as if to pull the glass out of the bag, and Mr. Tertius hastily
seized the great hand in an agony of apprehension. "My dear Cox-Raythwaite!" he said. "Pray don't! Allow me--presently. When either of these objects is touched it must be in the most, quite
the most, delicate fashion. Of course, I know you have a fairy-like
gentleness of touch--but don't touch these things yet. Let me explain. Shall we--suppose we sit down. Give me--yes--give me one of your
cigars." The Professor, plainly mystified, silently pointed to a cigar box which
stood on a corner of his desk, and took another look into the bag. "A sandwich--and a glass!" he murmured reflectively. "Um! Well?" he
continued, going back to his chair and dropping heavily into it. "And
what's it all about, Tertius? Some mystery, eh?" Mr. Tertius drew a whiff or two of fragrant Havana before he replied. Then he too dropped into a chair and pulled it close to his friend's
desk. "My dear Professor!" he said, in a low, thrilling voice, suggestive of
vast importance, "I don't know whether the secret of one of the most
astounding crimes of our day may not lie in that innocent-looking
bag--or, rather, in its present contents. Fact! But I'll tell you--you
must listen with your usual meticulous care for small details. The truth
is--Jacob Herapath has, I am sure, been murdered!" "Murdered!" exclaimed the Professor. "Herapath? Murder--eh? Now then,
slow and steady, Tertius--leave out nothing!" "Nothing!" repeated Mr. Tertius solemnly. "Nothing! You shall hear
all. And this it is--point by point, from last night until--until
the present moment. That is--so far as I know. There may have been
developments--somewhere else. But this is what I know." When Mr. Tertius had finished a detailed and thorough-going account of
the recent startling discovery and subsequent proceedings, to all of
which Professor Cox-Raythwaite listened in profound silence, he rose,
and tip-toeing towards the bag, motioned his friend to follow him. "Now, my dear sir," he said, whispering in his excitement as if he
feared lest the very retorts and crucibles and pneumatic troughs should
hear him, "Now, my dear sir, I wish you to see for yourself. First of
all, the glass. I will take it out myself--I know exactly how I put it
in. I take it out--thus! I place it on this vacant space--thus. Look for
yourself, my dear fellow. What do you see?" The Professor, watching Mr. Tertius's movements with undisguised
interest, took off his spectacles, picked up a reading-glass, bent down
and carefully examined the tumbler. "Yes," he said, after a while, "yes, Tertius, I certainly see distinct
thumb and finger-marks round the upper part of this glass. Oh, yes--no
doubt of that!" "Allow me to take one of your clean specimen slides," observed Mr.
Tertius, picking up a square of highly polished glass. "There! I place
this slide here and upon it I deposit this sandwich. Now, my dear
Cox-Raythwaite, favour me by examining the sandwich even more closely
than you did the glass--if necessary." But the Professor shook his head. He clapped Mr. Tertius on the
shoulder. "Excellent!" he exclaimed. "Good! Pooh!--no need for care there. The
thing's as plain as--as I am. Good, Tertius, good!" "You see it?" said Mr. Tertius, delightedly. "See it! Good Lord, why, who could help see it?" answered the Professor. "Needs no great amount of care or perception to see that, as I said. Of
course, I see it. Glad you did, too!" "But we must take the greatest care of it," urged Mr. Tertius. "The most
particular care. That's why I came to you. Now, what can we do? How
preserve this sandwich--just as it is?" "Nothing easier," replied the Professor. "We'll soon fix that. We'll put
it in such safety that it will still be a fresh thing if it remains
untouched until London Bridge falls down from sheer decay." He moved off to another part of the laboratory, and presently returned
with two objects, one oblong and shallow, the other deep and square,
which on being set down before Mr. Tertius proved to be glass boxes,
wonderfully and delicately made, with removable lids that fitted into
perfectly adjusted grooves. "There, my dear fellow," he said. "Presently I will deposit the glass in
that, and the sandwich in this. Then I shall adjust and seal the lids in
such a fashion that no air can enter these little chambers. Then through
those tiny orifices I shall extract whatever air is in them--to the most
infinitesimal remnant of it. Then I shall seal those orifices--and there
you are. Whoever wants to see that sandwich or that glass will find both
a year hence--ten years hence--a century hence!--in precisely the same
condition in which we now see them. And that reminds me," he continued,
as he turned away to his desk and picked up his pipe, "that reminds me,
Tertius--what are you going to do about these things being seen? They'll have to be seen, you know. Have you thought of the police--the
detectives?" "I have certainly thought of both," replied Mr. Tertius. "But--I think
not yet, in either case. I think one had better await the result of the
inquest. Something may come out, you know." "Coroners and juries," observed the Professor oracularly, "are good at
finding the obvious. Whether they get at the mysteries and the
secrets----"

"Just so--just so!" said Mr. Tertius. "I quite apprehend you. All the
same, I think we will see what is put before the coroner. Now, what
point suggests itself to you, Cox-Raythwaite?" "One in particular," answered the Professor. "Whatever medical evidence
is called ought to show without reasonable doubt what time Herapath
actually met his death." "Quite so," said Mr. Tertius gravely. "If that's once established----"

"Then, of course, your own investigation, or suggestion, or theory about
that sandwich will be vastly simplified," replied the Professor. "Meanwhile, you will no doubt take some means of observing--eh?" "I shall use every means to observe," said Mr. Tertius with a significant
smile, which was almost a wink. "Of that you may be--dead certain!" Then he left Professor Cox-Raythwaite to hermetically seal up the glass
and the sandwich, and quitting the house, walked slowly back to Portman
Square. As he turned out of Oxford Street into Orchard Street the
newsboys suddenly came rushing along with the _Argus_ special. CHAPTER VI

THE TAXI-CAB DRIVER


Mr. Tertius bought a copy of the newspaper, and standing aside on the
pavement, read with much interest and surprise the story which
Triffitt's keen appetite for news and ready craftsmanship in writing had
so quickly put together. Happening to glance up from the paper in the
course of his reading, he observed that several other people were
similarly employed. The truth was that Triffitt had headed his column:
"MYSTERIOUS DEATH OF MR. HERAPATH, M.P. IS IT SUICIDE OR MURDER?" --and
as this also appeared in great staring letters on the contents bills
which the newsboys were carrying about with them, and as Herapath had
been well known in that district, there was a vast amount of interest
aroused thereabouts by the news. Indeed, people were beginning to
chatter on the sidewalks, and at the doors of the shops. And as Mr.
Tertius turned away in the direction of Portman Square, he heard one
excited bystander express a candid opinion. "Suicide?" exclaimed this man, thrusting his paper into the hands of a
companion. "Not much! Catch old Jacob Herapath at that game--he was a
deuced deal too fond of life and money! Murder, sir--murder!--that's the
ticket--murder!" Mr. Tertius went slowly homeward, head bent and eyes moody. He let
himself into the house; at the sound of his step in the hall Peggie
Wynne looked out of the study. She retreated into it at sight of Mr.
Tertius, and he followed her and closed the door. Looking narrowly at
her, he saw that the girl had been shedding tears, and he laid his hand
shyly yet sympathetically on her arm. "Yes," he said quietly, "I've been
feeling like that ever since--since I heard about things. But I don't
know--I suppose we shall feel it more when--when we realize it more, eh? Just now there's the other thing to think about, isn't there?" Peggie mopped her eyes and looked at him. He was such a quiet,
unobtrusive, inoffensive old gentleman that she wondered more than ever
why Barthorpe had refused to admit him to the informal conference. "What other thing?" she asked. Mr. Tertius looked round the room--strangely empty now that Jacob
Herapath's bustling and strenuous presence was no longer in it--and
shook his head. "There's one thought you mustn't permit yourself to harbour for a moment,
my dear," he answered. "Don't even for a fraction of time allow yourself
to think that my old friend took his own life! That's--impossible." "I don't," said Peggie. "I never did think so. It is, as you say,
impossible. I knew him too well to believe that. So, of course,
it's----"

"Murder," assented Mr. Tertius. "Murder! I heard a man in the street
voice the same opinion just now. Of course! It's the only opinion. Yet
in the newspaper they're asking which it was. But I suppose the
newspapers must be--sensational." "You don't mean to say it's in the newspapers already?" exclaimed
Peggie. Mr. Tertius handed to her the _Argus_ special, which he had carried
crumpled up in his hand. "Everybody's reading it out there in the streets," he said. "It's
extraordinary, now, how these affairs seem to fascinate people. Yes--it's all there. That is, of course, as far as it's gone." "How did the paper people come to know all this?" asked Peggie, glancing
rapidly over Triffitt's leaded lines. "I suppose they got it from the police," replied Mr. Tertius. "I don't
know much about such matters, but I believe the police and the Press are
in constant touch. Of course, it's well they should be--it attracts
public notice. And in cases like this, public notice is an excellent
thing. We shall have to hear--and find out--a good deal before we get at
the truth in this case, my dear." Peggie suddenly flung down the newspaper and looked inquiringly at the
old man. "Mr. Tertius," she said abruptly, "why wouldn't Barthorpe let you come
into that room down there at the office this morning?" Mr. Tertius did not answer this direct question at once. He walked away
to the window and stood looking out into the square for a while. When
at last he spoke his voice was singularly even and colourless. He might
have been discussing a question on which it was impossible to feel any
emotion. "I really cannot positively say, my dear," he replied. "I have known, of
course, for some time that Mr. Barthorpe Herapath is not well disposed
towards me. I have observed a certain coldness, a contempt, on his part. I have been aware that he has resented my presence in this house. And I
suppose he felt that as I am not a member of the family, I had no right
to sit in council with him and with you." "Not a member of the family!" exclaimed Peggie. "Why, you came here soon
after I came--all those years ago!" "I have dwelt under Jacob Herapath's roof, in this house, fifteen
years," said Mr. Tertius, reflectively. "Fifteen years!--yes. Yes--Jacob
and I were--good friends." As he spoke the last word a tear trickled from beneath Mr. Tertius's
spectacles and ran down into his beard, and Peggie, catching sight of
it, impulsively jumped from her seat and kissed him affectionately. "Never mind, Mr. Tertius!" she said, patting his shoulders. "You and I
are friends, too, anyway. I don't like Barthorpe when he's like that--I
hate that side of him. And anyhow, Barthorpe doesn't matter--to me. I
don't suppose he matters to anything--except himself." Mr. Tertius gravely shook his head. "Mr. Barthorpe Herapath may matter a great deal, my dear," he remarked. "He is a very forceful person. I do not know what provision my poor
friend may have made, but Barthorpe, you will remember, is his nephew,
and, I believe, his only male relative. And in that case----"

Mr. Tertius was just then interrupted by the entrance of a footman who
came in and looked inquiringly at Peggie. "There's a taxi-cab driver at the door, miss," he announced. "He says he
would like to speak to some one about the news in the paper about--about
the master, miss." Peggie looked at Mr. Tertius. And Mr. Tertius quickly made a sign to the
footman. "Bring the man in at once," he commanded. And, as if to lose no time, he
followed the footman into the hall, and at once returned, conducting a
young man who carried a copy of the _Argus_ in his hand. "Yes?" he said,
closing the door behind them and motioning the man to a seat. "You wish
to tell us something! This lady is Miss Wynne--Mr. Herapath's niece. You
can tell us anything you think of importance. Do you know anything,
then?" The taxi-cab driver lifted the _Argus_. "This here newspaper, sir," he answered. "I've just been reading of
it--about Mr. Herapath, sir." "Yes," said Mr. Tertius gently. "Yes?" "Well, sir--strikes me as how I drove him, sir, this morning," answered
the driver. "Gentleman of his appearance, anyway, sir--that's a fact!" Mr. Tertius glanced at Peggie, who was intently watching the caller. "Ah!" he said, turning again to the driver, "you think you drove either
Mr. Herapath or a gentleman of his appearance this morning. You did not
know Mr. Herapath by sight, then?" "No, sir. I've only just come into this part--came for the first time
yesterday. But I'm as certain----"

"Just tell us all about it," said Mr. Tertius, interrupting him. "Tell
us in your own way. Everything, you know." "Ain't so much to tell, sir," responded the driver. "All the same,
soon's I'd seen this piece in the paper just now I said to myself, 'I'd
best go round to Portman Square and tell what I do know,' I says. And
it's like this, sir--I come on this part yesterday--last night it was. My taxi belongs to a man as keeps half a dozen, and he put me on to
night work, this end of Oxford Street. Well, it 'ud be just about a
quarter to two this morning when a tall, well-built gentleman comes out
of Orchard Street and made for my cab. I jumps down and opens the door
for him. 'You know St. Mary Abbot's Church, Kensington?' he says as he
got in. 'Drive me down there and pull up at the gate.' So, of course, I
ran him down, and there he got out, give me five bob, and off he went. That's it, sir." "And when he got out, which way did he go?" asked Mr. Tertius. "West, sir--along the High Street, past the Town Hall," promptly
answered the driver. "And there he crossed the road. I see him cross,
because I stopped there a minute or two after he'd got out, tinkering at
my engine." "Can you tell us what this gentleman was like in appearance?" asked Mr.
Tertius. "Well, sir, not so much as regards his face," answered the driver. 