



Produced by D. Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









IN THE MAYOR'S PARLOUR

By J. S. FLETCHER

JOHN LANE THE BODLEY HEAD LIMITED

LONDON                    MCMXXII




SECOND EDITION

_Printed in Great Britain by_ Butler & Tanner, _Frome and London_. CONTENTS


 CHAP. PAGE

     I  THE MAYOR'S PARLOUR                                   1
    II  THE CAMBRIC HANDKERCHIEF                             14
   III  THE TANNERY HOUSE                                    27
    IV  BULL'S SNUG                                          41
     V  SLEEPING FIRES                                       53
    VI  THE ANCIENT OFFICE OF CORONER                        67
   VII  THE VOLUNTARY WITNESS                                80
  VIII  MRS. SAUMAREZ                                        93
    IX  THE RIGHT TO INTERVENE                              107
     X  THE CAT IN THE BAG                                  121
    XI  THE NINETEEN MINUTES' INTERVAL                      132
   XII  CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE                             143
  XIII  A WOMAN INTERVENES                                  153
   XIV  WHOSE VOICES? 164
    XV  THE SPECIAL EDITION                                 174
   XVI  THE CASTLE WALL                                     185
  XVII  IMPREGNABLE                                         196
 XVIII  LOOSE STRANDS                                       208
   XIX  BLACK SECRETS AND RED TAPE                          221
    XX  THE FELL HAND                                       235
   XXI  CORRUPTION                                          246
  XXII  THE PARLOUR-MAID                                    258
 XXIII  THE CONNECTING WALL                                 268
  XXIV  BEHIND THE PANEL                                    280
   XXV  THE EMPTY ROOM                                      291




IN THE MAYOR'S PARLOUR




CHAPTER I

THE MAYOR'S PARLOUR


Hathelsborough market-place lies in the middle of the town--a long,
somewhat narrow parallelogram, enclosed on its longer side by old gabled
houses; shut in on its western end by the massive bulk of the great
parish church of St. Hathelswide, Virgin and Martyr, and at its eastern
by the ancient walls and high roofs of its mediaeval Moot Hall. The inner
surface of this space is paved with cobble-stones, worn smooth by
centuries of usage: it is only of late years that the conservative
spirit of the old borough has so far accommodated itself to modern
requirements as to provide foot-paths in front of the shops and houses. But there that same spirit has stopped; the utilitarian of to-day would
sweep away, as being serious hindrances to wheeled traffic, the two
picturesque fifteenth-century erections which stand in this
market-place; these, High Cross and Low Cross, one at the east end, in
front of the Moot Hall, the other at the west, facing the chancel of the
church, remain, to the delight of the archaeologist, as instances of the
fashion in which our forefathers built gathering places in the very
midst of narrow thoroughfares. Under the graceful cupola and the flying buttresses of High Cross the
countryfolk still expose for sale on market-days their butter and their
eggs; around the base of the slender shaft called Low Cross they still
offer their poultry and rabbits; on other than market-days High Cross
and Low Cross alike make central, open-air clubs, for the patriarchs of
the place, who there assemble in the lazy afternoons and still lazier
eventides, to gossip over the latest items of local news; conscious that
as they are doing so their ancestors have done for many a generation,
and that old as they may be themselves, in their septuagenarian or
octogenarian states, they are as infants in comparison with the age of
the stones and bricks and timbers about them, grey and fragrant with the
antiquity of at least three hundred years. Of all this mass of venerable material, still sound and uncrumbled, the
great tall-towered church at one end of the market-place, and the
square, heavily fashioned Moot Hall at the other, go farthest back,
through association, into the mists of the Middle Ages. The church dates
from the thirteenth century and, though it has been skilfully restored
on more than one occasion, there is nothing in its cathedral-like
proportions that suggests modernity; the Moot Hall, erected a hundred
years later, remains precisely as when it was first fashioned, and
though it, too, has passed under the hand of the restorer its renovation
has only taken the shape of strengthening an already formidably
strong building. Extending across nearly the whole eastern end
of the market-place, and flanked on one side by an ancient
dwelling-house--once the official residence of the Mayors of
Hathelsborough--and on the other by a more modern but still old-world
building, long used as a bank, Hathelsborough Moot Hall presents the
appearance of a mediaeval fortress, as though its original builders had
meant it to be a possible refuge for the townsfolk against masterful
Baron or marauding Scot. From the market-place itself there is but one
entrance to it; an arched doorway opening upon a low-roofed stone hall;
in place of a door there are heavy gates of iron, with a smaller
wicket-gate set in their midst; from the stone hall a stone stair leads
to the various chambers above; in the outer walls the windows are high
and narrow; each is filled with old painted glass. A strong, grim
building, this; and when the iron gates are locked, as they are every
night when the curfew bell--an ancient institution jealously kept up in
Hathelsborough--rings from St. Hathelswide's tower, a man might safely
wager his all to nothing that only modern artillery could effect an
entrance to its dark and gloomy interior. On a certain April evening, the time being within an hour of
curfew--which, to be exact, is rung in Hathelsborough every night, all
the year round, sixty minutes after sunset, despite the fact that it is
nowadays but a meaningless if time-honoured ceremony--Bunning, caretaker
and custodian of the Moot Hall, stood without its gates, smoking his
pipe and looking around him. He was an ex-Army man, Bunning, who had
seen service in many parts of the world, and was frequently heard to
declare that although he had set eyes on many men and many cities he
had never found the equal of Hathelsborough folk, nor seen a fairer
prospect than that on which he now gazed. The truth was that Bunning was
a Hathelsborough man, and having wandered about a good deal during his
military service, from Aldershot to Gibraltar, and Gibraltar to Malta,
and Malta to Cairo, and Cairo to Peshawar, was well content to settle
down in a comfortable berth amidst the familiar scenes of his childhood. But anyone who loves the ancient country towns of England would have
agreed with Bunning that Hathelsborough market-place made an unusually
attractive picture on a spring evening. There were the old gabled
houses, quaintly roofed and timbered; there the lace-like masonry of
High Cross; there the slender proportions of Low Cross; there the mighty
bulk of the great church built over the very spot whereon the virgin
saint suffered martyrdom; there, towering above the gables on the north
side, the well-preserved masonry of the massive Norman Keep of
Hathelsborough Castle; there a score of places and signs with which
Bunning had kept up a close acquaintance in youth and borne in mind when
far away under other skies. And around the church tower, and at the base
of the tall keep, were the elms for which the town was famous; mighty
giants of the tree world, just now bursting into leaf, and above them
the rooks and jackdaws circling and calling above the hum and murmur of
the town. To Bunning's right and left, going away from the eastern corner of the
market-place, lay two narrow streets, called respectively River Gate and
Meadow Gate--one led downwards to the little river on the southern edge
of the town; the other ran towards the wide-spread grass-lands that
stretched on its northern boundary. And as he stood looking about him,
he saw a man turn the corner of Meadow Gate--a man who came hurrying
along in his direction, walking sharply, his eyes bent on the flags
beneath his feet, his whole attitude that of one in deep reflection. At
sight of him Bunning put his pipe in his pocket, gave himself the
soldier's shake and, as the man drew near, stood smartly to attention. The man looked up--Bunning's right hand went up to his cap in the old
familiar fashion; that was how, for many a long year of service, he had
saluted his superiors. There was nothing very awe-compelling about the person whom the
caretaker thus greeted with so much punctilious ceremony. He was a
little, somewhat insignificant-looking man--at first sight. His clothes
were well-worn and carelessly put on; the collar of his under-coat
projected high above that of his overcoat; his necktie had slipped round
towards one ear; his linen was frayed; his felt hat, worn anyway, needed
brushing; he wore cotton gloves, too big for him. He carried a mass of
papers and books under one arm; the other hand grasped an umbrella which
had grown green and grey in service. He might have been all sorts of
insignificant things: a clerk, going homeward from his work; a
tax-gatherer, carrying his documents; a rent-collector, anxious about a
defaulting tenant--anything of that sort. But Bunning knew him for Mr.
Councillor John Wallingford, at that time Mayor of Hathelsborough. He
knew something else too--that Wallingford, in spite of his careless
attire and very ordinary appearance, was a remarkable man. He was not a
native of the old town; although he was, for twelve months at any rate,
its first magistrate, and consequently the most important person in the
place, Hathelsborough folk still ranked him as a stranger, for he had
only been amongst them for some twelve years. But during that time he
had made his mark in the town--coming there as managing clerk to a firm
of solicitors, he had ultimately succeeded to the practice which he had
formerly managed for its two elderly partners, now retired. At an early
period of his Hathelsborough career he had taken keen and deep interest
in the municipal affairs of his adopted town and had succeeded in
getting a seat on the Council, where he had quickly made his influence
felt. And in the previous November he had been elected--by a majority of
one vote--to the Mayoralty and had so become the four hundred and
eighty-first burgess of the ancient borough to wear the furred mantle
and gold chain which symbolized his dignity. He looked very different in
these grandeurs to what he did in his everyday attire, but whether in
the Mayoral robes or in his carelessly worn clothes any close observer
would have seen that Wallingford was a sharp, shrewd man with all his
wits about him--a close-seeing, concentrated man, likely to go through,
no matter what obstacles rose in his path, with anything that he took in
hand. Bunning was becoming accustomed to these evening visits of the Mayor to
the Moot Hall. Of late, Wallingford had come there often, going upstairs
to the Mayor's Parlour and remaining there alone until ten or eleven
o'clock. Always he brought books and papers with him; always, as he
entered, he gave the custodian the same command--no one was to disturb
him, on any pretext whatever. But on this occasion, Bunning heard a
different order. "Oh, Bunning," said the Mayor, as he came up to the iron gates before
which the ex-sergeant-major stood, still at attention, "I shall be in
the Mayor's Parlour for some time to-night, and I'm not to be disturbed,
as usual. Except, however, for this--I'm expecting my cousin, Mr. Brent,
from London, this evening, and I left word at my rooms that if he came
any time before ten he was to be sent on here. So, if he comes, show him
up to me. But nobody else, Bunning." "Very good, your Worship," replied Bunning. "I'll see to it. Mr. Brent,
from London." "You've seen him before," said the Mayor. "He was here last
Christmas--tall young fellow, clean-shaven. You'll know him." He hurried inside the stone hall and went away by the stairs to the
upper regions of the gloomy old place, and Bunning, with another salute,
turned from him, pulled out his pipe and began to smoke again. He was
never tired of looking out on that old market-place; even in the
quietest hours of the evening there was always something going on,
something to be seen, trivial things, no doubt, but full of interest to
Bunning: folks coming and going; young people sweethearting;
acquaintances passing and re-passing; these things were of more
importance to his essentially parochial mind than affairs of State. Presently came along another Corporation official, whom Bunning knew as
well as he knew the Mayor, an official who, indeed, was known all over
the town, and familiar to everybody, from the mere fact that he was
always attired in a livery the like of which he and his predecessors had
been wearing for at least two hundred years. This was Spizey, a
consequential person who, in the borough rolls for the time being, was
entered as Bellman, Town Crier, and Mace Bearer. Spizey was a big,
fleshy man, with a large solemn face, a ponderous manner, and small
eyes. His ample figure was habited at all seasons of the year in a
voluminous cloak which had much gold lace on its front and cuffs and
many capes about the shoulders; he wore a three-cornered laced hat on
his bullet head, and carried a tall staff, not unlike a wand, in his
hand. There were a few--very few--progressive folk in Hathelsborough who
regarded Spizey and his semi-theatrical attire as an anachronism, and
openly derided both, but so far nobody had dared to advocate the
abolition of him and his livery. He was part and parcel of the high
tradition, a reminder of the fact that Hathelsborough possessed a
Charter of Incorporation centuries before its now more popular and
important neighbouring boroughs gained theirs, and in his own opinion
the discontinuance of his symbols of office would have been little less
serious than the sale of the Mayor's purple robe and chain of solid
gold: Spizey, thus attired, was Hathelsborough. And, as he was not slow
to remind awe-stricken audiences at his favourite tavern, Mayors,
Aldermen and Councillors were, so to speak, creatures of the moment--the
Mayor, for example, was His Worship for twelve months and plain Mr.
Chipps the grocer ever after--but he, Spizey, was a Permanent
Institution, and not to be moved. Spizey was on his way to his favourite tavern now, to smoke his
pipe--which it was beneath his dignity to do in public--and drink his
glass amongst his cronies, but he stopped to exchange the time of day
with Bunning, whom he regarded with patronizing condescension, as being
a lesser light than himself. And having remarked that this was a fine
evening, after the usual fashion of British folk, who are for ever
wasting time and breath in drawing each other's attention to obvious
facts, he cocked one of his small eyes at the stairs behind the iron
gates. "Worship up there?" he asked, transferring his gaze to Bunning. "Just gone up," answered Bunning. "Five minutes ago." The Mace-Bearer looked up the market-place, down River Gate and along
Meadow Gate. Having assured himself that there was nobody within fifty
yards, he sank his mellow voice to a melodious whisper, and poked
Bunning in the ribs with a pudgy forefinger. "Ah!" he said confidingly. "Just so! Again! Now, as a Corporation
official--though not, to be sure, of the long standing that I am--what
do you make of it?" "Make of what?" demanded the caretaker. Spizey came still nearer to his companion. He was one of those men who
when disposed to confidential communication have a trick of getting as
close as possible to their victims, and of poking and prodding them. Again he stuck his finger into Bunning's ribs. "Make of what, says you!" he breathed. "Ay, to be sure! Why, of all this
here coming up at night to the Moot Hall, and sitting, all alone, in
that there Mayor's Parlour, not to be disturbed by nobody, whosomever! What's it all mean?" "No business of mine," replied Bunning. "Nor of anybody's but his own. That is, so far as I'm aware of. What about it?" Spizey removed his three-cornered hat, took a many-coloured handkerchief
out of it, and wiped his forehead--he was in a state of perpetual
warmth, and had a habit of mopping his brow when called on for mental
effort. "Ah!" he said. "That's just it--what about it, do you say? Well, what I
say is this here--'taint in accordance with precedent! Precedent, mark
you!--which is what a ancient Corporation of this sort goes by. Where
should we all be if what was done by our fathers before us wasn't done
by us? What has been, must be! Take me, don't I do what's been done in
this here town of Hathelsborough for time immemorial? Well, then!" "That's just it," said Bunning. "Well, then? Why shouldn't his Worship
come here at night and stick up there as long as he likes? What's
against it?" "Precedent!" retorted Spizey. "Ain't never been done before--never! Haven't I been in the office I hold nigh on to forty years? Seen a many
mayors, aldermen and common councillors come and go in my time. But
never do I remember a Mayor coming here to this Moot Hall of a night,
with books and papers--which is dangerous matters at any time, except
in their proper place, such as my proclamations and the town
dockyments--and sitting there for hours, doing--what?" Bunning shook his head. He was pulling steadily at his pipe as he
listened, and he gazed meditatively at the smoke curling away from it
and his pipe. "Well?" he said, after a pause. "And what do you make of it? You'll have
some idea, I reckon, a man of your importance." Once more the Mace-Bearer looked round, and once more applied his
forefinger to Bunning's waistline. His voice grew deep with confidence. "Mischief!" he whispered. "Mischief! That's what I make of it! He's up
to something--something what'll be dangerous to the vested interests in
this here ancient borough. Ain't he allus been one o' them
Radicals--what wants to pull down everything that's made this here
country what it is? Didn't he put in his last election address, when he
was a candidate for the Council, for the Castle Ward, that he was all
for retrenchment and reform? Didn't he say, when he was elected
Mayor--by a majority of one vote!--that he intended to go thoroughly
into the financial affairs of the town, and do away with a lot of
expenses which in his opinion wasn't necessary? Oh, I've heard talk--men
in high office, like me, hears a deal. Why, I've heard it said that he's
been heard to say, in private, that it was high time to abolish me!" Bunning's mouth opened a little. He was a man of simple nature, and the
picture of Hathelsborough without Spizey and his livery appalled him. "Bless me!" he exclaimed. "To be sure!" said Spizey. "It's beyond comprehension! To abolish
me!--what, in a manner of speaking, has existed I don't know how long. I
ain't a man--I'm a office! Who'd cry things that was lost--at that there
Cross? Who'd pull the big bell on great occasions, and carry round the
little 'un when there was proclamations to be made? Who'd walk in front
o' the Mayor's procession, with the Mace--what was give to this here
town by King Henry VII, his very self? Abolish me? Why, it's as bad as
talking about abolishing the Bible!" "It's the age for that sort of thing," remarked Bunning. "I seen a deal
of it in the Army. Abolished all sorts o' things, they have, there. I
never seen no good come of it, neither. I'm all for keeping up the good
old things--can't better 'em, in my opinion. And, as you say, that there
mace of ours--'tis ancient!" "Nobody but one o' these here Radicals and levellers could talk o' doing
away with such proper institutions," affirmed Spizey. "But I tell
yer--I've heard of it. He said--but you'd scarce believe it!--there was
no need for a town crier, nor a bellman, and, as for this mace, it could
be carried on Mayor's Day by a policeman! Fancy that, now--our mace
carried by a policeman!" "Dear, dear!" said Bunning. "Don't seem to fit in, that! However," he
added consolingly, "if they did abolish you, you'd no doubt get a
handsome pension." "Pension!" exclaimed Spizey. "That's a detail!--it's the office I'm
a-considering of. What this here free and ancient borough 'ud look
like, without me, I cannot think!" He shook his head and went sadly away, and Bunning, suddenly remembering
that it was about his supper-time, prepared to retreat into the room
which he and his wife shared, at the end of the stone hall. But as he
entered the gates, a quick firm footstep sounded behind him, and he
turned to see a smart, alert-looking young man approaching. Bunning
recognized him as a stranger whom he had seen once or twice before, at
intervals, in company with Wallingford. For the second time that night
he saluted. "Looking for the Mayor, sir?" he asked, throwing the gate open. "His
Worship's upstairs--I was to show you up. Mr. Brent, isn't it, sir?" "Right!" replied the other. "My cousin left word I was to join him here. Whereabouts is he in this old fortress of yours?" "This way, sir," said Bunning. "Fortress, you call it, sir, but it's
more like a rabbit-warren! No end of twists and turns--that is, once you
get inside it." He preceded Richard Brent up the stone staircase, along narrow corridors
and passages, until he came to a door, at which he knocked gently. Receiving no reply he opened it and went in, motioning Brent to follow. But before Bunning had well crossed the threshold he started back with a
sharp cry. The Mayor was there, but he was lying face forward across the
desk--lifeless. CHAPTER II

THE CAMBRIC HANDKERCHIEF


Bunning knew the Mayor was dead before that cry of surprise had passed
his lips. In his time he had seen many dead men--sometimes it was a
bullet, sometimes a bayonet; he knew the signs of what follows on the
swift passage of one and the sharp thrust of the other. In his first
glance into the room he had been quick to notice the limp hand hanging
across the edge of the desk, the way in which Wallingford's head lay
athwart the mass of papers over which he had collapsed in falling
forward from his chair--that meant death. And the old soldier's
observant eye had seen more than that--over the litter of documents
which lay around the still figure were great crimson stains. The
caretaker's cry changed to articulated speech. "Murder! The Mayor's been murdered!" Brent, a strongly-built and active man, pushed by, and made for the
desk. He was going to lay a hand on his cousin's shoulder, but Bunning
stopped him. "For God's sake, Mr. Brent, don't touch him!" he exclaimed. "Let him be,
sir, till the police----" He paused, staring round the gloomy,
oak-panelled room from the walls of which the portraits of various
dignitaries looked down. "Who on earth can have done it?" he muttered. "It's--it's not three-quarters of an hour since he came up here!" "Alone?" asked Brent. "Alone, sir! And I'll take my solemn oath that nobody was here, waiting
for him. I'd been in this room myself, not five minutes before he came,"
said Dunning. "It was empty of course." Brent disregarded the caretaker's admonition and laid a finger on the
dead man's forehead. But Bunning pointed to a dark stain, still
spreading, on the back of the Mayor's coat--a well-worn garment of grey
tweed. "Look there, sir," he whispered. "He's been run through the body from
behind--right through the heart!--as he sat in his chair. Murder!" "Who should murder him?" demanded Brent. Bunning made no answer. He was looking round. There were three doors
into that room; he glanced at each, shaking his head after each glance. "We'd best get the police, at once, Mr. Brent," he said. "The police
station's just at the back--there's a way down to it from outside this
parlour. I'll run down now. You, sir----"

"I'll stop here," answered Brent. "But get a doctor, will you? I want to
know----"

"Dr. Wellesley, the police-surgeon, is next door," replied Brent. "The
police'll get him. But he's beyond all doctors, Mr. Brent! Instantaneous--that! I know!" He hurried out of the room, and Brent, left alone with the dead man,
looked at him once again wonderingly. Cousins though they were, he and
Wallingford knew little of each other: their acquaintance, such as it
was, had not been deep enough to establish any particular affection
between them. But since Wallingford's election as Mayor of
Hathelsborough Brent, by profession a journalist in London, had twice
spent a week-end with him in the old town, and had learnt something of
his plans for a reform of certain matters connected with the
administration of its affairs. They had discussed these things on the
occasion of his last visit, and now, as he stood by the dead man, Brent
remembered certain words which Wallingford had spoken. "There are things that I can do," Wallingford had said, with some
confidence. And then he had added, with a cynical laugh, "But there are
other things that--why, it would be, literally, as much as my life's
worth to even try to undermine them!" That was now four months since, but Brent remembered. And as he stood
there, waiting for help which would be useless, he began to wonder if
Wallingford, eager for reform, had attempted anything likely to bring
him into personal danger. Certainly, from all that Brent knew of him, he
was the sort of man who, having set himself to a task, would let nothing
stop him in accomplishing it; he was the sort of man too, Brent thought,
who had a genius for making enemies: such men always have. But murder? Cold-blooded, deliberate, apparently well-planned murder! Yet there it
was, before him. The Mayor of Hathelsborough had walked up into that
room, sacred to his official uses and suggestive in its atmosphere and
furniture of his great dignity, and had settled down to his desk, only
to be assassinated by some enemy who had taken good care to perform his
crime with swiftness and thoroughness. The sound of heavy footsteps on the stairs outside the half-open door
aroused Brent from these melancholy speculations; he turned to see
Bunning coming back, attended by several men, and foremost among them,
Hawthwaite, superintendent of the borough police, whom Brent had met
once or twice on his previous visits to the town. Hawthwaite, a big,
bearded man, was obviously upset, if not actually frightened; his ruddy
face had paled under the caretaker's startling news, and he drew his
breath sharply as he entered the Mayor's Parlour and caught sight of the
still figure lying across the big desk in the--middle. "God bless my life and soul, Mr. Brent!" he exclaimed in hushed tones as
he tiptoed nearer to the dead and the living. "What's all this? You
found the Mayor dead--you and Bunning? Why--why----"

"We found him as you see him," answered Brent. "He's been murdered! There's no doubt about this, superintendent." Hawthwaite bent down fearfully towards the dead man, and then looked
round at Bunning. "When did he come up here?" he asked sharply. "About three-quarters of an hour before Mr. Brent came, sir," replied
Bunning. "He came up to me as I was standing outside the gates, smoking
my pipe, and said that he was going up to the Mayor's Parlour, and
nobody was to be allowed to disturb him, but that if his cousin, Mr.
Brent, came, he was to be shown up. Mr. Brent came and I brought him
up, and we found his Worship as you see." "Somebody's been lying in wait for him," muttered Hawthwaite. "Hid in
this room!" "Nobody here five minutes before he came up, sir," affirmed Bunning. "I
was up here myself. There was nobody in here, and nobody in this part of
the building." Hawthwaite looked round the room, and Brent looked with him. It was a
big room, panelled in old oak to half the height of its walls; above the
panelling hung numerous portraits of past occupants of the Mayoral chair
and some old engravings of scenes in the town. A wide, old-fashioned
fire-place stood to the right of the massive desk; on either side of it
were recesses, in each of which there was a door. Hawthwaite stepped
across to these in turn and tried them; each was locked from the inside;
he silently pointed to the keys. "The door to the stairs was open, sir," remarked Bunning. "I mean his
Worship hadn't locked himself in, as I have known him do." Hawthwaite nodded. Then he nudged Brent's elbow, looking sideways at the
dead man. "Been done as he sat writing in his chair," he muttered. "Look--the
pen's fallen from his fingers as he fell forward. Queer!" A policeman came hurrying into the room, pulling himself up as he saw
what was there. His voice instinctively hushed. "Dr. Wellesley's just gone down Meadow Gate, sir," he announced. "They've sent for him to come here at once." "Unless!" murmured the superintendent. "Still----"

Then the five or six men present stood, silently waiting. Some stared
about the room, as if wondering at its secret: some occasionally took
covert glances at its central figure. One of the three high, narrow
windows was open: Brent distinctly heard the murmur of children playing
in the streets outside. And suddenly, from the tower of St. Hathelswide,
at the other end of the market-place, curfew began to ring. "He's coming, sir!" whispered the policeman who stood near the door. "On
the stairs, sir." Brent turned as Dr. Wellesley came hurrying into the room; a tall,
clean-shaven, fresh-coloured man, who went straight to the desk, looked
at what he found there, and turned quickly on the men grouped around. "How long is it since he was found?" he asked abruptly. "Ten or twelve minutes," answered Brent. "Dead then?" "Yes," said Brent. "I should say--of course, I don't speak
professionally--but I should think he'd been dead at least half an
hour." The doctor glanced at the superintendent. "We must have him taken down to the mortuary," he said. "Let some of you
men stay here with me, and send another for my assistant and for Dr. Barber." The superintendent gave some orders, and touching Brent's arm motioned
him to follow outside the room. "This is a bad business, Mr. Brent!" he said as they paused at the head
of the stair. "That's murder, sir! But how on earth did the murderer get
in there? Bunning tells me that he himself was standing outside the iron
gates at the entrance to the Moot Hall from the time the Mayor entered
until you came. He asserts that nobody entered the place by those
gates." "I suppose there are other means of entrance?" suggested Brent. "Doubtful if anybody could get in by them at this hour of the evening,"
answered the superintendent. "But there are two ways by which anybody
could get to the Mayor's Parlour. They're both what you might call
complicated. I'll show you them. Come this way." He led Brent across a corridor that branched off from the head of the
stone staircase, and presently stopped at a big double door. "This is the Council Chamber," he said, as they entered a spacious
apartment. "You see that door in the far corner, over there? There's a
staircase leads down from that to the rooms that Bunning and his wife
occupy as caretakers--a back stairs, in fact. But nobody can come up it,
and through the Council Chamber, and along the corridor to the Mayor's
Parlour without first coming through Bunning's rooms, that's flat. As
for the other--well, it's still more unlikely." He led Brent out of the Council Chamber and farther along to another
door, which he flung open as he motioned his companion to enter. "This is the Borough Court," he said. "Magistrates' bench, solicitors'
table, and all the rest of it. And there's the dock, where we put the
prisoners. Now, Mr. Brent, there's a staircase--a corkscrew staircase,
modern, of ironwork--in the corner of that dock which leads down to the
cells. And that's the second way by which you could get to the Mayor's
Parlour. But just fancy what that means! A man who wanted to reach the
Mayor's Parlour by that means of approach would have to enter the police
station from St. Laurence Lane, at the back of the Moot Hall, pass the
charge office, pass my office, go along a passage in which he'd be
pretty certain to meet somebody, come up that stairs into the dock
there, cross the court and--so on. That's not likely! And yet, those are
the only ways by which there's access to the Mayor's Parlour except by
the big staircase from the iron gates." "What is certain," observed Brent, "is that the murderer did get to the
Mayor's Parlour. And what seems more important just now is the
question--how did he get away from it, unobserved? If Bunning is certain
that no one entered by the front between my cousin's arrival and my
coming, he is equally certain that no one left. Is it possible that
anyone left by the police station entrance?" "We'll soon settle that point!" answered Hawthwaite. "Come down there." He opened the door of the dock and led Brent down an iron staircase into
an arched and vaulted hall at its foot, whence they proceeded along
various gloomy passages towards a heavy, iron-studded door. Near this, a
police constable stood writing at a tall desk; the superintendent
approached and spoke to him. Presently he turned back to Brent. "There's nobody that he doesn't know has been in or out of this place
during the whole of the evening," he said. "He's been on duty there
since six o'clock. Nobody has entered--or left--during the time that's
elapsed." "I never supposed they had," remarked Brent. "The thing's been done in
much cleverer fashion than that! As I said before, what we do know is
that the murderer got to the Mayor's Parlour, and that he got away from
it!" Hawthwaite shook his head, with a puzzled expression overspreading his
somewhat heavy and unimaginative features. "Ay, but how?" he said. "How?" "That's a job for you," replied Brent, with a suggestive glance. "And,
if I might suggest it, why not make a thorough examination of the Moot
Hall? My cousin showed me over it when I was here last, and I remember
some queer places in it." "There are queer places in it," admitted Hawthwaite. "But it's hardly
likely the murderer would hang about after doing what he did. Of course
I'll have the whole place searched thoroughly--every inch of it!--for
any possible clues and traces. We shall neglect nothing in a case of
this sort, I can assure you, Mr. Brent. I--But come into my office." He led the way into a drab-walled, official-looking apartment, curiously
suggestive of the lesser and meaner forms of crime, and pointed to a
chair. "Sit down," he said. "As I was about to say----"

"Oughtn't one to be doing something?" interrupted Brent, refusing the
chair. "That's what I feel anyway. Only what can one do?" "Ah, that's just it!" exclaimed Hawthwaite. "You may feel as energetic
as you will, but what can you do? The doctors are doing the absolutely
necessary things at present; as for me, all I can do is to search for
clues and traces, as I suggested, and make all possible inquiries. But
there you are, we've nothing to go on--nothing, I mean, that would
identify." Brent gave the superintendent a keen glance. "Between ourselves," he said, "have you any reason for suspecting
anyone?" Hawthwaite started. His surprise was genuine enough. "For suspecting anyone?" he exclaimed. "Good Lord, no, Mr. Brent! His
Worship, poor man, wasn't exactly popular in the town--with a certain
section, that is--but I couldn't believe that there's man or woman in
the place would wish him harm! No, sir--in my opinion this is outside
work!" "Somewhat doubtful whether any outsider could obtain the apparently very
accurate knowledge of Hathelsborough Moot Hall which the murderer of my
cousin evidently possessed, isn't it?" suggested Brent. "I should say
the guilty person is some one who knows the place extremely well!" Before the superintendent could reply, his partly-open door was further
opened, and a little, bustling, eager-faced man, who wore large
spectacles and carried a pencil behind his right ear, looked in. Brent
recognized him as another of the half-dozen Hathelsborough men whose
acquaintance he had made on former visits--Peppermore, the hard-worked
editor-reporter of the one local newspaper. Wallingford had introduced
him to Peppermore in the smoking-room of the _Chancellor_ Hotel, and
Peppermore, who rarely got the chance of talking to London journalists,
had been loquacious and ingratiating. His expressive eyebrows--prominent
features of his somewhat odd countenance--went up now as he caught sight
of Brent standing on the superintendent's hearth-rug. He came quickly
into the room. "Mr. Brent!" he exclaimed. "No idea you were here, sir. My profound
sympathy, Mr. Brent! Dear, dear! what a truly terrible affair!" Then,
his professional instincts getting the better of him, he turned on
Hawthwaite, at the same time pulling out a note-book. "What are the
details, Mr. Superintendent?" he asked. "I just met one of your
officers, going for Dr. Barber; he gave me the scantiest information, so
I hurried to see you." "And I can't give you any more," replied Hawthwaite. "There are no
details yet, my lad! All we know is that the Mayor was found dead in the
Mayor's Parlour half an hour ago, and that he's been murdered. You'll
have to wait for the rest." "We don't go to press till 12.30," remarked Peppermore, unperturbed by
this curtness. "Perhaps by then you can give me more news, Mr. Superintendent? Murdered! The Mayor of Hathelsborough! Now that's
something that's unique in the history of the town, I believe. I was
looking over the records not so long since, and I don't remember coming
across any entry of such an event as this. Unparalleled!" Hawthwaite made no reply. At that moment a policeman put his head inside
the door and asked him to go to Dr. Wellesley, and he went off, leaving
the two newspaper men together. Brent looked at Peppermore and suddenly
put an abrupt question to him. "I guess you'll know," he said meaningly. "Was my cousin unpopular in
this place?" Peppermore turned his big spectacles on his questioner and sank his
voice to a whisper. "Between ourselves," he answered, "in some quarters--very!" "Of late, I suppose?" suggested Brent. "Become--gradually--more and more so, Mr. Brent," said Peppermore. "You
see, he only got elected Mayor by one vote. That meant that half the
Council was against him. Against his policy and ideas, you know. Of
course he was a reformer. Those who didn't like him called him a
meddler. And in my experience of this place--ten years--it's a bad thing
to meddle in Hathelsborough affairs. Too many vested interests, sir! Certainly--amongst some people--Mr. Wallingford was not at all popular. But--murder!" "There are plenty of people who don't stick at that," remarked Brent. "But you wanted information. I'll give you some." He went on to tell how
he and Bunning had found Wallingford, and of the difficulties of access
to the Mayor's Parlour. "The thing is," he concluded, "how did the
murderer get in, and how did he get away?" "Queer!" admitted Peppermore, scribbling fast in his note-book. "That's
a nice job for the detectives. Looks like a skilfully-planned,
premeditated job too----"

Hawthwaite came in again, carrying something in his hand, concealed by a
piece of brown paper. His face betokened a discovery. "Look here!" he said. "No secret about it--you can mention it,
Peppermore. Just after you and I had gone out of the Mayor's Parlour,
Mr. Brent, Bunning picked something out of the hearth, where it was
half-burnt, and what's left charred, and gave it to Dr. Wellesley. See!" He laid the brown paper on his desk, turned back the edges, and revealed
part of a fine cambric pocket-handkerchief, crumpled and blood-stained,
charred and blackened. "Without a doubt," he whispered confidentially, "this belonged to the
murderer! He got blood on his hands--he wiped them on this, and threw it
away on the fire, to burn. And this half is not burned!" CHAPTER III

THE TANNERY HOUSE


During a moment's impressive silence the three men, standing side by
side at Hawthwaite's desk, stared at the blood-stained memento of the
crime. Each was thinking the same thought--there, before them, was the
life-blood of the man who little more than an hour previously had been
full of energy, forcefulness, ambition. It was Peppermore who first
spoke, in an awe-stricken voice. "You'll take care of that, Mr. Superintendent?" he said. "A clue!" "I should just think so!" exclaimed Hawthwaite. He picked up a box of
letter-paper which lay close by, emptied it of its contents, and lifted
the fragment of handkerchief by a corner. "That goes into my safe," he
continued, as he placed his find in the box. "A clue, as you say, and an
important one. That, as you may observe, is no common article; it's a
gentleman's handkerchief--fine cambric. If it had only been the other
part of it, now, there'd probably have been a name on it, or initials
wove into it: there's nothing of that sort, you see, on what's left. But it's something, and it may lead to a good deal." He put the cardboard box away in a safe and locked it up; putting the
key in his pocket, he gave Brent an informing glance. "I've had a word or two with the medical men while I was out there," he
said confidentially. "They say there's no doubt as to how he was killed. The murderer, they're confident, was standing behind him as he himself
was either writing or looking over the papers on his desk, and suddenly
thrust a knife clean through his shoulders. They say death would be
instantaneous." "A knife!" muttered Brent. "Well," continued Hawthwaite, "as regards that, there are all sorts of
knives. It would be a long, thin weapon, said Dr. Wellesley; and Dr.
Barber, he suggested that it was the sort of wound that would be caused
by one of those old-fashioned rapiers. And they did say, both of them,
that it had been used--whatever the weapon was--with great force: gone
clean through." Peppermore was listening to these gruesome details with all the ardour
of the born news-seeker. But Brent turned away. "Is there anything I can do?" he asked. "Why, there isn't," replied Hawthwaite. "The fact is, there is nothing
to do outside our work. The doctors are doing theirs, and there'll have
to be an inquest of course. I've sent to notify Mr. Seagrave, the
coroner, already, and I'm having a thorough search made of the Moot
Hall, and making inquiries about his Worship's last movements. There's
nothing more can be done, at present. One of my men has gone round to
tell his landlady. It's a fortunate thing, Mr. Brent," he added with a
knowing look, "that your cousin wasn't a married man! This would have
been a fine thing to have to break to a man's wife and family! About
relations, now, Mr. Brent, you'll know what to do? I know nothing about
his private affairs." "Yes," answered Brent. "But I'm much more concerned, just now, about his
public affairs. It seems to me--indeed, it's no use trying to disguise
it--that this has arisen out of the fact that as Mayor of Hathelsborough
he was concerning himself in bringing about some drastic reforms in the
town. You probably know yourself that he wasn't popular----"

"Yes, yes, Mr. Brent," interrupted Hawthwaite. "But then, you know, murder----! I can't think there's anybody in this
place would carry their likes to that length! Murder!" "You don't know," said Brent. "But, at any rate, I'm my cousin's nearest
blood-relation, and I'm going to find out who killed him, if it's
humanly possible. Now who is there in the town who knows most about his
public affairs--who is there who's most conversant with whatever it was
that he had in hand?" Hawthwaite seemed to consider matters. "Well, Alderman Crood, the tanner, is the Deputy-Mayor," he replied at
last. "I should say he's as good a man to go to as anybody, Mr. Brent. He's chairman of the Financial Committee too; and it was in financial
matters that Mr. Wallingford was wanting to make these reforms you've
mentioned. If there's anything known--I mean that I don't know--Alderman
Crood's the most likely man to know it." "Alderman Crood," remarked Peppermore softly, "knows everything that
goes on in Hathelsborough--everything!" "So to speak; so to speak!" said Hawthwaite. "There are things of
course----"

"Where does Alderman Crood live?" asked Brent. Already he was moving
towards the door. "As I can do nothing here, I'll go to him at once. I'm
not going to leave a stone unturned in this matter, superintendent." "Quite right, Mr. Brent, quite right! Neither will I," asserted
Hawthwaite. "Alderman Crood lives by his tannery--the far end of the
town. Anybody'll show you the place, once you're past the big church." "I'm going that way," remarked Peppermore. "Come with me, Mr. Brent." He
led Brent out into St. Lawrence Lane, a narrow thoroughfare at the back
of the Moot Hall, and turning a corner, emerged on the market-place,
over which the night shadows had now fallen. "A terrible affair, this,
Mr. Brent!" he said as they walked along. "And a most extraordinary one
too--it'll be more than a nine days' wonder here. A deep mystery, sir,
and I question if you'll get much light on it where you're going." "You said that Alderman Crood knew everything," observed Brent. "Ay!" answered Peppermore, with a short laugh. "But that isn't to say
that he'll tell everything--or anything! Alderman Crood, Mr. Brent, is
the closest man in this town--which is saying a good deal. Since I came
here, sir, ten years ago, I've learnt much--and if you'll drop in at the
_Monitor_ office any time you like, Mr. Brent--mornings preferable--I'll
give you the benefit of my experience: Hathelsborough folk, sir, are, in
my opinion, the queerest lot in all England. But you want to see
Alderman Crood--now, go to the end of the market-place, turn down Barley
Market, and drop a hundred yards or so down the hill at the end--then
you'll smell Crood's tan-yard, even if you don't see it. His is the big,
solid-looking house at the side--you can't miss it." The editor-reporter shot up an alley at his left, at the head of which
was a lighted window with MONITOR OFFICE on it in black letters; and
Brent went on his way to seek the Deputy-Mayor. As he passed Low Cross,
and the east end of the great church, and turned into the wide,
irregular space called Barley Market, he tried to analyse his feelings
about the tragic event on which he had chanced without warning. He had
left Fleet Street early that afternoon, thinking of nothing but a few
days' pleasant change, and here he was, in that quiet, old-world town,
faced with the fact that his kinsman and host had been brutally murdered
at the very hour of his arrival. He was conscious of a fierce if dull
resentment--the resentment of a tribesman who finds one of his clan done
to death, and knows that the avenging of blood is on his shoulders from
henceforth. He had no particular affection for his cousin, and
therefore no great sense of personal loss, but Wallingford after all was
of his breed, and he must bring his murderer to justice. Alderman Crood's house, big, broad, high, loomed up across him as the
odours of the tan-yard at its side and rear assailed his nostrils. As he
went towards it, the front door opened a little, and a man came out. He
and Brent met in the light of a street lamp, and Brent recognized a
policeman whom he had seen in the Mayor's Parlour. The man recognized
him, and touched his helmet. Brent stopped. "Oh," he said, "have you been to tell Mr. Crood of what has happened?" "Just that, sir," replied the policeman. "He's Deputy-Mayor, sir." "I know," said Brent. "Then, he's at home?" "Yes, sir." Brent was going forward, but a sudden curiosity seized on him. He
paused, glancing at the policeman suggestively. "Did--did Mr. Crood say anything?" he asked. The policeman shook his head. "Nothing, sir, except that he supposed Superintendent Hawthwaite was
seeing to everything." "Did you happen to tell him that I was here?" "I did, sir; I said his Worship's cousin from London had just come. No
harm, sir, I hope?" "Not a bit--glad you did," said Brent. "He'll expect me." He said good night to the man and walked forward to Alderman Crood's
door. It was like the house to which it gave entrance--very high and
broad, a massive affair, topped by a glass transom, behind which a
light, very dim and feeble, was burning. Brent felt for and rang a bell,
and heard it ring somewhere far off in the house. Then he waited; waited
so long that he was about to ring again, when he heard a bolt being
withdrawn inside the big door; then another. Each creaked in a fashion
that suggested small use, and the need of a little oil. The door opened,
and he found himself confronting a girl, who stood holding a small lamp
in her hand; behind her, at the far end of a gloomy, cavernous hall a
swinging lamp, turned low, silhouetted her figure. Something about the girl made Brent look at her with more attention than
he would ordinarily have given. She was a tallish girl, whose figure
would have been unusually good had it been properly filled out; as it
was, she was thin, but only too thin for her proportions--her thinness,
had she been three inches shorter, would have passed for a graceful
slenderness. But Brent took this in at a glance; his attention was more
particularly concentrated on the girl's face--a delicate oval, framed in
a mass of dark hair. She was all dark--dark hair, an olive complexion,
large, unusually lustrous dark eyes, fringed by long soft lashes, an
almost dark rose-tint on her cheeks. And in the look which she gave him
there was something as soft as her eyes, which were those of a shy
animal--something appealing, pathetic. He glanced hastily at her
attire--simple, even to plainness--and wondered who she was, and what
was her exact status in that big house, which seemed to require the
services of a staff of domestics. Brent asked for Alderman Crood. The girl glanced towards the end of the
hall and then looked at him doubtfully. "What name?" she inquired in tones that were little above a whisper. "My name's Brent," the caller answered, in a clear, loud voice. Somehow,
he had a suspicion that Crood was listening at the other end of the
cavernous hall. "I am Mr. Wallingford's cousin." The girl gave him a curious glance and motioning him to wait, went away
up the hall to a door which stood partly open, revealing a lighted
interior. She disappeared within; came out again, walked a little way
towards Brent, and spoke with a timid smile. "Will you please come this way?" she said. "Mr. Crood will see you." Brent strode up the hall, the girl, preceding him, pushed open the door
which she had just left. He walked into a big room and, through a fog of
tobacco smoke, saw that he was in the presence of three men, who sat in
arm-chairs round a hearth whereon a big fire of logs blazed. Behind
their chairs a table was set out with decanters and glasses, a
tobacco-jar and cigar-boxes: clearly he had interrupted a symposium of a
friendly and social sort. The visitor's eyes went straight to the obvious master of the house, a
big, heavily-built, massive-framed man of sixty or thereabouts, who sat
in state on the right-hand side of the hearth. Brent took in certain
details of his appearance at a glance: the broad, flabby,
parchment-hued face, wide mouth, square jaw, and small, shrewd eyes; the
suit of dead-black broadcloth, and the ample black neckcloth swathed
about an old-fashioned collar; he noted, too, the fob which dangled from
Alderman Crood's waist, and its ancient seals and ornaments. A survival
of the past, Alderman Crood, he thought, in outward seeming, but there
was that in his watchful expression which has belonged to man in every
age. The small shrewd eyes, in their turn, measured up Brent as he crossed
the threshold, and Crood, seeing what he would have described as a
well-dressed young gentleman who was evidently used to superior society,
did what he would certainly not have done for any man in
Hathelsborough--he rose from his chair and stretched out a hand. "How do you do, sir?" he said in a fat, unctuous voice. "The cousin of
our lamented Mayor, poor gentleman, of whose terrible fate we have this
moment learned, sir. I can assure you, Mr.--Brent, I think?--and
whatever other relations there may be, of our sincere sympathy, sir--I
never knew a more deplorable thing in my life. And to happen just as you
should arrive on a visit to your cousin, Mr. Brent--dear, dear! The
constable who came to inform me of what had happened mentioned that
you'd come, and we were just talking--But I'll introduce you to these
gentlemen, sir; allow me--Mr. Mallett, our esteemed bank manager. Mr.
Coppinger, our respected borough treasurer." Brent silently shook hands with the two other men; just as silently he
made a sharp inspection of them as they resettled themselves in their
chairs. Mallett, a spick-and-span sort of man, very precise as to the
cut of his clothes and particular as to the quality of his linen and the
trimming of his old-fashioned side-whiskers, he set down at once as the
personification of sly watchfulness: he was the type of person who would
hear all and say no more than was necessary or obligatory. Coppinger, a
younger man, had that same watchful look; a moment later, Brent saw it
in Crood's big face too. They were all watchful, all sly, these men, he
decided: the sort who would sit by and listen, and admit nothing and
tell nothing; already, before even he asked the questions which he had
come to put, he knew that he would get no answer other than
noncommittal, evasive ones. He saw that all three men, instead of being
anxious to give him information, were actuated by the same desire--to
find out what he knew, to hear what he had to say. Crood, as Brent seated himself, waved a hand towards the decanters on
the table. "You'll try a little drop o' something, Mr. Brent?" he said, with
insinuating hospitality. "A taste of whisky, now? Do you no harm after
what you've just been through." He turned to the girl, who had followed
Brent into the room and, picking up her needlework, had seated herself
near the master of the house. "Queenie, my love," he continued, "give
the gentleman a whisky and soda--say the word, sir. My niece, sir--Miss
Queenie Crood--all my establishment, Mr. Brent; quiet, old-fashioned
folk we are, but glad to see you, sir; though I wish the occasion had
been a merrier one--dear, dear!" Brent made the girl a polite bow and, not wishing to show himself
stand-offish, took the glass which she mixed and handed to him. He
turned to Crood. "It's not a pleasant occasion for me, sir," he said. "I am my cousin's
nearest blood-relative, and it lies with me to do what I can to find out
who's responsible for his death. I understand that you are Deputy-Mayor,
so naturally you're conversant with his public affairs. Now, I've learnt
within the last hour that he had become unpopular in the town--made
enemies. Is that so, Mr. Crood?" Crood, who was smoking a long churchwarden pipe, took its stem from his
lips, and waved it in the air with an expressive motion. "Well, well!" he said soothingly. "There might ha' been a little of
something of that sort, you know, Mr. Brent, but in a purely political
sense, sir, an entirely political sense only. No personal feeling, you
know, sir. I'm sure Mr. Mallett there will agree with me--and Mr.
Coppinger too." "Absolutely!" said Mallett. "Unreservedly!" said Coppinger. "Your cousin, sir, our late lamented Mayor, was much respected in the
town," continued Crood. "He was the hardest-working Mayor we've had for
many years, Mr. Brent." "A first-rate man of business!" observed Mallett. "A particularly clever hand at figures!" remarked Coppinger. "A man as tried hard to do his duty," said Crood. "Of course I'll not
say that everybody saw eye to eye with him. They didn't. Wherever
there's public bodies, Mr. Brent, there'll be parties. Your poor cousin
had his party--and there was, to be sure, a party against him and his. But you'll be well aware, sir, as a London gentleman, that no doubt
often visits Parliament, that here in England men is enemies in politics
that's firm friends outside 'em. I believe I may say that that's a fact,
sir?" "Oh, no doubt!" agreed Brent. He was already feeling at a loss, and he
scarcely knew what to say next. "I heard, though, that my cousin, as
Mayor, was proposing such drastic reforms in the administration of your
borough affairs, that--well, in short, that personal feeling had been
imported." Crood shook his head more solemnly than ever. "I think you've been misinformed on that point, Mr. Brent," he said. "There may be--no doubt are--mischievous persons that would say such
things, but I never heard nothing of the sort, sir. Political feeling,
perhaps; but personal feeling--no!" "Certainly not!" said Mallett. "Nothing of the sort!" said Coppinger. "Now, I should say," remarked Crood, waving his pipe again, "that our
late lamented Mayor, as an individual, was much thought of amongst the
townspeople. I believe Mr. Mallett will agree with that--and Mr. Coppinger." "A great deal thought of," answered Mallett. "By, I should say, everybody," added Coppinger. "He was, of course, a comparative stranger," continued Crood. "Twelve
years only had he been amongst us--and now cut off, sudden and
malicious, at the beginning of his career! But well thought of, sir,
well thought of!" "Then you feel sure that this crime has not sprung out of his public
affairs?" suggested Brent. "It's not what you'd call a political
murder?" "Of that, sir, I would take my solemn oath!" declared Crood. "The idea,
sir, is ridiculous." "Absurd!" said Mallett. "Out of the question!" affirmed Coppinger. "Why then, has he been murdered?" asked Brent. "What's at the bottom of
it?" All three men shook their heads. They looked at each other. They looked
at Brent. "Ay--what?" said Crood. "Just so!" agreed Mallett. "That's precisely where it is," concluded Coppinger. "Exactly!" "More in it than anyone knows of--most probably--at present, Mr. Brent,"
observed Crood, with solemn significance. "Time, sir, time! Time, sir,
may tell--may!" Brent saw that he was not going to get any information under that roof,
and after a further brief exchange of trite observations he rose to take
his leave. Alderman Crood wrung his hand. "Sorry I am, sir, that your first visit to my establishment should be
under such painful circumstances," he said unctuously. "I hope you'll
favour me with another talk, sir--always pleased to see a London
gentleman, I'm sure--we're behind, perhaps, in these parts, Mr. Brent,
but honest and hearty, sir, honest and hearty. Queenie, my love, you'll
open the door for the young gentleman?" The girl took Brent into the gloomy hall. Halfway along its shadows, she
suddenly turned on him with a half shy, half daring expression. "You are from London?" she whispered. "From London?--yes," said Brent. "Why?" "I want to--to talk to somebody about London," she went on, with a
nervous, backward glance at the door they had just left. "May I--will
you let me talk to--you?" "To be sure!" answered Brent. "But when--where?" "I go into the Castle grounds every afternoon," she answered timidly. "Could--could you come there--some time?" "To-morrow afternoon?" suggested Brent. "Say three o'clock? Would that
do?" "Yes," she whispered. "Thank you--I'll be there. It seems--queer, but
I'll tell you. Thank you again--you'll understand to-morrow." She had her hand on the big street door by then. Without more words she
let him out into the night; he heard the door close heavily behind him. He went back towards the heart of the little town, wondering. Only a few
hours before, he had been in the rush and bustle of Fleet Street, and
now, here he was, two hundred miles away, out of the world, and faced
with an atmosphere of murder and mystery. CHAPTER IV

BULL'S SNUG


When Brent came again to the centre of the town he found that
Hathelsborough, instead of sinking to sleep within an hour of curfew,
according to long-established custom, had awakened to new life. There
were groups at every corner, and little knots of folk at doors, and men
in twos and threes on the pavement, and it needed no particular
stretching of his ears to inform him that everybody was talking of the
murder of his cousin. He caught fragmentary bits of surmise and comment
as he walked along; near a shadowy corner of the great church he
purposely paused, pretending to tie his shoe-lace, in order to overhear
a conversation between three or four men who had just emerged from the
door of an adjacent tavern, and were talking in loud, somewhat excited
tones: working men, these, whose speech was in the vernacular. "You can bet your life 'at this job's been done by them whose little
game Wallingford were going to checkmate!" declared one man. "I've allus
said 'at he were running a rare old risk. We know what t' old saying is
about new brooms sweeping clean--all very well, is that, but ye can
smash a new broom if ye use it over vigorously. Wallingford were going
a bit too deeply into t' abuses o' this town--an' he's paid t' penalty. Put out o' t' way--that's t' truth on it!" "Happen it may be," said a second man. "And happen not. There's no
denying 'at t' Mayor were what they call a man o' mystery. A mysterious
chap, d'ye see, in his comings and goings. Ye don't know 'at he mayn't
ha' had secret enemies; after all, he were nowt but a stranger i' t'
town--nobbut been here twelve year or so. How do we know owt about him? It may be summat to do wi' t' past, this here affair. I'm none going t'
believe 'at there's anybody i' Hathelsborough 'ud stick a knife into him
just because he were cleaning up t' town money affairs, like." "Never ye mind!" asserted the former speaker. "He were going to touch t'
pockets o' some on 'em, pretty considerable, were t' Mayor. And ye know
what Hathelsborough folk is when their pockets is touched--they'll stick
at nowt! He's been put away, has Wallingford, 'cause he were interfering
over much." Brent walked on, reflecting. His own opinions coincided, uncomfortably
but decidedly, with those of the last speaker, and a rapidly-growing
feeling of indignation and desire for vengeance welled up within him. He
looked round at the dark-walled, closely shuttered old houses about him
with a sense of dull anger--surely they were typical of the reserve, the
cunning watchfulness, the suggestive silences of the folk who lived in
them, of whom he had just left three excellent specimens in Crood,
Mallett and Coppinger. How was he, a stranger, going to unearth the
truth about his cousin's brutal murder, amongst people like these,
endowed, it seemed to him, with an Eastern-like quality of
secretiveness? But he would! He went on to the rooms in which Wallingford had lived ever since his
first coming to the town. They were good, roomy, old-fashioned
apartments in a big house, cosy and comfortable, but the sight of
Wallingford's study, of his desk, his books and papers, of his favourite
chair and his slippers at the fire, of the supper-table already spread
for him and Brent in an inner parlour, turned Brent sick at heart. He
turned hastily to Wallingford's landlady, who had let him in and
followed him into the dead man's room. "It's no use, Mrs. Appleyard," he said. "I can't stop here to-night,
anyway. It would be too much! I'll go to the _Chancellor_, and send on
for my luggage." The woman nodded, staring at him wonderingly. The news had evidently
wrought a curious change in her; usually, she was a cheery,
good-natured, rather garrulous woman, but she looked at Brent now as if
something had dazed her. "Mr. Brent," she whispered, in awe-stricken accents, "you could have
knocked me down with a feather when they came here and told me. He was
that well--and cheerful--when he went out!" "Yes," said Brent dully. "Yes." He let his eyes run over the room
again--he had looked forward to having a long, intimate chat with
Wallingford that night over the bright fire, still crackling and
glowing in readiness for host and guest. "Ay, well!" he added. "It's
done now!" "Them police fellows, Mr. Brent," said the landlady, "have they any idea
who did it?" "I don't think they've the least idea yet," replied Brent. "I suppose
you haven't, either?" Mrs. Appleyard, thus spurred to reminiscence, recovered something of her
customary loquaciousness. "No, to be sure I haven't," she answered. "But I've heard things, and I
wish--eh, I do wish!--that I'd warned him! I ought to ha' done." "What about?" asked Brent. "And what things?" The landlady hesitated a little, shaking her head. "Well, you know, Mr. Brent," she said at last, "in a little town like
this, folk will talk--Hathelsborough's a particular bad place for talk
and gossip; for all that, Hathelsborough people's as secret as the grave
when they like, about their own affairs. And, as I say, I've heard
things. There's a woman comes here to work for me at odd times, a woman
that sometimes goes to put in a day or two at Marriner's Laundry, where
a lot of women works, and I recollect her telling me not so long since
that there was talk amongst those women about the Mayor and his
interfering with things, and she'd heard some of 'em remark that he'd
best keep his fingers out o' the pie or he'd pay for it. No more, Mr.
Brent; but a straw'll show which way the wind blows. I'm sure there was
them in the town that wanted to get rid of him. All the same--murder!" "Just so," said Brent. "Well, I've got to find it all out." He went away to the _Chancellor_ Hotel, made his arrangements, sent to
Mrs. Appleyard's for his luggage, and eventually turned into bed. But it was little sleep that Brent got that night, and he was thankful
when morning came and he could leave his bed and find relief in
activity. He was out and about while the grey mists still hung around
the Hathelsborough elms, and at eight o'clock walked into the
police-station, anxious for news. Hawthwaite had no news for him. Late the previous night, and early that
morning, the police had carried out an exhaustive search of the old Moot
Hall, and had failed to discover anything that seemed to bear relation
to the crime. Also they had made themselves acquainted with the murdered
man's movements immediately previous to his arrival at the Moot Hall;
there was nothing whatever in them that afforded any clue. "We know all that he did from five o'clock yesterday afternoon to the
time you found him, Mr. Brent," said Hawthwaite. "He left his office at
five o'clock, and went home to his rooms. He was there till nearly seven
o'clock. He went out then and walked round by Abbey Lodge, where he left
some books--novels, or something of the sort--for Mrs. Saumarez. Then----"

"Who's Mrs. Saumarez?" asked Brent. "She's a young widow lady, very wealthy, it's understood, who came to
live in the town some two years ago," replied Hawthwaite. "Very handsome
young woman--you'll be seeing her. Between you and me," he added, with a
knowing glance, "his Worship--late Worship, I should say--had been
showing her great attention, and I don't think she was indifferent to
him--he used to go and dine with her a good deal anyway. However, that's
neither here nor there, just now. He called, I say, at Abbey Lodge, left
these books, and then came on to the Moot Hall, as Bunning said. That's
the plain truth about his movements." "I don't think his movements matter," observed Brent. "What does matter
is--what were the movements of the murderer, and how did he get into the
Mayor's Parlour? Or was he concealed there when my cousin entered and,
if so, how did he get out and away?" "Ay, just so, Mr. Brent," agreed Hawthwaite. "As to that, we know
nothing--so far. But it was of importance to find out about your
cousin's own movements, because, you see, he might have been seen, for
instance, in conversation with some stranger, or--or something of that
sort, and it all helps." "You don't know anything about the presence of any strangers in the town
last night?" inquired Brent. "Oh, we've satisfied ourselves about that," replied Hawthwaite. "We made
full inquiries last night at the railway station and at the hotels. There were no strangers came into the town last night, or evening, or
afternoon, barring yourself and a couple of commercial travellers who
are well known here. We saw to that particular at once." "Then you've really found out--nothing?" suggested Brent. "Nothing!" asserted Hawthwaite. "But the inquest won't be held until
to-morrow morning, and by then we may know something. And, in the
meantime, there's something you might do, Mr. Brent--I gather that
you're his next-of-kin? Very well, sir, then you might examine his
papers--private papers and so on. You never know what bit of sidelight
you might come upon." "Very good," said Brent. "But I shall want help--large help--in that. Can you recommend a solicitor, now?" "There's Mr. Tansley," replied Hawthwaite. "His office is next door to
his late Worship's--a sound man, Tansley, Mr. Brent. And, if I were you,
I should get Tansley to represent you at the inquest to-morrow--legal
assistance is a good thing to have, sir, at an affair of that sort." Brent nodded his acquiescence and went back to his hotel. He was
thankful that there were few guests in the house--he had no wish to be
stared at as a principal actor in the unfolding drama. Yet he speedily
realized that he had better lay aside all squeamish feelings of that
sort; he foresaw that the murder of its Mayor would throw Hathelsborough
into the fever of a nine-days' wonder, and that his own activities would
perforce draw attention to himself. And there were things to be done,
and after he had breakfasted he set resolutely and systematically about
doing them. Tansley's office first--he made an arrangement with Tansley
to meet him at Wallingford's rooms that afternoon, to go through any
private papers that might be found there. Then his cousin's
office--there were clerks there awaiting instructions. Brent had to
consult with them as to what was to be done about business. And that
over, there was another and still more difficult task--the arrangements
for Wallingford's interment. Of one thing Brent was determined--whatever
Alderman Crood, as Deputy-Mayor, or whatever the Aldermen and
Councillors of Hathelsborough desired, he, as the murdered man's
next-of-kin, was not going to have any public funeral or demonstration;
it roused his anger to white heat to think of even the bare possibility
of Wallingford's murderer following him in smug hypocrisy to his grave. And in Brent's decided opinion that murderer was a Hathelsborough man,
and one of high place. It was nearly noon when he had completed these arrangements, and then,
having no more to do at the moment, he remembered the little newspaper
man, Peppermore, and his invitation to call at the _Monitor_ office. So,
as twelve o'clock chimed and struck from the tower of St. Hathelswide,
he walked up the narrow entry from the market-place, along which the
editor-reporter had shot the previous night, and, after a preliminary
reconnoitring of the premises, tapped at a door marked "Editorial." A
shrill voice bade him enter, and he turned the handle to find himself
inspecting an unusually untidy and littered room, the atmosphere of
which seemed chiefly to be derived from a mixture of gas, paste and
printers' ink. Somewhere beyond sounded the monotonous rumble of what
was probably an old-fashioned printing machine. A small-figured, sharp-faced, red-haired youngster of apparently fifteen
or sixteen years was the sole occupant of this unsavoury sanctum. He was
very busy--so busy that he had divested himself of his jacket, and had
rolled up his shirt-sleeves. In his right hand he wielded a pair of
scissors; with them he was industriously clipping paragraphs from a pile
of newspapers which lay before him on a side-table. It was evident that
he had a sharp eye for telling stuff, for in the moment which elapsed
after Brent's entrance he had run it over a column, swooped on a likely
item, snipped it out and added it to a heap of similar gleanings at his
elbow. He glanced at his caller with an expression which was of the sort
that discourages wasting of time. "Mr. Peppermore?" inquired Brent, taking his cue. "In?" "Out," answered the boy. "Long?" demanded Brent. "Can't say," said the busy one. "Might be and mightn't." Then he gave
Brent a close inspection. "If it's news," he added, "I can take it. Is
it?" "No news," replied Brent. "Mr. Peppermore asked me to call. I'll wait." He perched himself on the counter, and watched the scissors. "You're the
sub-editor, I reckon?" he said at last with a smile. "Eh?" "I'm all sorts of things in this blooming office," answered the boy. "We're short-handed here, I can tell you! Takes me and Mr. P. all our
time to get the paper out. Why, last week, Mr. P. he didn't have time to
write his Editorial! We had to shove an old one in. But lor' bless you,
I don't believe anybody reads 'em! Liveliness, and something about
turnips--that's what our folks likes. However, they'll have some good
stuff this week. We'd a real first-class murder in this town last night. The Mayor! Heard about it?" "I've heard," said Brent. "Um! And how long have you been at that job?" "Twelve months," replied the boy. "I was in the law before that--six
months. But the law didn't suit me. Slow! There's some go in this--bit
too much now and then. What we want is another reporter. Comes hard on
me and Mr. Peppermore, times. I did two cricket matches, a fire, a lost
child, and a drowning case last Saturday." "Good!" said Brent. "Know any shorthand?" "I can do a fair bit," answered the man-of-all-work. "Learning. Can
you?" "Some," replied Brent. "Did a lot--once. What system?" But just then Peppermore, more in a hurry than ever, came bustling in,
to beam brightly through his spectacles at sight of his visitor. "Mr. Brent!" he exclaimed. "Delighted, my dear sir, charmed! Not often
our humble roof is extended over a distinguished visitor. Take a chair,
sir--but no! stop! I've an idea." He seized Brent by the lapel of his
coat and became whispering and mysterious. "Step outside," he said. "Twelve o'clock--we'll go over to Bull's." "What's Bull's?" asked Brent, as they went out into the entry. Peppermore laughed and wagged his finger. "Bull's, sir?" he said. "Bull's?--centre of all the gossip in
Hathelsborough. Come across there and have a quiet glass with me, and
keep your eyes and ears open. I've been trying all the morning to get
some news, ideas, impressions, about the sad event of last night, Mr.
Brent--now, for current criticism, Bull's is the place. All the gossips
of the town congregate there, sir." "All right," agreed Brent. "Show the way!" Peppermore led him down the narrow entry, across the market-place, and
into an equally narrow passage that opened between two shops near High
Cross. There Brent found himself confronted by what seemed to be a high,
blank, doorless and windowless wall; Peppermore perceived his
astonishment and laughed. "Some queer, odd nooks and corners in Hathelsborough, Mr. Brent!" he
said knowingly. "It would take a stranger a long time to find out all
the twists and turns in this old town. But everybody knows the way to
Bull's Snug--and here we are!" He suddenly made a sharp turn to the right and into another passage,
where he pushed open a door, steered his companion by the elbow through
a dark entry, and thrusting aside a heavy curtain ushered him into as
queer a place as Brent had ever seen. It was a big, roomy apartment,
lavishly ornamented with old sporting prints and trophies of the rustic
chase; its light came from the top through a skylight of coloured glass;
its floor was sawdusted; there were shadowy nooks and recesses in it,
and on one side ran a bar, presided over by two hefty men in their
shirt-sleeves. And here, about the bar, and in knots up and down the
room and at the little tables in the corners, was a noontide assemblage,
every man with a glass in his hand or at his elbow. Peppermore drew
Brent into a vacant alcove and gave him a significant glance. "I guess there isn't a man in this room, Mr. Brent, that hasn't got his
own theory about what happened last night," he murmured. "I don't
suppose any of 'em know you--they're not the sort of men you'd meet
when you were here before--these are all chiefly tradesmen, betting men,
sportsmen, and so on. But as I say, if you want the gossip of the town,
here's the place! There never was a rumour in Hathelsborough but it was
known and canvassed and debated and improved upon in Bull's, within an
hour. Every scandalmonger and talebearer comes here--and here's," he
continued, suddenly dropping his voice to a whisper, "one of the biggest
of 'em--watch him, and listen to him, if he comes near us. That tall,
thin man, in the grey suit, the man with the grizzled moustache. Listen,
Mr. Brent; I'll tell you who that chap is, for he's one of the queerest
and at the same time most interesting characters in the town. That, sir,
is Krevin Crood, the ne'er-do-weel brother of Mr. Alderman Crood--watch
him!" CHAPTER V

SLEEPING FIRES


Already interested in the Crood family because of what he had seen of
Simon Crood and his niece on the previous evening, Brent looked closely
at the man whom Peppermore pointed out. There was no resemblance in him
to his brother, the Alderman. He was a tall, spare, fresh-coloured man,
apparently about fifty years of age, well-bred of feature, carefully
groomed; something in his erect carriage, slightly swaggering air and
defiant eye suggested the military man. Closer inspection showed Brent
that the grey tweed suit, though clean and scrupulously pressed, was
much worn, that the brilliantly polished shoes were patched, that the
linen, freshly-laundered though it was, was far from new--everything,
indeed, about Krevin Crood, suggested a well-kept man of former
grandeur. "Decayed old swell--that's what he looks like, eh, Mr. Brent?" whispered
Peppermore, following his companion's thoughts. "Ah, they say that once
upon a time Krevin Crood was the biggest buck in Hathelsborough--used to
drive his horses and ride his horses, and all the rest of it. And
now--come down to that." He winked significantly as he glanced across the room, and Brent knew
what he meant. Krevin Crood, lofty and even haughty in manner as he was,
had lounged near the bar and stood looking around him, nodding here and
there as he met the eye of an acquaintance. "Waiting till somebody asks him to drink," muttered Peppermore. "Regular
sponge, he is! And once used to crack his bottle of champagne with the
best!" "What's the story?" asked Brent, still quietly watching the subject of
Peppermore's remarks. "Oh, the old one," said Peppermore. "Krevin Crood was once a solicitor,
and Town Clerk, and, as I say, the biggest swell in the place. Making
his couple of thousand a year, I should think. Come down in the usual
fashion--drink, gambling, extravagance and so on. And in the end they
had to get rid of him--as Magistrates' Clerk, I mean: it was impossible
to keep him on any longer. He'd frittered away his solicitor's practice
too by that time, and come to the end of his resources. But Simon was
already a powerful man in the town, so they--he and some others--cooked
things nicely for Krevin. Krevin Crood, Mr. Brent, is one of the
Hathelsborough abuses that your poor cousin meant to rid the ratepayers
of--fact, sir!" "How?" asked Brent. "Well," continued Peppermore, "I said that Simon and some others cooked
things for him. Instead of dismissing Krevin for incompetence and
inattention to his duties, they retired him--with a pension. Krevin
Crood, sir, draws a hundred and fifty-six pounds a year out of the
revenues of this rotten little borough--all because he's Simon's
brother. Been drawing that--three pounds a week--for fifteen years now. It's a scandal! However, as I say, he once had two thousand a year." "A difference," remarked Brent. "Ay, well, he adds a bit to his three pound," said Peppermore. "He does
odd jobs for people. For one thing, he carries out all Dr. Wellesley's
medicines for him. And he shows strangers round the place--he knows all
about the history and antiquities of the Castle, St. Hathelswide, and
St. Laurence, and the Moot Hall, and so on. A hanger-on, and a
sponge--that's what he is, Mr. Brent. But clever--as clever, sir, as
he's unprincipled." "The Croods seem to be an interesting family," observed Brent. "Who is
that girl that I saw last night--the Alderman's niece? Is she, by any
chance, this chap's daughter?" "Queenie," said Peppermore. "Pretty girl too, that, Mr. Brent. No, sir;
she's this chap's niece, and Simon's. She's the daughter of another
Crood. Ben Crood. Ben's dead--he never made anything out, either--died,
I believe, as poor as a church mouse. Simon's the moneyed man of the
Crood family--the old rascal rolls in brass, as they call it here. So he
took Queenie out of charity, and I'll bet my Sunday hat that he gets out
of her the full equivalent of all that he gives her! Catch him giving
anything for nothing!" "You don't love Alderman Crood?" suggested Brent. Peppermore picked up his glass of bitter ale and drank off what
remained. He set down the glass with a bang. "Wouldn't trust him any farther than I could throw his big carcase!" he
said with decision. "Nor any more than I would Krevin there--bad 'uns,
both of 'em. But hullo! as nobody's come forward this morning, Krevin's
treating himself to a drink! That's his way--he'll get his drink for
nothing, if he can, but, if he can't, he's always got money. Old
cadger!" Brent was watching Krevin Crood. As Peppermore had just said, nobody had
joined Krevin at the bar. And now he was superintending the mixing of a
drink which one of the shirt-sleeved barmen was preparing for him. Presently, glass in hand, he drew near a little knot of men, who, in the
centre of the room, were gossiping in whispers. One of the men turned on
him. "Well, and what's Sir Oracle got to say about it?" he demanded, with
something like a covert sneer. "You'll know all about it, Krevin, I
reckon! What's your opinion?" Krevin Crood looked over the speaker with a quiet glance of conscious
superiority. However much he might have come down in the world, he still
retained the manners of a well-bred and educated man, and Brent was not
surprised to hear a refined and cultured accent when he presently spoke. "If you are referring to the unfortunate and lamentable occurrence of
last night, Mr. Spelliker," he answered, "I prefer to express no
opinion. The matter is _sub judice_." "Latin!" sneered the questioner. "Ay! you can hide a deal o' truth away
behind Latin, you old limbs o' the law! But I reckon the truth'll come
out, all the same." 