

E-text prepared by Sankar Viswanathan, Suzanne Shell, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



RAVENSDENE COURT

by

J. S. FLETCHER







New York
Alfred A. Knopf
MCMXXII

Copyright, 1922, by
Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. Published July, 1922





CONTENTS


I     THE INN ON THE CLIFF               9

II    RAVENSDENE COURT                  21

III   THE MORNING TIDE                  34

IV    THE TOBACCO BOX                   46

V     THE NEWS FROM DEVONPORT           58

VI    SECRET THEFT                      71

VII   YELLOWFACE                        84

VIII  WAS IT A WOMAN? 96

IX    THE ENLARGED PHOTOGRAPH          108

X     THE YELLOW SEA                   120

XI    THE FIVE CONCLUSIONS             133

XII   NETHERFIELD BAXTER               145

XIII  THE SPOILS OF SACRILEGE          157

XIV   SOLOMON FISH                     169

XV    MR. JALLANBY--SHIP BROKER        181

XVI   THE PATHLESS WOOD                193

XVII  HUMFREY DE KNAYTHVILLE           206

XVIII THE PLUM CAKE                    218

XIX   BLACK MEMORIES                   230

XX    THE POSSIBLE REASON              242

XXI   THE CHINESE GENTLEMAN            254

XXII  RED DAWN                         267

XXIII THE FOURTH CHINAMAN              279

XXIV  THE SILK CAP                     291

XXV   CLEAR DECKS                      304





RAVENSDENE COURT

CHAPTER I

THE INN ON THE CLIFF


According to an entry in my book of engagements, I left London for
Ravensdene Court on March 8th, 1912. Until about a fortnight earlier I
had never heard of the place, but there was nothing remarkable in my
ignorance of it, seeing that it stands on a remote part of the
Northumbrian coast, and at least three hundred miles from my usual
haunts. But then, towards the end of February, I received the
following letter which I may as well print in full: it serves as a
fitting and an explanatory introduction to a series of adventures, so
extraordinary, mysterious, and fraught with danger, that I am still
wondering how I, until then a man of peaceful and even dull life, ever
came safely through them. "RAVENSDENE COURT, NEAR ALNWICK
                                         NORTHUMBERLAND
                                       February 24, 1912

     "_Dear Sir_,

     "I am told by my friend Mr. Gervase Witherby of Monks
     Welborough, with whom I understand you to be well
     acquainted, that you are one of our leading experts in
     matters relating to old books, documents, and the like, and
     the very man to inspect, value, and generally criticize the
     contents of an ancient library. Accordingly, I should be
     very glad to secure your valuable services. I have recently
     entered into possession of this place, a very old
     manor-house on the Northumbrian coast, wherein the senior
     branch of my family has been settled for some four hundred
     years. There are here many thousands of volumes, the
     majority of considerable age; there are also large
     collections of pamphlets, manuscripts, and broadsheets--my
     immediate predecessor, my uncle, John Christopher Raven, was
     a great collector; but, from what I have seen of his
     collection up to now, I cannot say that he was a great
     exponent of the art of order, or a devotee of system, for an
     entire wing on this house is neither more nor less than a
     museum, into which books, papers, antiques, and similar
     things appear to have been dumped without regard to
     classification or arrangement. I am not a bookman, nor an
     antiquary; my life until recently has been spent in far
     different fashion, as a Financial Commissioner in India. I
     am, however, sincerely anxious that these new possessions of
     mine should be properly cared for, and I should like an
     expert to examine everything that is here, and to advise me
     as to proper arrangement and provision for the future. I
     should accordingly be greatly obliged to you if you could
     make it convenient to come here as my guest, give me the
     benefit of your expert knowledge, and charge me whatever fee
     seems good to you. I cannot promise you anything very lively
     in the way of amusement in your hours of relaxation, for
     this is a lonely place, and my family consists of nothing
     but myself and my niece, a girl of nineteen, just released
     from the schoolroom; but you may find some more congenial
     society in another guest of mine, Mr. Septimus Cazalette,
     the eminent authority on numismatics, who is here for the
     purpose of examining the vast collection of coins and medals
     formed by the kinsman I have just referred to. I can also
     promise you the advantages of a particularly bracing
     climate, and assure you of a warm welcome and every possible
     provision for your comfort. In the hope that you will be
     able to come to me at an early date,

                     "I am, dear sir,

                            "Yours truly,

                                  "FRANCIS RAVEN. "Leonard Middlebrook, ESQ.,

    "35M, Old Buildings, Lincoln's Inn, W. C."

Several matters referred to in this letter inclined me towards going
to Ravensdene Court--the old family mansion--the thousands of ancient
volumes--the prospect of unearthing something of real note--the
chance of examining a collector's harvest--and perhaps more than
anything, the genuinely courteous and polite tone of my invitation. I
was not particularly busy at that time, nor had I been out of London
for more than a few days now and then for several years: a change to
the far-different North had its attractions. And after a brief
correspondence with him, I arranged to go down to Mr. Raven early in
March, and remain under his roof until I had completed the task which
he desired me to undertake. As I have said already, I left London on
the 8th of March, journeying to Newcastle by the afternoon express
from King's Cross. I spent that night at Newcastle and went forward
next morning to Alnmouth, which according to a map with which I had
provided myself, was the nearest station to Ravensdene Court. And soon
after arriving at Alnmouth the first chapter of my adventures opened,
and came about by sheer luck. It was a particularly fine, bright,
sharply-bracing morning, and as I was under no particular obligation
to present myself at Ravensdene Court at any fixed time, I determined
to walk thither by way of the coast. The distance, according to my
map, was about nine or ten miles. Accordingly, sending on my luggage
by a conveyance, with a message to Mr. Raven that I should arrive
during the afternoon, I made through the village of Lesbury toward the
sea, and before long came in sight of it ... a glorious stretch of
blue, smooth that day as an island lake and shining like polished
steel in the light of the sun. There was not a sail in sight, north
or south or due east, nor a wisp of trailing smoke from any passing
steamer: I got an impression of silent, unbroken immensity which
seemed a fitting prelude to the solitudes into which my mission had
brought me. I was at that time just thirty years of age, and though I had been
closely kept to London of late years, my youth had been spent in
lonely places, and I had an innate love of solitudes and wide spaces. I saw at once that I should fall in love with this Northumbrian coast,
and once on its headlands I took my time, sauntering along at my
leisure: Mr. Raven, in one of his letters, had mentioned seven as his
dinner hour: therefore, I had the whole day before me. By noon the sun
had grown warm, even summer-like; warm enough, at any rate, to warrant
me in sitting down on a ledge of the cliffs while I smoked a pipe of
tobacco and stared lazily at the mighty stretch of water across which,
once upon a time, the vikings had swarmed from Norway. I must have
become absorbed in my meditations--certainly it was with a start of
surprise that I suddenly realized that somebody was near me, and
looked up to see, standing close by and eyeing me furtively, a man. It was, perhaps, the utter loneliness of my immediate surroundings
just then that made me wonder to see any living thing so near. At that
point there was neither a sail on the sea, nor a human habitation on
the land; there was not even a sheep cropping the herbage of the
headlands. I think there were birds calling about the pinnacles of the
cliffs--yet it seemed to me that the man broke a complete stillness
when he spoke, as he quietly wished me a good morning. The sound of his voice startled me; also, it brought me out of a
reverie and sharpened my wits, and as I replied to him, I took him in
from head to foot. A thick-set middle-aged man, tidily dressed in a
blue serge suit of nautical cut, the sort of thing that they sell,
ready-made, in sea-ports and naval stations. His clothes went with his
dark skin and grizzled hair and beard, and with the gold rings which
he wore in his ears. And there was that about him which suggested that
he was for that time an idler, lounging. "A fine morning," I remarked, not at all averse to entering into
conversation, and already somewhat curious about him. "A fine morning it is, master, and good weather, and likely to keep
so," he answered, glancing around at sea and sky. Then he looked
significantly at my knickerbockers and at a small satchel which I
carried over my shoulders. "The right sort o' weather," he added, "for
gentlemen walking about the country--pleasuring." "You know these parts," I suggested. "No!" he said, with a decisive shake of his head. "I don't, master,
and that's a fact. I'm from the south, I am--never been up this way
before, and, queerly enough, for I've seen most of the world in my
time, never sailed this here sea as lies before us. But I've a sort of
connection with this bit of country--mother's side came from
hereabouts. And me having nothing particular to do, I came down here
to take a cast round, like, seeing places as I've heard of--heard of,
you understand, but ain't never seen." "Then you're stopping in the neighbourhood?" I asked. He raised one of his brown, hairy hands, and jerked a thumb landwards. "Stopped last night in a little place, inland," he answered. "Name of
Lesbury--a riverside spot. But that ain't what I want--what I want is
a churchyard, or it might be two, or it might be three, where there's
gravestones what bears a name. Only I don't know where that
churchyard--or, again, there may be more than one--is, d'ye see? Except--somewhere between Alnmouth one way and Brandnell Bay,
t'other." "I have a good map, if it's any use to you," I said. He took the map
with a word of thanks, and after spreading it out, traced places with
the end of his thick forefinger. "Hereabouts we are, at this present, master," he said, "and here and
there is, to be sure, villages--mostly inland. And'll have graveyards
to 'em--folks must be laid away somewhere. And in one of them
graveyards there'll be a name, and if I see that name, I'll know where
I am, and I can ask further, aiming at to find out if any of that name
is still flourishing hereabouts. But till I get that name, I'm clear
off my course, so to speak." "What is the name?" I asked him. "Name of Netherfield," he answered, slowly. "Netherfield. Mother's
people--long since. So I've been told. And seen it--in old books, what
I have far away in Devonport. That's the name, right enough, only I
don't know where to look for it. You ain't seen it, master, in your
wanderings round these parts?" "I've only come into these parts this morning," I replied. "But--if
you look closely at that map, you'll observe that there aren't many
villages along the coast, so your search ought not to be a lengthy
one. I should question if you'll find more than two or three
churchyards between here and Brandell Bay--judging by the map." "Aye, well, Netherfield is the name," he repeated. "Netherfield,
mother's side. In some churchyards hereabouts. And there may be some
of 'em left--and again there mayn't be. My name being Quick--Salter
Quick. Of Devonport--when on land." He folded up and handed back the map, with an old-fashioned bow. I
rose from the ledge of rock on which I had been resting, and made to
go forward. "I hope you'll come across what you're seeking, Mr. Quick," I said. "But I should say you won't have much difficulty. There can't be many
churchyards in this quarter, and not many gravestones in any of them." "I found nothing in that one behind," he answered, jerking his thumb
towards Lesbury. "And it's a long time since my mother left these
parts. But here I am--for the purpose, d'ye see, master. Time's no
object--nor yet expense. A man must take a bit of a holiday some day
or other. Ain't had one--me--for thirty odd year." *       *       *       *       *

We walked forward, northing our course, along the headlands. And
rounding a sharp corner, we suddenly came in sight of a little
settlement that lay half-way down the cliff. There was a bit of a
cottage or two, two or three boats drawn up on a strip of yellow sand,
a crumbling smithie, and above these things, on a shelf of rock, a
low-roofed, long-fronted inn, by the gable of which rose a mast,
wherefrom floated a battered flag. At the sight of this I saw a gleam
come into my companion's eye, and I was quick to understand it's
meaning. "Do you feel disposed to a glass of ale?" I asked. "I should say we
could get one down there." "Rum," he replied, laconically. "Rum is my drink, master. Used to
that--I ain't used to ale. Cold stuff! Give me something that warms a
man." "It's poor ale that won't warm a man's belly," I said with a laugh. "But every man to his taste. Come on, then." He followed in silence down the path to the lonely inn; once, looking
back, I saw that he was turning a sharp eye round and about the new
stretch of country that had just opened before us. From the inn and
its surroundings a winding track, a merely rough cartway, wound off
and upward into the land; in the distance I saw the tower of a church. Salter Quick saw it, too, and nodded significantly in its direction. "That'll be where I'll make next," he observed. "But first--meat and
drink. I ate my breakfast before seven this morning, and this walking
about on dry land makes a man hungry." "Drink you'll get here, no doubt," said I. "But as to meat--doubtful." His reply to that was to point to the sign above the inn door, to
which we were now close. He read its announcement aloud, slowly. "'The Mariner's Joy. By Hildebrand Claigue. Good Entertainment for Man
and Beast,'" he pronounced. "'Entertainment'--that means eating--meat
for man; hay for cattle. Not that there's much sign of either in these
parts, I think, master." We walked into the Mariner's Joy side by side, turning into a
low-ceilinged, darkish room, neat and clean enough, wherein there was
a table, chairs, the model of a ship in a glass case on the
mantelpiece, and a small bar, furnished with bottles and glasses,
behind which stood a tall, middle-aged man, clean-shaven, spectacled,
reading a newspaper. He bade us good morning, with no sign of surprise
at the presence of strangers, and looked expectantly from one to the
other. I turned to my companion. "Well?" I said. "You'll drink with me? What is it--rum?" "Rum it is, master, thanking you," he replied. "But vittals, too, is
what I want." He glanced knowingly at the landlord. "You ain't got
such a thing as a plateful--a good plateful!--of cold beef, with a
pickle--onion or walnut, 'tain't no matter. And bread--a loaf of real
home-baked? And a morsel of cheese?" The landlord smiled as he reached for the rum bottle. "I daresay we can fit you up, my lad," he answered. "Got a nice round
of boiled beef on go--as it happens. Drop of rum first, eh? And--yours
sir?" "A glass of ale if you please," said I. "And as I'm not quite as
hungry as our friend here, a crust of bread and a piece of cheese." The landlord satisfied our demands, and then vanished through a door
at the back of his bar. And when he had expressed his wishes for my
good health, Salter Quick tasted the rum, smacked his lips over it,
and looked about him with evident approval. "Sort of port that a vessel might put into with security and comfort
for a day or two, this, master," he observed. "I reckon I'll put
myself up here, while I'm looking round--this will do me very well. And doubtless there'll be them coming in here, night-time, as'll know
the neighbourhood, and be able to give a man points as to his
bearings." "I daresay you'll be very comfortable here," I assented. "It's not
exactly a desert island." "Aye, well, and Salter Quick's been in quarters of that sort in his
time," he observed, with a glance that suggested infinite meaning. "He
has, so! But this ain't no desert island, master. I can see they ain't
short of good grub and sound liquor here!" He made his usual jerk of the thumb--this time in the direction of the
landlord, who just then came back with a well-filled tray. And
presently, first removing his cap and saying his grace in a devout
fashion, he sat down and began to eat with an evidently sharp-set
appetite. Trifling with my bread and cheese, I turned to the landlord. "This is a very lonely spot," I said. "I was surprised to see a
licensed house here. Where do you get your customers?" "Ah, you wouldn't see it as you came along," replied the landlord. "I
saw you coming--you came from Alnmouth way. There's a village just
behind here--it 'ud be hidden from you by this headland at back of the
house--goodish-sized place. Plenty o' custom from that, o' nights. And
of course there's folks going along, north and south." Quick, his weather-stained cheeks bulging with his food, looked up
sharply. "A village, says you!" he exclaimed. "Then if a village, a church. And
if a church, a churchyard. There is a churchyard, ain't there?" "Why, there is a church, and there's a churchyard to it," replied the
landlord. "What o' that?" Quick nodded at me. "As I been explaining to this gentleman," he said, "churchyards is
what I'm looking for. Graves in 'em, you understand. And on them
graves, a name. Name of Netherfield. Now I asks you, friendly--ha' you
ever seen that name in your churchyard? 'Cause if so I'm at anchor. For the time being." "Well, I haven't," answered the landlord. "But our churchyard--Lord
bless you, there's scores o' them flat stones in it that's covered
with long grass--there might be that name on some of 'em, for aught I
know; I've never looked 'em over, I'm sure. But----"

Just then there came into the parlour a man, who from his rough dress,
appeared to be a cattle-drover or a shepherd. Claigue turned to him
with a glance that seemed to indicate him as authority. "Here's one as lives by that churchyard," he observed. "Jim! ha' you
ever noticed the name of Netherfield on any o' them old gravestones up
yonder? This gentleman's asking after it, and I know you mow that
churchyard grass time and again." "Never seen it!" answered the new-comer. "But--strange things!--there
was a man come up to me the other night, this side o' Lesbury, and
asked that very question--not o' these parts, he wasn't. But--"

He stopped at that. Salter Quick dropped his knife and fork with a
clatter, and held up his right hand. CHAPTER II

RAVENSDENE COURT


It was very evident to Claigue and myself, interested spectators, that
the new-comer's announcement, sudden and unexpected as it was, had had
the instantaneous effect of making Quick forget his beef and his rum. Indeed, although he was only half-way through its contents, he pushed
his plate away from him as if food were just then nauseous to him; his
right hand lifted itself in an arresting, commanding gesture, and he
turned a startled eye on the speaker, looking him through and through
as if in angry doubt of what he had just said. "What's that?" he snapped out. "What says you? Say it again--no, I'll
say it for you--to make sure that my ears ain't deceiving me! You met
a man--hereabouts--what asked you if you knew where there was graves
with a certain name on 'em? And that name was--Netherfield? Did you
say that?--I asks you serious?" The drover, or shepherd, or whatever he was, looked from Quick to me
and then to Claigue, and smiled, as if he wondered at Quick's
intensity of manner. "You've got it all right, mister," he answered. "That's just what I
did say. A stranger chap, he was--never seen him in these parts
before." Quick took up his glass and drank. There was no doubt about his being
upset, for his big hand trembled. "Where was this here?" he demanded. "Recent?" "Two nights ago," replied the man readily. "I was coming home,
lateish, from Almwick, and met with this here chap a bit this side o'
Lesbury. We walked a piece of the road together, talking. And he asked
me what I've told you. Did I know these parts?--was I a native
hereabouts?--did I know any churchyards with the name Netherfield on
gravestones? And I said I didn't, but that there was such-like places
in our parts where you couldn't see the gravestones for the grass, and
these might be what he was asking after. And when we came to them
cross-roads, where it goes to Denwick one direction and Boulmer the
other, he left me, and I ain't seen aught of him since. Nor heard." Quick pushed his empty glass across the table, with a sign to Claigue
to refill it; at the same time he pointed silently to his informant,
signifying that he was to be served at his expense. He was evidently
deep in thought by that time, and for a moment or two he sat staring
at the window and the blue sea beyond, abstracted and pondering. Suddenly he turned again on his informant. "What like was this here man?" he demanded. "I couldn't tell you, mister," replied the other. "It was well after
dark and I never saw his face. But, for the build of him, a strong-set
man, like myself, and just about your height. And now I come to think
of it, spoke in your way--not as we do in these quarters. A
stranger--like yourself. Seafaring man, I took him for." "And you ain't heard of his being about?" asked Quick. "Not a word, mister," affirmed the informant. "He went Denwick way
when he left me. That's going inland." Quick turned to me. "I would like to see that map of yours again, master, if you please,"
he said. "I ought to ha' provided myself with one before I came here." He spread the map out before him, and after taking another gulp of his
rum, proceeded to trace roads and places with the point of his finger. "Denwick?" he muttered. "Aye I see that. And these places where
there's a little cross?--that'll mean there's a church there?" I nodded an affirmative, silently watching him, and wondering what
this desire on the part of two men to find the graves of the
Netherfields might mean. And the landlord evidently shared my wonder,
for presently he plumped his customer with a direct question. "You seem very anxious to find these Netherfield gravestones," he
remarked, with good-humoured inquisitiveness. "And so, apparently,
does another man. Now, I've been in these parts a good many years, and
I've never heard of 'em; never even heard the name." "Nor me!" said the other man. "There's none o' that name in these
parts--'twixt Alnmouth Bay and Budle Point. I ain't never heard it!" "And he's a native," declared the landlord. "Born and bred and brought
up here. Wasn't you, Jim?" "Never been away from it," assented Jim, with a short laugh. "Never
been farther north than Belford, south than Warkworth, west than
Whittingham. And as for east, I reckon you can't get much further that
way than where we are now." "Not unless you take to the water, you can't," said Claigue. "No--we
ain't heard of no Netherfields hereabouts." Quick seemed indifferent to these remarks. He suddenly folded up the
map, returned it to me with a word of thanks, and plunging a hand in
his trousers' pocket, produced a fistful of gold coins. "What's to pay?" he demanded. "Take it out o' that--all we've had, and
do you help yourself to a glass and a cigar." He flung a sovereign on
the table, and rose to his feet. "I must be stepping along," he
continued, looking at me. "If so be as there's another man seeking
for----"

But at that he checked himself, remaining silent until Claigue counted
out and handed over his change; silently, too, he pocketed it, and
turned to the door. Claigue stopped him with an arresting word and
motion of his hand. "I say!" he said. "No business of mine, to be sure, but--don't you
show that money of yours over readily hereabouts--in places like this,
I mean. There's folk up and down these roads that 'ud track you for
miles on the chance of--eh, Jim?" "Aye--and farther!" assented Jim. "Keep it close, master." Quick listened quietly--just as quietly he slipped a hand to his hip
pocket, brought it back to the front and showed a revolver. "That and me, together--eh?" he said significantly. "Bad look-out for
anybody that came between us and the light." "They might come between you and the dark," retorted Claigue. "Take
care of yourself! 'Tisn't a wise thing to flash a handful of gold
about, my lad." Quick made no remark. He walked out on to the cobbled pavement in
front of the inn, and when I had paid Claigue for my modest lunch, and
had asked how far it was to Ravensdene Court, I followed him. He was
still in a brown study, and stood staring about him with moody eyes. "Well?" I said, still inquisitive about this apparently mysterious
man. "What next? Are you going on with your search?" He scraped the point of a boot on the cobble-stones for awhile, gazing
downwards almost as if he expected to unearth something; suddenly he
raised his eyes and gave me a franker look than I had so far had from
him. "Master," he said, in a low voice, and with a side glance at the open
door of the inn, "I'll tell you a bit more than I've said
before--you're a gentleman, I can see, and such keeps counsel. I've an
object--and a particular object!--in finding them graves. That's why
I've travelled all this way--as you might say, from one end of England
to the other. And now, arriving where they ought to be, I
find--another man after what I'm after! Another man!" "Have you any idea who he may be?" I asked. He hesitated--and then suddenly shook his head. "I haven't!" he answered. "No, I haven't, and that's a fact. For a
minute or two, in there, I thought that maybe I did know, or, at any
rate, had a notion; but it's a fact, I haven't. All the same, I'm
going Denwick way, to see if I can come across whoever it is, or get
news of him. Is that your road, master?" "No," I replied. "I'm going some way farther along the headlands. Well--I hope you'll be successful in your search for the family
gravestones." He nodded, very seriously. "I'm not going out o' this country till I've found 'em!" he asserted
determinedly. "It's what I've come three hundred miles for. Good-day,
master." He turned off by the track that led over the top of the headlands, and
as long as I watched him went steadily forward without even looking
back, or to the right or left of him. And presently I, too, went on my
way, and rounding another corner of the cliff left the lonely inn
behind me. *       *       *       *       *

But as I went along, following the line of the headlands, I wondered a
good deal about Salter Quick and the conversation at the Mariner's
Joy. What was it that this hard-bitten, travel-worn man, one who had
seen, evidently, much of wind and wave, was really after? I gave no
credence to his story of the family relationship--it was not at all
likely that a man would travel all the way from Devonshire to
Northumberland to find the graves of his mother's ancestors. There was
something beyond that--but what? It was very certain that Quick wanted
to come across the tombs of the dead and gone Netherfields, however,
for whatever purpose--certain, too, that there was another man who had
the same wish. That complicated matters, and it deepened the mystery. Why did two men--seafaring men, both of them--arrive in this
out-of-the-way spot about the same time, unknown to each other, but
each apparently bent on the same object? And what would happen if, as
seemed likely, they met? It was impossible to find an answer to these
questions; but the mystery was there, all the same. The afternoon remained fine, and, for the time of year, warm, and I
took advantage of it by dawdling along that glorious stretch of
sea-coast, taking in to the full its rich stores of romantic scenery
and suggestion of long-past ages. Sometimes I sat for a long time,
smoking my pipe on the edge of the headlands, staring at the blue of
the water, the curl of the waves on the brown sands, conscious most of
the compelling silence, and only dimly aware of the calling of the
sea-birds on the cliffs. Altogether, the afternoon was drawing to its
close when, rounding a bluff that had been in view before me for some
time, I came in sight of what I felt sure to be Ravensdene Court, a
grey-walled, stone-roofed Tudor mansion that stood at the head of a
narrow valley or ravine--dene they call it in those parts, though a
dene is really a tract of sand, while these breaks in the land are
green and thickly treed--through which a narrow, rock-encumbered
stream ran murmuring to the sea. Very picturesque in its old-worldness
it looked in the mellowing light; the very place, I thought, which a
bookman and an antiquary, such as I had heard the late owner to be,
would delight to store with his collections. A path that led inland from the edge of the cliffs took me after a few
minutes' walking to a rustic gate which was set in the boundary wall
of a small park; within the wall rose a belt of trees, mostly oak and
beech, their trunks obscured by a thick undergrowth. Passing through
this, I came out on the park itself, at a point where, on a well-kept
green, a girl, whom I immediately took to be the niece, recently
released from the schoolroom, of whom Mr. Raven had spoken in his
letter, was studying the lie of a golf ball. Behind her, carrying her
bag of sticks, stood a small boy, chiefly remarkable for his large
boots and huge tam-o'-shanter bonnet, who, as I appeared on the scene,
was intently watching his young mistress's putter, wavering
uncertainly in her slender hands before she ventured on what was
evidently a critical stroke. But before the stroke was made the girl
caught sight of me, paused, seemed to remember something, and then,
swinging her club, came lightly in my direction--a tallish,
elastic-limbed girl, not exactly pretty, but full of attraction
because of her clear eyes, healthy skin, and general atmosphere of
life and vivacity. Recently released from the schoolroom though she
might be, she showed neither embarrassment nor shyness on meeting a
stranger. Her hand went out to me with ready frankness. "Mr. Middlebrook?" she said inquiringly. "Yes, of course--I might have
known you'd come along the cliffs. Your luggage came this morning, and
we got your message. But you must be tired after all those miles? I'll take you up to the house and give you some tea." "I'm not at all tired, thank you," I answered. "I came along very
leisurely, enjoying the walk. Don't let me take you from your game." "Oh, that's all right," she said carelessly, throwing her putter to
the boy. "I've had quite enough; besides, it's getting towards dusk,
and once the sun sets, it's soon dark in these regions. You've never
seen Ravensdene Court before?" "Never," I replied, glancing at the house, which stood some two or three
hundred yards before us. "It seems to be a very romantically-situated,
picturesque old place. I suppose you know all its nooks and corners?" She gave her shoulders--squarely-set, well-developed ones--a little
shrug, and shook her head. "No, I don't," she answered. "I never saw it before last month. It's
all that you say--picturesque and romantic enough. And queer! I
believe it's haunted." "That adds to its charm," I remarked with a laugh. "I hope I shall
have the pleasure of seeing the ghost." "I don't!" she said. "That is, I hope I shan't. The house is odd
enough without that! But--you wouldn't be afraid?" "Would you?" I asked, looking more closely at her. "I don't know," she replied. "You'll understand more when you see the
place. There's a very odd atmosphere about it. I think something must
have happened there, some time. I'm not a coward, but, really, after
the daylight's gone----"

"You're adding to its charms!" I interrupted. "Everything sounds
delightful!" She looked at me half-inquiringly, and then smiled a little. "I believe you're pulling my leg," she said. "However--we'll see. But
you don't look as if you would be afraid--and you're not a bit like
what I thought you'd be, either." "What did you think I should be?" I asked, amused at her candour. "Oh, I don't know--a queer, snuffy, bald-pated old man, like Mr.
Cazalette," she replied. "Booky, and papery, and that sort of thing. And you're quite--something else--and young!" "The frost of thirty winters have settled on me," I remarked with mock
seriousness. "They must have been black frosts, then!" she retorted. "No!--you're a
surprise. I'm sure Uncle Francis is expecting a venerable, dry-as-dust
sort of man." "I hope he won't be disappointed," I said. "But I never told him I was
dry as dust, or snuffy, or bald----"

"It's your reputation," she said quickly. "People don't expect to find
such learning in ordinary young men in tweed suits." "Am I an ordinary young man, then?" I demanded. "Really----"

"Oh, well, you know what I mean!" she said hastily. "You can call me
a very ordinary young woman, if you like." "I shall do nothing of the sort!" said I. "I have a habit of always
calling things by their right names, and I can see already that you
are very far from being an ordinary young woman." "So you begin by paying me compliments?" she retorted with a laugh. "Very well--I've no objection, which shows that I'm human, anyhow. But
here is my uncle." I had already seen Mr. Francis Raven advancing to meet us; a tall,
somewhat stooping man with all the marks of the Anglo-Indian about
him: a kindly face burnt brown by equatorial suns, old-fashioned,
grizzled moustache and whiskers; the sort of man that I had seen more
than once coming off big liners at Tilbury and Southampton, looking as
if England, seen again after many years of absence, were a strange
country to their rather weary, wondering eyes. He came up with
outstretched hands; I saw at once that he was a man of shy, nervous
temperament. "Welcome to Ravensdene Court, Mr. Middlebrook!" he exclaimed in quick,
almost deprecating fashion. "A very dull and out-of-the-way place to
which to bring one used to London; but we'll do our best--you've had a
convoy across the park, I see," he added with a glance at his niece. "That's right!" "As charming a one as her surroundings are delightful, Mr. Raven," I
said, assuming an intentionally old-fashioned manner. "If I am treated
with the same consideration I have already received, I shall be loth
to bring my task to an end!" "Mr. Middlebrook is a bit of a tease, Uncle Francis," said my guide. "I've found that out already. He's not the paper-and-parchment person
you expected." "Oh, dear me, I didn't expect anything of the sort!" protested Mr.
Raven. He looked from his niece to me, and laughed, shaking his head. "These modern young ladies--ah!" he exclaimed. "But come--I'll show
Mr. Middlebrook his rooms." He led the way into the house and up the great stair of the hall to a
couple of apartments which overlooked the park. I had a general sense
of big spaces, ancient things, mysterious nooks and corners; my own
rooms, a bed-chamber and a parlour, were delightful. My host was
almost painfully anxious to assure himself that I had everything in
them that I was likely to want, and fussed about from one room to the
other, seeing to details that I should never have thought of. "You'll be able to find your way down?" he said at last, as he made
for the door. "We dine at seven--perhaps there'll be time to take a
little look round before then, after we've dressed. And I must
introduce Mr. Cazalette--you don't know him personally?--oh, a
remarkable man, a very remarkable man indeed--yes!" I did not waste much time over my toilet, nor, apparently did Miss
Marcia Raven, for I found her, in a smart gown, in the hall when I
went down at half-past-six. And she and I had taken a look at its
multifarious objects before Mr. Raven appeared on the scene, followed
by Mr. Cazalette. One glance at this gentleman assured me that our
host had been quite right when he spoke of him as remarkable--he was
not merely remarkable, but so extraordinary in outward appearance that
I felt it difficult to keep my eyes off him. CHAPTER III

THE MORNING TIDE


Miss Raven had already described Mr. Cazalette to me, by inference, as
a queer, snuffy bald-pated old man, but this summary synopsis of his
exterior features failed to do justice to a remarkable original. There
was something supremely odd about him. I thought, at first, that my
impression of oddity might be derived from his clothes--he wore a
strangely-cut dress-coat of blue cloth, with gold buttons, a buff
waistcoat, and a frilled shirt--but I soon came to the conclusion that
he would be queer and uncommon in any garments. About Mr. Cazalette
there was an atmosphere--and it was decidedly one of mystery. First
and last, he looked uncanny. Mr. Raven introduced us with a sort of old-world formality (I soon
discovered, as regards him, that he was so far unaware that a vast
gulf lay between the manners and customs of society as they are
nowadays and as they were when he left England for India in the
'seventies: he was essentially mid-Victorian) and in order to keep up
to it, I saluted Mr. Cazalette with great respect and expressed myself
as feeling highly honoured by meeting one so famous as my
fellow-guest. Somewhat to my surprise, Mr. Cazalette's tightly-locked
lips relaxed into what was plainly a humorous smile, and he favoured
me with a knowing look that was almost a wink. "Aye, well," he said, "you're just about as well known in your own
line, Middlebrook, as I am in mine, and between the pair of us I've no
doubt we'll be able to reduce chaos into order. But we'll not talk
shop at this hour of the day--there's more welcome matters at hand." He put his snuff box and his gaudy handkerchief out of sight, and
looked at his host and hostess with another knowing glance, reminding
me somehow of a wicked old condor which I had sometimes seen at the
Zoological Gardens, eyeing the keeper who approached with its meal. "Mr. Cazalette," remarked Miss Raven, with an informing glance at me,
"never, on principle, touches bite or sup between breakfast and
dinner--and he has no great love of breakfast." "I'm a disciple of the justly famed and great man, Abernethy,"
observed Mr. Cazalette. "I'd never have lived to my age nor kept my
energy at what, thank Heaven, it is, if I hadn't been. D'ye know how
old I am, Middlebrook?" "I really don't, Mr. Cazalette," I replied. "Well I'm eighty years of age," he answered with a grin. "And I'm
intending to be a hundred! And on my hundredth birthday, I'll give a
party, and I'll dance with the sprightliest lassie that's there, and
if I'm not as lively as she is I'll be sore out of my calculations." "A truly wonderful young man!" exclaimed Mr. Raven. "I veritably
believe he feels--and is--younger than myself--and I'm twenty years
his junior." So I had now discovered certain facts about Mr. Cazalette. He was an
octogenarian. He was uncannily active. He had an almost imp-like
desire to live--and to dance when he ought to have been wrapped in
blankets and saying his last prayers. And a few minutes later, when we
were seated round our host's table, I discovered another fact--Mr.
Cazalette was one of those men to whom dinner is the event of the day,
and who regard conversation--on their own part, at any rate--as a
wicked disturbance of sacred rites. As the meal progressed (and Mr.
Raven's cook proved to be an unusually clever and good one) I was
astonished at Mr. Cazalette's gastronomic powers and at his love of
mad dishes: indeed, I never saw a man eat so much, nor with such
hearty appreciation of his food, nor in such a concentrated silence. Nevertheless, that he kept his ears wide open to what was being said
around him, I soon discovered. I was telling Mr. Raven and his niece
of my adventure of the afternoon, and suddenly I observed that Mr.
Cazalette, on the other side of the round table at which we sat, had
stopped eating, and that, knife and fork still in his queer, claw-like
hands, he was peering at me under the shaded lamps, his black, burning
eyes full of a strange, absorbed interest. I paused--involuntarily. "Go on!" said he. "Did you mention the name Netherfield just then?" "I did," said I. "Netherfield." "Well, continue with your tale," he said. "I'm listening. I'm a
silent man when I'm busy with my meat and drink, but I've a fine pair
of ears." He began to ply knife and fork again, and I went on with my story,
continuing it until the parting with Salter Quick. When I came to
that, the footman who stood behind Mr. Cazalette's chair was just
removing his last plate, and the old man leaned back a little and
favoured the three of us with a look. "Aye, well," he said, "and that's an interesting story, Middlebrook,
and it tempts me to break my rule and talk a bit. It was some
churchyard this fellow was seeking?" "A churchyard--in this neighbourhood," I replied. "Or--churchyards." "Where there were graves with the name Netherfield on their stones or
slabs or monuments," he continued. "Aye--just so. And those men he foregathered with at the inn, they'd
never heard of anything at that point, nor elsewhere?" "Neither there nor elsewhere," I assented. "Then if there is such a place," said he, "it'll be one of those
disused burial-grounds of which there are examples here in the north,
and not a few." "You know of some?" suggested Mr. Raven. "I've seen such places," answered Mr. Cazalette. "Betwixt here--the
sea-coast--and the Cheviots, westward, there's a good many spots that
Goldsmith might have drawn upon for his deserted village. The folks
go--the bit of a church falls into ruins--its graveyard gets choked
with weeds--the stones are covered with moss and lichen--the monuments
fall and are obscured by the grass--underneath the grass and the weed
many an old family name lies hidden. And what'll that man be wanting
to find any name at all for, I'd like to know!" "The queer thing to me," observed Mr. Raven, "is that two men should
be wanting to find it at the same time." "That looks as if there were some very good reason why it should be
found, doesn't it?" remarked his niece. "Anyway, it all sounds very
queer--you've brought mystery with you, Mr. Middlebrook! Can't you
suggest anything, Mr. Cazalette? I'm sure you're good at solving
problems." But just then Mr. Cazalette's particular servant put a fresh dish in
front of him--a curry, the peculiar aroma of which evidently aroused
his epicurean instinct. Instead of responding to Miss Raven's
invitation he relapsed into silence, and picked up another fork. When dinner was over I excused myself from sitting with the two elder
men over their wine--Mr. Cazalette, whom by that time I, of course,
knew for a Scotchman, turned out to have an old-fashioned taste for
claret--and joined Miss Raven in the hall, a great, roomy, shadowy
place which was evidently popular. There was a great fire in its big
hearth-place with deep and comfortable chairs set about it; in one of
these I found her sitting, a book in her hand. She dropped it as I
approached and pointed to a chair at her side. "What do you think of that queer old man?" she asked in a low voice as I
sat down. "Isn't there something almost--what is it?--uncanny?--about
him?" "You might call him that," I assented. "Yes--I think uncanny would fit
him. A very marvellous man, though, at his age." "Aye!" she exclaimed, under her breath. "If I could live to see it, it
wouldn't surprise me if he lived to be four hundred. He's so queer. Do
you know that he actually goes out early--very early--in the morning
and swims in the open sea?" "Any weather?" I suggested. "No matter what the weather is," she replied. "He's been here three
weeks now, and he has never missed that morning swim. And sometimes
the mornings have been Arctic--more than I could stand, anyway, and
I'm pretty well hardened." "A decided character!" I said musingly. "And somehow, he seems to fit
in with his present surroundings. From what I have seen of it, Mr.
Raven was quite right in telling me that this house was a museum." I was looking about me as I spoke. The big, high-roofed hall, like
every room I had so far seen, was filled from floor to ceiling with
books, pictures, statuary, armour, curiosities of every sort and of
many ages. The prodigious numbers of the books alone showed me that I
had no light task in prospect. But Miss Raven shook her head. "Museum!" she exclaimed. "I should think so! But you've seen
nothing--wait till you see the north wing. Every room in that is
crammed with things--I think my great-uncle, who left all this to
Uncle Francis recently, must have done nothing whatever but buy, and
buy, and buy things, and then, when he got them home, have just dumped
them down anywhere! There's some order here," she added, looking
round, "but across there, in the north wing, it's confusion." "Did you know your great-uncle?" I asked. "I? No!" she replied. "Oh, dear me, no! I'd never been in the north
until Uncle Francis came home from India some months ago and fetched
me from the school where I'd been ever since my father and mother
died--that was when I was twelve. No, except my father, I never knew
any of the Raven family. I believe Uncle Francis and myself are the
very last." "You must like living under the old family roof?" I suggested. She gave me a somewhat undecided look. "I'm not quite sure," she answered. "Uncle Francis is the very soul of
kindness--I think he's the very kindest person, man or woman, I ever
came across, but--I don't know." "Don't know--what?" I asked. "Don't know if I really like this place," she said. "As I said to you
this afternoon, this is a very odd house altogether, and there's a
strange atmosphere about it, and I think something must have happened
here. I--well, personally, I feel as if I were something so very small
and insignificant, shut up in immensity." "That's because it's a little strange, even now," I suggested. "You'll
get used to it. And I suppose there's society." "Uncle Francis is a good deal of a recluse," she answered. "It's
really a very good thing that I'm fond of outdoor life, and that I
take an interest in books, too. But I'm very deficient in knowledge in
book matters--do teach me something while you're here!--I'd like to
know a good deal about all these folios and quartos and so on." I made haste to reply that I should be only too happy to put my
knowledge at her disposal, and she responded by saying that she would
like to help me in classifying and inspecting the various volumes
which the dead-and-gone great-uncle had collected. We got on very well
together, and I was a little sorry when my host came in with his other
guest--who, a loop-hole being given him, proceeded to give us a
learned dissertation on the evidences of Roman occupation of the North
of England as evidenced by recent and former discoveries of coins
between Trent and Tweed: it was doubtless very interesting, and a
striking proof of Mr. Cazalette's deep and profound knowledge of his
special subject, and at another time I should have listened to it
gladly. But--somehow I should just then have preferred to chat quietly
in the corner of the hearth with Miss Raven. We all retire early--that, Mr. Raven informed me with a shy laugh, as
if he were confessing a failing, was the custom of the house. But, he
added, I should find a fire in my sitting-room, so that if I wanted to
read or write, I should be comfortable in my retirement. On hearing
that, I begged him to countermand any such luxuries on my account in
future; it was my invariable habit, I assured him, to retire to bed at
ten o'clock, wherever I was--reading or writing at night, I said,
were practices which I rigidly tabooed. Mr. Cazalette, who stood by,
grimly listening, nodded approval. "Wise lad!" he said. "That's another reason why I'm what I am. Don't
let any mistake be made about it!--the old saw, much despised and
laughed at though it is, has more in it than anybody thinks for. Get
to your pillow early, and leave it early!--that's the sure thing." "I don't think I should like to get up as early as you do, though,"
remarked Mr. Raven. "You certainly don't give the worms much chance!" "Aye, and I've caught a few in my time," assented the old gentleman,
complacently. "And I hope to catch a few more yet. You folk who don't
get up till the morning's half over don't know what you miss." I slept soundly that night--a strange bed and unfamiliar surroundings
affect me not at all. Just as suddenly as I had dropped asleep, I
woke. My windows face due east--I was instantly aware that the sun had
either risen or was just about to rise. Springing out of bed and
drawing up the blind of one of the three tall, narrow windows of my
room, I saw him mounting behind a belt of pine and fir which stretched
along a bluff of land that ran down to the open sea. And I saw, too,
that it was high tide--the sea had stolen up the creek which ran right
to the foot of the park, and the wide expanse of water glittered and
coruscated in the brilliance of the morning glory. My watch lay on the dressing-table close by; glancing at it, I saw
that the time was twenty-five minutes to seven. I had been told that
the family breakfasted at nine, so I had nearly two-and-a-half hours
of leisure. Of course, I would go out, and enjoy the freshness of the
morning. I turned to the window again, just to take another view of
the scenery in front of the house, and to decide in which direction I
would go. And there, emerging from a wicket-gate that opened out of an
adjacent plantation, I caught sight of Mr. Cazalette. It was evident that this robust octogenarian had been taking that
morning swim of which Miss Raven had told me the previous evening. He
was muffled up in an old pea-jacket; various towels were festooned
about his shoulders; his bald head shone in the rising sun. I watched
him curiously as he came along the borders of a thick yew hedge at the
side of the gardens. Suddenly, at a particular point, he stopped, and
drawing something out of his towels, thrust it, at the full length of
his arm, into the closely interwoven mass of twig and foliage at his
side. Then he moved forward towards the house; a bushy clump of
rhododendron hid him from my sight. Two or three minutes later I heard
a door close somewhere near my own; Mr. Cazalette had evidently
re-entered his own apartment. I was bathed, shaved, and dressed by a quarter past seven, and finding
my way out of the house went across the garden towards the wicket-gate
through which I had seen Mr. Cazalette emerge--as he had come from the
sea that way, it was, I concluded, the nearest way to it. My path led
by the yew-hedge which I have just mentioned, and I suddenly saw the
place where Mr. Cazalette had stood when he thrust his arm into it;
thereabouts, the ground was soft, mossy, damp: the marks of his shoes
were plain. Out of mere curiosity, I stood where he had stood, and
slightly parting the thick, clinging twigs, peeped into the obscurity
behind. And there, thrust right in amongst the yew, I saw something
white, a crumpled, crushed-up lump of linen, perhaps a man's
full-sized pocket-handkerchief, whereon I could make out, even in that
obscurity (and nothing in the way of hedges can be thicker or darker
than one of old, carefully-trimmed yew) brown stains and red stains,
as if from contact with soil or clay in one case, with blood in the
other. I went onward, considerably mystified. But most people, chancing upon
anything mysterious try to explain it to their own satisfaction. I
came to the conclusion that Mr. Cazalette, during his morning swim--no
doubt in very shallow waters--had cut hand or foot against some sharp
pebble or bit of rock, and had used his handkerchief as a bandage
until the bleeding stopped. Yet--why thrust it away into the
yew-hedge, close to the house? Why carry it from the shore at all, if
he meant to get rid of it? And why not have consigned it to his
dirty-linen basket and have it washed? "Decidedly an odd character," I mused. "A man of mystery!" Then I dismissed him from my thoughts, my mind becoming engrossed by
the charm of my surroundings. I made my way down to the creek, passed
through the belt of pine and fir over which I had seen the sun rise,
and came out on a little, rock-bound cove, desolate and wild. Here one
was shut out from everything but the sea in front: Ravensdene Court
was no longer visible; here, amongst great masses of fallen cliff and
limpet-encrusted rock, round which the full strength of the tide was
washing, one seemed to be completely alone with sky and strand. But the place was tenanted. I had not taken twenty paces along the
foot of the overhanging cliff before I pulled myself sharply to a
halt. There, on the sand before me, his face turned to the sky, his
arms helplessly stretched, lay Salter Quick. I knew he was dead in my
first horrified glance. And for the second time that morning, I saw
blood--red, vivid, staining the shining particles in the yellow,
sun-lighted beach. CHAPTER IV

THE TOBACCO BOX


My first feeling of almost stupefied horror at seeing a man whom I had
met only the day before in the full tide of life and vigour lying
there in that lonely place, literally weltering in his own blood and
obviously the victim of a foul murder speedily changed to one of angry
curiosity. Who had wrought this crime? Crime it undoubtedly was--the
man's attitude, the trickle of blood from his slightly parted lips
across the stubble of his chin, the crimson stain on the sand at his
side, the whole attitude of his helpless figure, showed me that he had
been attacked from the rear and probably stricken down by a deadly
knife thrust through his shoulders. This was murder--black murder. And
my thoughts flew to what Claigue, the landlord, had said, warningly,
the previous afternoon, about the foolishness of showing so much gold. Had Salter Quick disregarded that warning, flashed his money about in
some other public house, been followed to this out of the way spot and
run through the heart for the sake of his fistful of sovereigns? It
looked like it. But then that thought fled, and another took its
place--the recollection of the blood-stained linen, rag, bandage, or
handkerchief, which that queer man Mr. Cazalette had pushed into
hiding in the yew-hedge. Had that--had Cazalette himself--anything to
do with this crime? The instinctive desire to get an answer to this last question made me
suddenly stoop down and lay my fingers on the dead man's open palm. I
was conscious as I did so of the extraordinary, appealing helplessness
of his hands--instead of being clenched in a death agony as I should
have expected they were stretched wide; they looked nerveless, limp,
effortless. But when my fingers came to the nearest one--the right
hand--I found that it was stiff, rigid, stone-cold. I knew then that
Salter Quick had been dead for several hours; had probably been lying
there, murdered, all through the darkness of the night. There were no signs of any struggle. At this point the sands were
unusually firm and for the most part, all round and about the body,
they remained unbroken. Yet there were footprints, very faint indeed,
yet traceable, and I saw at once that they did not extend beyond this
spot. There were two distinct marks; one there of boots with nails in
the heels; these were certainly made by the dead man; the other
indicated a smaller, very light-soled boot, perhaps a slipper. A yard
or so behind the body these marks were mingled; that had evidently
been done when the murderer stole close up to his victim, preparatory
to dealing the fatal thrust. Carefully, slowly, I traced these footsteps. They were plainly
traceable, faint though they were, to the edge of the low cliff, there
a gentle slope of some twelve or fifteen feet in height; I traced them
up its incline. But from the very edge of the cliff the land was
covered by a thick wire-like turf; you could have run a heavy gun
over it without leaving any impression. Yet it was clear that two men
had come across it to that point, had then descended the cliff to the
sand, walked a few yards along the beach, and then--one had murdered
the other. Standing there, staring around me, I was suddenly startled by the
explosion of a gun, close at hand. And then, from a coppice, some
thirty yards away, a man emerged, whom I took, from his general
appearance, to be a gamekeeper. Unconscious of my presence he walked
forward in my direction, picked up a bird which his shot had brought
down, and was thrusting it into a bag that hung at his hip, when I
called to him. He looked round sharply, caught sight of me, and came
slowly in my direction, wondering, I could see, who I was. I made
towards him. He was a middle-aged, big-framed man, dark of skin and
hair, sharp-eyed. "Are you Mr. Raven's gamekeeper?" I asked, as I got within speaking
distance. "Just so--I am staying with Mr. Raven. And I've just made a
terrible discovery. There is a man lying behind the cliff
there--dead." "Dead, sir?" he exclaimed. "What--washed up by the tide, likely." "No," I said. "He's been murdered. Stabbed to death!" He let out a short, sibilant breath, looking at me with rapidly
dilating eyes: they ran me all over, as if he wondered whether I were
romancing. "Come this way," I continued, leading him to the edge of the cliff. "And mind how you walk on the sand--there are footmarks there, and I
don't want them interfered with till the police have examined them. There!" I continued, as we reached the edge of the turf and came in
view of the beach. "You see?" He gave another exclamation of surprise: then carefully followed me to
the dead man's side where he stood staring wonderingly at the stains
on the sand. "He must have been dead for some hours," I whispered. "He's
stone-cold--and rigid. Now, this is murder! You live about here, no
doubt? Did you see or hear anything of this man in the neighbourhood
last night--or in the afternoon or evening?" "I, sir?" he exclaimed. "No, sir--nothing!" "I met him yesterday afternoon on the headlands between this and
Alnmouth," I remarked. "I was with him for a while at the Mariner's Joy. He pulled out a big
handful of gold there, to pay for his lunch. The landlord warned him
against showing so much money. Now, before we do more, I'd like to
know if he's been murdered for the sake of robbery. You're doubtless
quicker of hand than I am--just slip your hand into that right-hand
pocket of his trousers, and see if you feel money there." He took my meaning on the instant, and bending down, did what I
suggested. A smothered exclamation came from him. "Money?" he said. "His pocket's full o' money!" "Bring it out," I commanded. He withdrew his hand; opened it; the palm was full of gold. The light
of the morning sun flashed on those coins as if in mockery. We both
looked at them--and then at each other with a sudden mutual
intelligence. "Then it wasn't robbery!" I exclaimed. "So--"

He thrust back the gold, and pulling at a thick chain of steel which
lay across Quick's waistcoat, drew out a fine watch. "Gold again, sir!" he said. "And a good 'un, that's never been bought
for less than thirty pound. No, it's not been robbery." "No," I agreed, "and that makes it all the more mysterious. What's
your name?" "Tarver, sir, at your service," he answered, as he rose from the dead
man's side. "Been on this estate a many years, sir." "Well, Tarver," I said, "the only thing to be done is that I must go
back to the house and tell Mr. Raven what's happened, and send for the
police. Do you stay here--and if anybody comes along, be very careful
to keep them off those footmarks." "Not likely that there'll be anybody, sir," he remarked. "As lonely a
bit of coast, this, as there is, hereabouts. What beats me," he added,
"is--what was he--and the man as did it--doing, here? There's naught
to come here for. And--it must ha' happened in the night, judging by
the looks of him." "The whole thing's a profound mystery," I answered. "We shall hear a
lot more of it." I left him standing by the dead man and went hurriedly away towards
Ravensdene Court. Glancing at my watch as I passed through the belt of
pine, I saw that it was already getting on to nine o'clock and
breakfast time. But this news of mine would have to be told: this was
no time for waiting or for ceremony. I must get Mr. Raven aside, at
once, and we must send for the nearest police officer, and--

Just then, fifty yards in front of me, I saw Mr. Cazalette vanishing
round the corner of the long yew-hedge, at the end nearest to the
house. So--he had evidently been back to the place whereat he had
hidden the stained linen, whatever it was? Coming up to that place a
moment later, and making sure that I was not observed, I looked in
amongst the twigs and foliage. The thing was gone. This deepened the growing mystery more than ever. I began, against my
will, to piece things together. Mr. Cazalette, returning from the
beach, hides a blood-stained rag--I, going to the beach, find a
murdered man--coming back, I ascertain that Mr. Cazalette has already
removed what he had previously hidden. What connection was there--if
any at all--between Mr. Cazalette's actions and my discovery? To say
the least of it, the whole thing was queer, strange, and even
suspicious. Then I caught sight of Mr. Cazalette again. He was on the terrace, in
front of the house, with Mr. Raven--they were strolling up and down,
before the open window of the morning room, chatting. And I was
thankful that Miss Raven was not with them, and that I saw no sign of
her near presence. I determined to tell my gruesome news straight out--Mr. Raven, I felt
sure, was not the man to be startled by tidings of sudden death, and I
wanted, of set purpose, to see how his companion would take the
announcement. So, as I walked up the steps of the terrace, I loudly
called my host's name. He turned, saw from my expression that
something of moment had happened, and hurried toward me, Cazalette
trotting in his rear. I gave a warning look in in the direction of
the house and its open windows. "I don't want to alarm Miss Raven," I said in a low voice, which I
purposely kept as matter-of-fact as possible. "Something has happened. You know the man I was telling you of last night--Salter Quick? I
found his dead body, half-an-hour ago, on your beach. He has been
murdered--stabbed to the heart. Your gamekeeper, Tarver, is with him. Had you not better send for the police?" I carefully watched both men as I broke the news. Its effect upon them
was different in both cases. Mr. Raven started a little; exclaimed a
little: he was more wonder-struck than horrified. But Mr. Cazalette's
mask-like countenance remained immobile; only, a gleam of sudden,
almost pleased interest showed itself in his black, shrewd eyes. "Aye?" he exclaimed. "So you found your man dead and murdered,
Middlebrook? Well, now, that's the very end that I was thinking the
fellow would come to! Not that I fancied it would be so soon, nor so
close at hand. On one's own doorstep so to speak. Interesting! Very
interesting!" I was too much taken aback by his callousness to make any observation
on these sentiments; instead, I looked at Mr. Raven. He was evidently
too much surprised just then to pay any attention to his elder guest:
he motioned me to follow him. "Come with me to the telephone," he said. "Dear, dear, what a very sad
thing. Of course, the poor fellow has been murdered for his money? You
said he'd a lot of gold on him." "It's not been for robbery," I answered. "His money and his watch are
untouched. There's more in it than that." He stared at me as if failing to comprehend. "Some mystery?" he suggested. "A very deep and lurid one, I think," said I. "Get the police out as
quickly as possible, and bid them bring a doctor." "They'll bring their own police-surgeon," he remarked, "but we have a
medical man closer at hand. I'll ring him up, too. Yet--what can they
do?" "Nothing--for him," I replied. "But they may be able to tell us at
what hour the thing took place. And that's important." When we left the telephone we went to the morning-room, to get a
mouthful of food before going down to the beach. Miss Raven was
there--so was Cazalette. I saw at once that he had told her the news. She was sitting behind her tea and coffee things, staring at him: he,
on his part, a cup of tea in one hand, a dry biscuit in the other, was
marching up and down the room sipping and munching, and holding forth,
in didactic fashion, on crime and detection. Miss Raven gave me a
glance as I slipped into a place at her side. "You found this poor man?" she whispered. "How dreadful for you!" "For him, too--and far more so," I said. "I didn't want you to know
until--later. Mr. Cazalette oughtn't to have told you." She arched her eyebrows in the direction of the odd, still orating
figure. "Oh!" she murmured. "He's no reverence for anything--life or death. I
believe he's positively enjoying this: he's been talking like that
ever since he came in and told me of it." Mr. Raven and I made a very hurried breakfast and prepared to join
Tarver. The news of the murder had spread through the household; we
found two or three of the men-servants ready to accompany us. And Mr.
Cazalette was ready, too, and, I thought, more eager than any of the
rest. Indeed, when we set out from the house he led the way, across
the gardens and pleasure-grounds, along the yew-hedge (at which he
never so much as gave a glance) and through the belt of pine wood. At
its further extremity he glanced at Mr. Raven. "From what Middlebrook says, this man must be lying in Kernwick Cove,"
he said. "Now, there's a footpath across the headlands and the field
above from Long Houghton village to that spot. Quick must have
followed it last night. But how came he to meet his murderer--or did
his murderer follow him? And what was Quick doing down here? Was he
directed here--or led here?" Mr. Raven seemed to think these questions impossible of immediate
answer: his one anxiety at that moment appeared to be to set the
machinery of justice in motion. He was manifestly relieved when, as we
came to the open country behind the pines and firs, where a narrow
lane ran down to the sea, we heard the rattle of a light dog-cart and
turned to see the inspector of police and a couple of his men, who had
evidently hurried off at once on receiving the telephone message. With
them, seated by the inspector on the front seat of the trap, was a
professional-looking man who proved to be the police-surgeon. We all trooped down to the beach, where Tarver was keeping his
unpleasant vigil. He had been taking a look round the immediate scene
of the murder, he said, during my absence, thinking that he might find
something in the way of a clue. But he had found nothing: there were
no signs of any struggle anywhere near. It seemed clear that two men
had crossed the land, descended the low cliffs, and that one had
fallen on the other as soon as the sands were reached--the footmarks
indicated as much. I pointed them out to the police, who examined them
carefully, and agreed with me that one set was undoubtedly made by the
boots of the dead man while the other was caused by the pressure of
some light-footed, lightly-shoed person. And there being nothing else
to be seen or done at that place, Salter Quick was lifted on to an
improvised stretcher which the servants had brought down from the
Court and carried by the way we had come to an outhouse in the
gardens, where the police-surgeon proceeded to make a more careful
examination of his body. He was presently joined in this by the
medical man of whom Mr. Raven had spoken--a Dr. Lorrimore, who came
hurrying up in his motor-car, and at once took a hand in his
fellow-practitioner's investigations. But there was little to
investigate--just as I had thought from the first. Quick had been
murdered by a knife-thrust from behind--dealt with evident knowledge
of the right place to strike, said the two doctors, for his heart had
been transfixed, and death must have been instantaneous. Mr. Raven shrank away from these gruesome details, but Mr. Cazalette
showed the keenest interest in them, and would not be kept from the
doctor's elbows. He was pertinacious in questioning them. "And what sort of a weapon was it, d'ye suppose that the assassin
used?" he asked. "That'll be an important thing to know, I'm
thinking." "It might have been a seaman's knife," said the police-surgeon. "One
of those with a long, sharp blade." "Or," said Dr. Lorrimore, "a stiletto--such as foreigners carry." "Aye," remarked Mr. Cazalette, "or with an operating knife--such as
you medicos use. Any one of those fearsome things would serve, no
doubt. But we'll be doing more good, Middlebrook, just to know what
the police are finding in the man's pockets." The police-inspector had got all Quick's belongings in a little heap. They were considerable. Over thirty pounds in gold and silver. Twenty
pounds in notes in an old pocket-book. His watch--certainly a valuable
one. A pipe, a silver match-box, a tobacco-box of some metal, quaintly
chased and ornamented. Various other small matters--but, with one
exception, no papers or letters. The one exception was a slightly
torn, dirty envelope addressed in an ill-formed handwriting to Mr.
Salter Quick, care of Mr. Noah Quick, The Admiral Parker, Haulaway
Street, Devonport. There was no letter inside it, nor was there
another scrap of writing anywhere about the dead man's pockets. The police allowed Mr. Cazalette to inspect these things according to
his fancy. It was very clear to me by that time that the old
gentleman had some taste for detective work, and I watched him with
curiosity while he carefully examined Quick's money, his watch (of
which he took particular notice, even going so far as to jot down its
number and the name of its maker on his shirt cuff), and the rest of
his belongings. But nothing seemed to excite his interest very deeply
until he began to finger the tobacco-box; then, indeed, his eyes
suddenly coruscated, and he turned to me almost excitedly. "Middlebrook!" he whispered, edging me away from the others. "Do you
look here, my lad! D'ye see the inside of the lid of this box? There's
been something--a design, a plan, something of that sort,
anyway--scratched into it with the point of a nail, or a knife. Look
at the lines--and see, there's marks and there's figures! Now I'd like
to know what all that signifies? What are you going to do with all
these things?" he asked, turning suddenly on the inspector. "Take them
away?" "They'll all be carefully sealed up and locked up till the inquest,
sir," replied the inspector. "No doubt the dead man's relatives will
claim them." Mr. Cazalette laid down the tobacco-box, left the place, and hurried
away in the direction of the house. Within a few minutes he came
hurrying back, carrying a camera. He went up to the inspector with an
almost wheedling air. "Ye'll just indulge an old man's fancy?" he said, placatingly. "There's some queer marking inside the lid of that bit of a box that
the poor man kept his tobacco in. I'd like to take a photograph of
them. Man! you don't know that an examination of them mightn't be
useful." CHAPTER V

THE NEWS FROM DEVONPORT


The police-inspector, a somewhat silent, stolid sort of man, looked
down from his superior height on Mr. Cazalette's eager face with a
half-bored, half-tolerant expression; he had already seen a good deal
of the old gentleman's fussiness. "What is it about the box?" he demanded. "Certain marks on it--inside the lid--that I'd like to photograph,"
answered Mr. Cazalette. "They're small and faint, but if I get a good
negative of them I can enlarge it. And I say again, you don't know
what one mightn't find out--any little detail is of value in a case of
this sort." The inspector picked up the metal tobacco-box from where it lay amidst
Quick's belongings and looked inside the lid. It was very plain that
he saw nothing there but some--to him meaningless scratches and he put
the thing into Mr. Cazalette's hands with an air of indifference. "I see no objection," he said. "Let's have it back when you've done
with it. We shall have to exhibit these personal properties before the
coroner." Mr. Cazalette carried his camera and the tobacco-box outside the shed
in which the dead man's body lay and began to be busy. A gardener's
potting-table stood against the wall; on this, backed by a black
cloth which he had brought from the house, he set up the box and
prepared to photograph it. It was evident that he attached great
importance to what he was doing. "I shall take two or three negatives of this, Middlebrook," he
observed, consequentially. "I'm an expert in photography, and I've got
an enlarging apparatus in my room. Before the day's out, I shall show
you something." Personally, I had seen no more in the inner lid of the tobacco-box
than the inspector seemed to have seen--a few lines and scratches,
probably caused by thumb or finger-nail--and I left Mr. Cazalette to
his self-imposed labours and rejoined the doctors and the police who
were discussing the next thing to be done. That Quick had been
murdered there was no doubt; there would have to be an inquest, of
course, and for that purpose his body would have to be removed to the
nearest inn, a house on the cross-roads just beyond Ravensdene Court;
search would have to be set up at once for suspicious characters, and
Noah Quick, of Devonport, would have to be communicated with. All this the police took in hand, and I saw that Mr. Raven was
heartily relieved when he heard that the dead man would be removed
from his premises and that the inquest would not be held there. Ever
since I had first broken the news to him, he had been upset and
nervous: I could see that he was one of those men who dislike fuss and
publicity. He looked at me with a sort of commiseration when the
police questioned me closely about my knowledge of Salter Quick's
movements on the previous day, and especially about his visit to the
Mariner's Joy. "Yet," said I, finishing my account of that episode, "it is very
evident that the man was not murdered for the sake of robbery, seeing
that his money and his watch were found on him untouched." The inspector shook his head. "I'm not so sure," he remarked. "There's one thing that's certain--the
man's clothes had been searched. Look here!" He turned to Quick's garments, which had been removed, preparatory to
laying out the body in decent array for interment, and picked up the
waistcoat. Within the right side, made in the lining, there was a
pocket, secured by a stout button. That pocket had been turned inside
out; so, too, had a pocket in the left hip of the trousers,
corresponding to that on the right in which Quick had carried the
revolver that he had shown to us at the inn. The waistcoat was a
thick, quilted affair--its lining, here and there, had been ripped
open by a knife. And the lining of the man's hat had been torn out,
too, and thrust roughly into place again: clearly, whoever killed him
had searched for something. "It wasn't money they were after," observed the inspector, "but there
was an object. He'd that on him that his murderer was anxious to get. And the fact that the murderer left all this gold untouched is the
worst feature of the affair--from our point of view." "Why, now?" inquired Mr. Raven. "Because, sir, it shows that the murderer, whoever he was, had plenty
of money on him," replied the inspector grimly. "And as he had, he'd
have little difficulty in getting away. Probably he got an early
morning train, north or south, and is hundreds of miles off by this
time. But we must do our best--and we'll get to work now." Leaving everything to the police--obviously with relief and
thankfulness--Mr. Raven retired from the scene, inviting the two
medical men and the inspector into the house with him, to take, as he
phrased, a little needful refreshment; he sent out a servant to
minister to the constables in the same fashion. Leaving him and his
guests in the morning-room and refusing Mr. Cazalette's invitation to
join him in his photographic enterprise, I turned into the big hall
and there found Miss Raven. I was glad to find her alone; the mere
sight of her, in her morning freshness, was welcome after the gruesome
business in which I had just been engaged. I think she saw something
of my thoughts in my face, for she turned to me sympathetically. "What a very unfortunate thing that this should have happened at the
very beginning of your visit!" she exclaimed. "Didn't it give you an
awful shock, to find that poor fellow?--so unexpectedly!" "It was certainly not a pleasant experience," I answered. "But--I was
not quite as surprised as you might think." "Why not?" she asked. "Because--I can't explain it, quite--I felt, yesterday, that the man
was running risks by showing his money as foolishly as he did," I
replied. "And, of course, when I found him, I thought he'd been
murdered for his money." "And yet he wasn't!" she said. "For you say it was all found on him. What an extraordinary mystery! Is there no clue? I suppose he must
really have been killed by that man who was spoken of at the inn? You
think they met?" "To tell you the truth," I answered, "at present I don't know what to
think--except that this is merely a chapter in some mystery--an
extraordinary one, as you remark. We shall hear more. And, in the
meantime--a much pleasanter thing--won't you show me round the house? Mr. Raven is busy with the police-inspector and the doctors, and--I'm
anxious to know what the extent of my labours may be." She at once acquiesced in this proposition, and we began to inspect
the accumulations of the dead-and-gone master of Ravensdene Court. As
his successor had remarked in his first letter to me, Mr. John
Christopher Raven, though obviously a great collector, had certainly
not been a great exponent of system and order--except in the library
itself, where all his most precious treasures were stored in tall,
locked book-presses, his gatherings were lumped together anyhow and
anywhere, all over the big house--the north wing was indeed a
lumber-house--he appeared to have bought books, pamphlets, and
manuscripts by the cart-load, and it was very plain to me, as an
expert, that the greater part of his possessions of these sorts had
never even been examined. Before Miss Raven and I had spent an hour in
going from one room to another I had arrived at two definite
conclusions--one, that the dead man's collection of books and papers
was about the most heterogeneous I had ever set eyes on, containing
much of great value and much of none whatever; the other, that it
would take me a long time to make a really careful and proper
examination of it, and longer still to arrange it in proper order. Clearly, I should have to engage Mr. Raven in a strictly business
talk, and find out what his ideas were in regard to putting his big
library on a proper footing. Mr. Raven at last joined us, in one of
the much-encumbered rooms. With him was the doctor, Lorrimore, whom he
had mentioned to me as living near Ravensdene Court. He introduced him
to his niece, with, I thought, some signs of pleasure; then to me,
remarking that we had already seen each other in different
surroundings--now we could foregather in pleasanter ones. "Dr. Lorrimore," he continued, glancing from me to Miss Raven and then
to the doctor with a smile that was evidently designed to put us all
on a friendly footing, "Dr. Lorrimore and I have been having quite a
good talk. It turns out that he has spent a long time in India. So we
have a lot in common." "How very nice for you, Uncle Francis!" said Miss Raven. "I know
you've been bored to death with having no one you could talk to about
curries and brandy-pawnees and things--now Dr. Lorrimore will come and
chat with you. Were you long in India, Dr. Lorrimore?" "Twelve years," answered the doctor. "I came home just a year ago." "To bury yourself in these wilds!" remarked Miss Raven. "Doesn't it
seem quite out of the world here--after that?" Dr. Lorrimore glanced at Mr. Raven and showed a set of very white
teeth in a meaning smile. He was a tall, good-looking man, dark of eye
and hair; moustached and bearded; apparently under forty years of
age--yet, at each temple, there was the faintest trace of silvery
grey. A rather notable man, too, I thought, and one who was evidently
scrupulous about his appearance--yet his faultlessly cut frock suit of
raven black, his glossy linen, and smart boots looked more fitted to a
Harley Street consulting-room than to the Northumbrian cottages and
farmsteads amongst which his lot must necessarily be cast. He
transferred his somewhat gleaming, rather mechanical smile to Miss
Raven. "On the contrary," he said in a quiet almost bantering tone, "this
seems--quite gay. I was in a part of India where one had to travel
long distances to see a white patient--and one doesn't count the rest. And--I bought this practice, knowing it to be one that would not make
great demands on my time, so that I could devote myself a good deal to
certain scientific pursuits in which I am deeply interested. No!--I
don't feel out of the world, Miss Raven, I assure you." "He has promised to put in some of his spare time with me, when he
wants company," said Mr. Raven. "We shall have much in common." "Dark secrets of a dark country!" remarked Dr. Lorrimore, with a sly
glance at Miss Raven. "Over our cheroots!" Then, excusing himself from Mr. Raven's pressing invitation to stay to
lunch, he took himself off, and my host, his niece, and myself
continued our investigations. These lasted until the lunch hour--they
afforded us abundant scope for conversation, too, and kept us from
any reference to the grim tragedy of the early morning. Mr. Cazalette made no appearance at lunch. I heard a footman inform
Miss Raven, in answer to her inquiry, that he had just taken Mr.
Cazalette's beef-tea to his room and that he required nothing else. And I did not see him again until late that afternoon, when, as the
rest of us were gathered about the tea-table in the hall, before a
cheery fire, he suddenly appeared, a smile of grim satisfaction on his
queer old face. He took his usual cup of tea and dry biscuit and sat
down in silence. But by that time I was getting inquisitive. "Well, Mr. Cazalette," I said, "have you brought your photographic
investigations to any successful conclusion?" "Yes, Mr. Cazalette," chimed in Miss Raven, whom I had told of the old
man's odd fancy about the scratches on the lid of the tobacco-box. "We're dying to know if you've found out anything. Have you--and what
is it?" He gave us a knowing glance over the rim of his tea-cup. "Aye!" he said. "Young folks are full of curiosity. But I'm not going
to say what I've discovered, nor how far my investigations have gone. Ye must just die a bit more, Miss Raven, and maybe when ye're on the
point of demise I'll resuscitate ye with the startling news of my
great achievements." I knew by that time that when Mr. Cazalette relapsed into his native
Scotch he was most serious, and that his bantering tone was assumed as
a cloak. It was clear that we were not going to get anything out of
him just then. But Mr. Raven tried another tack, fishing for
information. "You really think those marks were made of a purpose, Cazalette?" he
suggested. "You think they were intentional?" "I'll not say anything at present," answered Mr. Cazalette. "The
experiment is in course of process. But I'll say this, as a student of
this sort of thing--yon murderer was far from the ordinary." Miss Raven shuddered a little. "I hope the man who did it is not hanging about!" she said. Mr. Cazalette shook his head with a knowing gesture. "Ye need have no fear of that, lassie!" he remarked. "The man that did
it had put a good many miles between himself and his victim long
before Middlebrook there made his remarkable discovery." "Now, how do you know that, Mr. Cazalette?" I asked, feeling a bit
restive under the old fellow's cock-sureness. "Isn't that guess-work?" "No!" said he. "It's deduction--and common-sense. Mine's a nature
that's full of both those highly admirable qualities, Middlebrook." He went away then, as silently as he had come. And when, a few minutes
later, I, too, went off to some preliminary work that I had begun in
the library, I began to think over the first events of the morning,
and to wonder if I ought not to ask Mr. Cazalette for some explanation
of the incident of the yew-hedge. He had certainly secreted a piece of
blood-stained, mud-discoloured linen in that hedge for an hour or so. Why? Had it anything to do with the crime? Had he picked it up on the
beach when he went for his dip? Why was he so secretive about it? And
why, if it was something of moment, had he not carried it straight to
his own room in the house, instead of hiding it in the hedge while he
evidently went back to the house and made his toilet? The circumstance
was extraordinary, to say the least of it. But on reflection I determined to hold my tongue and abide my time. For anything I knew, Mr. Cazalette might have cut one of his feet on
the sharp stones on the beach, used his handkerchief to staunch the
wound, thrown it away into the hedge, and then, with a touch of native
parsimony, have returned to recover the discarded article. Again, he
might be in possession of some clue, to which his tobacco-box
investigations were ancillary--altogether, it was best to leave him
alone. He was clearly deeply interested in the murder of Salter Quick,
and I had gathered from his behaviour and remarks that this sort of
thing--investigation of crime--had a curious fascination for him. Let
him, then, go his way; something, perhaps, might come of it. One thing
was very sure, and the old man had grasped it readily--this crime was
no ordinary one. As the twilight approached, making my work in the library impossible,
and having no wish to go on with it by artificial light, I went out
for a walk. The fascination which is invariably exercised on any of us
by such affairs led me, half-unconsciously, to the scene of the
murder. The tide, which had been up in the morning, was now out,
though just beginning to turn again, and the beach, with its masses
of bare rock and wide-spreading deposits of sea-weed, looked bleak and
desolate in the uncertain grey light. But it was not without life--two
men were standing near the place where I had come upon Salter Quick's
dead body. Going nearer to them, I recognized one as Claigue, the
landlord of the Mariner's Joy. He recognized me at the same time, and
touched his cap with a look that was alike knowing and confidential. "So it came about as I'd warned him, sir!" he said, without preface. "I told him how it would be. You heard me! A man carrying gold about
him like that!--and showing it to all and sundry. Why, he was asking
for trouble!" "The gold was found on him," I answered. "And his watch and other
things. He wasn't murdered for his property." 