



Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer





THE CLUE OF THE TWISTED CANDLE

By Edgar Wallace




CHAPTER I


The 4.15 from Victoria to Lewes had been held up at Three Bridges in
consequence of a derailment and, though John Lexman was fortunate enough
to catch a belated connection to Beston Tracey, the wagonette which was
the sole communication between the village and the outside world had
gone. "If you can wait half an hour, Mr. Lexman," said the station-master, "I
will telephone up to the village and get Briggs to come down for you." John Lexman looked out upon the dripping landscape and shrugged his
shoulders. "I'll walk," he said shortly and, leaving his bag in the
station-master's care and buttoning his mackintosh to his chin, he
stepped forth resolutely into the rain to negotiate the two miles which
separated the tiny railway station from Little Tracey. The downpour was incessant and likely to last through the night. The high hedges on either side of the narrow road were so many leafy
cascades; the road itself was in places ankle deep in mud. He stopped
under the protecting cover of a big tree to fill and light his pipe and
with its bowl turned downwards continued his walk. But for the
driving rain which searched every crevice and found every chink in his
waterproof armor, he preferred, indeed welcomed, the walk. The road from Beston Tracey to Little Beston was associated in his mind
with some of the finest situations in his novels. It was on this road
that he had conceived "The Tilbury Mystery." Between the station and the
house he had woven the plot which had made "Gregory Standish" the most
popular detective story of the year. For John Lexman was a maker of
cunning plots. If, in the literary world, he was regarded by superior persons as a
writer of "shockers," he had a large and increasing public who were
fascinated by the wholesome and thrilling stories he wrote, and who
held on breathlessly to the skein of mystery until they came to the
denouement he had planned. But no thought of books, or plots, or stories filled his troubled mind
as he strode along the deserted road to Little Beston. He had had two
interviews in London, one of which under ordinary circumstances would
have filled him with joy: He had seen T. X. and "T. X." was T. X.
Meredith, who would one day be Chief of the Criminal Investigation
Department and was now an Assistant Commissioner of Police, engaged in
the more delicate work of that department. In his erratic, tempestuous way, T. X. had suggested the greatest idea
for a plot that any author could desire. But it was not of T. X. that
John Lexman thought as he breasted the hill, on the slope of which was
the tiny habitation known by the somewhat magnificent title of Beston
Priory. It was the interview he had had with the Greek on the previous day which
filled his mind, and he frowned as he recalled it. He opened the little
wicket gate and went through the plantation to the house, doing his
best to shake off the recollection of the remarkable and unedifying
discussion he had had with the moneylender. Beston Priory was little more than a cottage, though one of its walls
was an indubitable relic of that establishment which a pious Howard had
erected in the thirteenth century. A small and unpretentious building,
built in the Elizabethan style with quaint gables and high chimneys,
its latticed windows and sunken gardens, its rosary and its tiny meadow,
gave it a certain manorial completeness which was a source of great
pride to its owner. He passed under the thatched porch, and stood for a moment in the broad
hallway as he stripped his drenching mackintosh. The hall was in darkness. Grace would probably be changing for dinner,
and he decided that in his present mood he would not disturb her. He
passed through the long passage which led to the big study at the back
of the house. A fire burnt redly in the old-fashioned grate and the snug
comfort of the room brought a sense of ease and relief. He changed his
shoes, and lit the table lamp. The room was obviously a man's den. The leather-covered chairs, the big
and well-filled bookcase which covered one wall of the room, the
huge, solid-oak writing-desk, covered with books and half-finished
manuscripts, spoke unmistakably of its owner's occupation. After he had changed his shoes, he refilled his pipe, walked over to the
fire, and stood looking down into its glowing heart. He was a man a little above medium height, slimly built, with a breadth
of shoulder which was suggestive of the athlete. He had indeed rowed 4
in his boat, and had fought his way into the semi-finals of the
amateur boxing championship of England. His face was strong, lean, yet
well-moulded. His eyes were grey and deep, his eyebrows straight and a
little forbidding. The clean-shaven mouth was big and generous, and the
healthy tan of his cheek told of a life lived in the open air. There was nothing of the recluse or the student in his appearance. He
was in fact a typical, healthy-looking Britisher, very much like any
other man of his class whom one would meet in the mess-room of the
British army, in the wardrooms of the fleet, or in the far-off posts of
the Empire, where the administrative cogs of the great machine are to be
seen at work. There was a little tap at the door, and before he could say "Come in" it
was pushed open and Grace Lexman entered. If you described her as brave and sweet you might secure from that brief
description both her manner and her charm. He half crossed the room to
meet her, and kissed her tenderly. "I didn't know you were back until--" she said; linking her arm in his. "Until you saw the horrible mess my mackintosh has made," he smiled. "I
know your methods, Watson!" She laughed, but became serious again. "I am very glad you've come back. We have a visitor," she said. He raised his eyebrows. "A visitor? Whoever came down on a day like this?" She looked at him a little strangely. "Mr. Kara," she said. "Kara? How long has he been here?" "He came at four." There was nothing enthusiastic in her tone. "I can't understand why you don't like old Kara," rallied her husband. "There are very many reasons," she replied, a little curtly for her. "Anyway," said John Lexman, after a moment's thought, "his arrival is
rather opportune. Where is he?" "He is in the drawing-room." The Priory drawing-room was a low-ceilinged, rambling apartment,
"all old print and chrysanthemums," to use Lexman's description. Cosy
armchairs, a grand piano, an almost medieval open grate, faced with
dull-green tiles, a well-worn but cheerful carpet and two big silver
candelabras were the principal features which attracted the newcomer. There was in this room a harmony, a quiet order and a soothing quality
which made it a haven of rest to a literary man with jagged nerves. Two
big bronze bowls were filled with early violets, another blazed like a
pale sun with primroses, and the early woodland flowers filled the room
with a faint fragrance. A man rose to his feet, as John Lexman entered and crossed the room with
an easy carriage. He was a man possessed of singular beauty of face and
of figure. Half a head taller than the author, he carried himself with
such a grace as to conceal his height. "I missed you in town," he said, "so I thought I'd run down on the off
chance of seeing you." He spoke in the well-modulated tone of one who had had a long
acquaintance with the public schools and universities of England. There
was no trace of any foreign accent, yet Remington Kara was a Greek and
had been born and partly educated in the more turbulent area of Albania. The two men shook hands warmly. "You'll stay to dinner?" Kara glanced round with a smile at Grace Lexman. She sat uncomfortably
upright, her hands loosely folded on her lap, her face devoid of
encouragement. "If Mrs. Lexman doesn't object," said the Greek. "I should be pleased, if you would," she said, almost mechanically; "it
is a horrid night and you won't get anything worth eating this side of
London and I doubt very much," she smiled a little, "if the meal I can
give you will be worthy of that description." "What you can give me will be more than sufficient," he said, with a
little bow, and turned to her husband. In a few minutes they were deep in a discussion of books and places, and
Grace seized the opportunity to make her escape. From books in general
to Lexman's books in particular the conversation flowed. "I've read every one of them, you know," said Kara. John made a little face. "Poor devil," he said sardonically. "On the contrary," said Kara, "I am not to be pitied. There is a great
criminal lost in you, Lexman." "Thank you," said John. "I am not being uncomplimentary, am I?" smiled the Greek. "I am merely
referring to the ingenuity of your plots. Sometimes your books baffle
and annoy me. If I cannot see the solution of your mysteries before the
book is half through, it angers me a little. Of course in the majority
of cases I know the solution before I have reached the fifth chapter." John looked at him in surprise and was somewhat piqued. "I flatter myself it is impossible to tell how my stories will end until
the last chapter," he said. Kara nodded. "That would be so in the case of the average reader, but you forget that
I am a student. I follow every little thread of the clue which you leave
exposed." "You should meet T. X.," said John, with a laugh, as he rose from his
chair to poke the fire. "T. X.?" "T. X. Meredith. He is the most ingenious beggar you could meet. We were
at Caius together, and he is by way of being a great pal of mine. He is
in the Criminal Investigation Department." Kara nodded. There was the light of interest in his eyes and he would
have pursued the discussion further, but at the moment dinner was
announced. It was not a particularly cheerful meal because Grace did not as usual
join in the conversation, and it was left to Kara and to her husband
to supply the deficiencies. She was experiencing a curious sense of
depression, a premonition of evil which she could not define. Again and
again in the course of the dinner she took her mind back to the events
of the day to discover the reason for her unease. Usually when she adopted this method she came upon the trivial causes
in which apprehension was born, but now she was puzzled to find that a
solution was denied her. Her letters of the morning had been pleasant,
neither the house nor the servants had given her any trouble. She was
well herself, and though she knew John had a little money trouble,
since his unfortunate speculation in Roumanian gold shares, and she half
suspected that he had had to borrow money to make good his losses, yet
his prospects were so excellent and the success of his last book
so promising that she, probably seeing with a clearer vision the
unimportance of those money worries, was less concerned about the
problem than he. "You will have your coffee in the study, I suppose," said Grace, "and
I know you'll excuse me; I have to see Mrs. Chandler on the mundane
subject of laundry." She favoured Kara with a little nod as she left the room and touched
John's shoulder lightly with her hand in passing. Kara's eyes followed her graceful figure until she was out of view,
then:

"I want to see you, Kara," said John Lexman, "if you will give me five
minutes." "You can have five hours, if you like," said the other, easily. They went into the study together; the maid brought the coffee
and liqueur, and placed them on a little table near the fire and
disappeared. For a time the conversation was general. Kara, who was a frank admirer
of the comfort of the room and who lamented his own inability to secure
with money the cosiness which John had obtained at little cost, went on
a foraging expedition whilst his host applied himself to a proof which
needed correcting. "I suppose it is impossible for you to have electric light here," Kara
asked. "Quite," replied the other. "Why?" "I rather like the light of this lamp." "It isn't the lamp," drawled the Greek and made a little grimace; "I
hate these candles." He waved his hand to the mantle-shelf where the six tall, white, waxen
candles stood out from two wall sconces. "Why on earth do you hate candles?" asked the other in surprise. Kara made no reply for the moment, but shrugged his shoulders. Presently
he spoke. "If you were ever tied down to a chair and by the side of that chair was
a small keg of black powder and stuck in that powder was a small candle
that burnt lower and lower every minute--my God!" John was amazed to see the perspiration stand upon the forehead of his
guest. "That sounds thrilling," he said. The Greek wiped his forehead with a silk handkerchief and his hand shook
a little. "It was something more than thrilling," he said. "And when did this occur?" asked the author curiously. "In Albania," replied the other; "it was many years ago, but the devils
are always sending me reminders of the fact." He did not attempt to explain who the devils were or under what
circumstances he was brought to this unhappy pass, but changed the
subject definitely. Sauntering round the cosy room he followed the bookshelf which filled
one wall and stopped now and again to examine some title. Presently he
drew forth a stout volume. "'Wild Brazil'," he read, "by George Gathercole-do you know Gathercole?" John was filling his pipe from a big blue jar on his desk and nodded. "Met him once--a taciturn devil. Very short of speech and, like all men
who have seen and done things, less inclined to talk about himself than
any man I know." Kara looked at the book with a thoughtful pucker of brow and turned the
leaves idly. "I've never seen him," he said as he replaced the book, "yet, in a
sense, his new journey is on my behalf." The other man looked up. "On your behalf?" "Yes--you know he has gone to Patagonia for me. He believes there is
gold there--you will learn as much from his book on the mountain systems
of South America. I was interested in his theories and corresponded
with him. As a result of that correspondence he undertook to make a
geological survey for me. I sent him money for his expenses, and he went
off." "You never saw him?" asked John Lexman, surprised. Kara shook his head. "That was not--?" began his host. "Not like me, you were going to say. Frankly, it was not, but then I
realized that he was an unusual kind of man. I invited him to dine with
me before he left London, and in reply received a wire from Southampton
intimating that he was already on his way." Lexman nodded. "It must be an awfully interesting kind of life," he said. "I suppose he
will be away for quite a long time?" "Three years," said Kara, continuing his examination of the bookshelf. "I envy those fellows who run round the world writing books," said John,
puffing reflectively at his pipe. "They have all the best of it." Kara turned. He stood immediately behind the author and the other
could not see his face. There was, however, in his voice an unusual
earnestness and an unusual quiet vehemence. "What have you to complain about!" he asked, with that little drawl of
his. "You have your own creative work--the most fascinating branch of
labour that comes to a man. He, poor beggar, is bound to actualities. You have the full range of all the worlds which your imagination
gives to you. You can create men and destroy them, call into existence
fascinating problems, mystify and baffle ten or twenty thousand people,
and then, at a word, elucidate your mystery." John laughed. "There is something in that," he said. "As for the rest of your life," Kara went on in a lower voice, "I think
you have that which makes life worth living--an incomparable wife." Lexman swung round in his chair, and met the other's gaze, and there was
something in the set of the other's handsome face which took his breath
away. "I do not see--" he began. Kara smiled. "That was an impertinence, wasn't it!" he said, banteringly. "But then
you mustn't forget, my dear man, that I was very anxious to marry your
wife. I don't suppose it is secret. And when I lost her, I had ideas
about you which are not pleasant to recall." He had recovered his self-possession and had continued his aimless
stroll about the room. "You must remember I am a Greek, and the modern Greek is no philosopher. You must remember, too, that I am a petted child of fortune, and have
had everything I wanted since I was a baby." "You are a fortunate devil," said the other, turning back to his desk,
and taking up his pen. For a moment Kara did not speak, then he made as though he would say
something, checked himself, and laughed. "I wonder if I am," he said. And now he spoke with a sudden energy. "What is this trouble you are having with Vassalaro?" John rose from his chair and walked over to the fire, stood gazing down
into its depths, his legs wide apart, his hands clasped behind him, and
Kara took his attitude to supply an answer to the question. "I warned you against Vassalaro," he said, stooping by the other's side
to light his cigar with a spill of paper. "My dear Lexman, my fellow
countrymen are unpleasant people to deal with in certain moods." "He was so obliging at first," said Lexman, half to himself. "And now he is so disobliging," drawled Kara. "That is a way which
moneylenders have, my dear man; you were very foolish to go to him at
all. I could have lent you the money." "There were reasons why I should not borrow money from you,", said John,
quietly, "and I think you yourself have supplied the principal reason
when you told me just now, what I already knew, that you wanted to marry
Grace." "How much is the amount?" asked Kara, examining his well-manicured
finger-nails. "Two thousand five hundred pounds," replied John, with a short laugh,
"and I haven't two thousand five hundred shillings at this moment." "Will he wait?" John Lexman shrugged his shoulders. "Look here, Kara," he said, suddenly, "don't think I want to reproach
you, but it was through you that I met Vassalaro so that you know the
kind of man he is." Kara nodded. "Well, I can tell you he has been very unpleasant indeed," said John,
with a frown, "I had an interview with him yesterday in London and it
is clear that he is going to make a lot of trouble. I depended upon the
success of my play in town giving me enough to pay him off, and I very
foolishly made a lot of promises of repayment which I have been unable
to keep." "I see," said Kara, and then, "does Mrs. Lexman know about this matter?" "A little," said the other. He paced restlessly up and down the room, his hands behind him and his
chin upon his chest. "Naturally I have not told her the worst, or how beastly unpleasant the
man has been." He stopped and turned. "Do you know he threatened to kill me?" he asked. Kara smiled. "I can tell you it was no laughing matter," said the other, angrily,
"I nearly took the little whippersnapper by the scruff of the neck and
kicked him." Kara dropped his hand on the other's arm. "I am not laughing at you," he said; "I am laughing at the thought of
Vassalaro threatening to kill anybody. He is the biggest coward in the
world. What on earth induced him to take this drastic step?" "He said he is being hard pushed for money," said the other, moodily,
"and it is possibly true. He was beside himself with anger and anxiety,
otherwise I might have given the little blackguard the thrashing he
deserved." Kara who had continued his stroll came down the room and halted in front
of the fireplace looking at the young author with a paternal smile. "You don't understand Vassalaro," he said; "I repeat he is the greatest
coward in the world. You will probably discover he is full of firearms
and threats of slaughter, but you have only to click a revolver to see
him collapse. Have you a revolver, by the way?" "Oh, nonsense," said the other, roughly, "I cannot engage myself in that
kind of melodrama." "It is not nonsense," insisted the other, "when you are in Rome, et
cetera, and when you have to deal with a low-class Greek you must use
methods which will at least impress him. If you thrash him, he will
never forgive you and will probably stick a knife into you or your wife. If you meet his melodrama with melodrama and at the psychological moment
produce your revolver; you will secure the effect you require. Have you
a revolver?" John went to his desk and, pulling open a drawer, took out a small
Browning. "That is the extent of my armory," he said, "it has never been fired and
was sent to me by an unknown admirer last Christmas." "A curious Christmas present," said the other, examining the weapon. "I suppose the mistaken donor imagined from my books that I lived in
a veritable museum of revolvers, sword sticks and noxious drugs," said
Lexman, recovering some of his good humour; "it was accompanied by a
card." "Do you know how it works?" asked the other. "I have never troubled very much about it," replied Lexman, "I know that
it is loaded by slipping back the cover, but as my admirer did not send
ammunition, I never even practised with it." There was a knock at the door. "That is the post," explained John. The maid had one letter on the salver and the author took it up with a
frown. "From Vassalaro," he said, when the girl had left the room. The Greek took the letter in his hand and examined it. "He writes a vile fist," was his only comment as he handed it back to
John. He slit open the thin, buff envelope and took out half a dozen sheets of
yellow paper, only a single sheet of which was written upon. The letter
was brief:

  "I must see you to-night without fail," ran the scrawl; "meet me
   at the crossroads between Beston Tracey and the Eastbourne
   Road. I shall be there at eleven o'clock, and, if you want to
   preserve your life, you had better bring me a substantial
   instalment." It was signed "Vassalaro." John read the letter aloud. "He must be mad to write a letter like
that," he said; "I'll meet the little devil and teach him such a lesson
in politeness as he is never likely to forget." He handed the letter to the other and Kara read it in silence. "Better take your revolver," he said as he handed it back. John Lexman looked at his watch. "I have an hour yet, but it will take me the best part of twenty minutes
to reach the Eastbourne Road." "Will you see him?" asked Kara, in a tone of surprise. "Certainly," Lexman replied emphatically: "I cannot have him coming up
to the house and making a scene and that is certainly what the little
beast will do." "Will you pay him?" asked Kara softly. John made no answer. There was probably 10 pounds in the house and a
cheque which was due on the morrow would bring him another 30 pounds. He looked at the letter again. It was written on paper of an unusual
texture. The surface was rough almost like blotting paper and in some
places the ink absorbed by the porous surface had run. The blank sheets
had evidently been inserted by a man in so violent a hurry that he had
not noticed the extravagance. "I shall keep this letter," said John. "I think you are well advised. Vassalaro probably does not know that he
transgresses a law in writing threatening letters and that should be a
very strong weapon in your hand in certain eventualities." There was a tiny safe in one corner of the study and this John opened
with a key which he took from his pocket. He pulled open one of the
steel drawers, took out the papers which were in it and put in their
place the letter, pushed the drawer to, and locked it. All the time Kara was watching him intently as one who found more than
an ordinary amount of interest in the novelty of the procedure. He took his leave soon afterwards. "I would like to come with you to your interesting meeting," he said,
"but unfortunately I have business elsewhere. Let me enjoin you to take
your revolver and at the first sign of any bloodthirsty intention on the
part of my admirable compatriot, produce it and click it once or twice,
you won't have to do more." Grace rose from the piano as Kara entered the little drawing-room and
murmured a few conventional expressions of regret that the visitor's
stay had been so short. That there was no sincerity in that regret Kara,
for one, had no doubt. He was a man singularly free from illusions. They stayed talking a little while. "I will see if your chauffeur is asleep," said John, and went out of the
room. There was a little silence after he had gone. "I don't think you are very glad to see me," said Kara. His frankness
was a little embarrassing to the girl and she flushed slightly. "I am always glad to see you, Mr. Kara, or any other of my husband's
friends," she said steadily. He inclined his head. "To be a friend of your husband is something," he said, and then as if
remembering something, "I wanted to take a book away with me--I wonder
if your husband would mind my getting it?" "I will find it for you." "Don't let me bother you," he protested, "I know my way." Without waiting for her permission he left the girl with the unpleasant
feeling that he was taking rather much for granted. He was gone less
than a minute and returned with a book under his arm. "I have not asked Lexman's permission to take it," he said, "but I am
rather interested in the author. Oh, here you are," he turned to John
who came in at that moment. "Might I take this book on Mexico?" he
asked. "I will return it in the morning." They stood at the door, watching the tail light of the motor disappear
down the drive; and returned in silence to the drawing room. "You look worried, dear," she said, laying her hand on his shoulder. He smiled faintly. "Is it the money?" she asked anxiously. For a moment he was tempted to tell her of the letter. He stifled the
temptation realizing that she would not consent to his going out if she
knew the truth. "It is nothing very much," he said. "I have to go down to Beston Tracey
to meet the last train. I am expecting some proofs down." He hated lying to her, and even an innocuous lie of this character was
repugnant to him. "I'm afraid you have had a dull evening," he said, "Kara was not very
amusing." She looked at him thoughtfully. "He has not changed very much," she said slowly. "He's a wonderfully handsome chap, isn't he?" he asked in a tone of
admiration. "I can't understand what you ever saw in a fellow like me,
when you had a man who was not only rich, but possibly the best-looking
man in the world." She shivered a little. "I have seen a side of Mr. Kara that is not particularly beautiful," she
said. "Oh, John, I am afraid of that man!" He looked at her in astonishment. "Afraid?" he asked. "Good heavens, Grace, what a thing to say! Why I
believe he'd do anything for you." "That is exactly what I am afraid of," she said in a low voice. She had a reason which she did not reveal. She had first met Remington
Kara in Salonika two years before. She had been doing a tour through the
Balkans with her father--it was the last tour the famous archeologist
made--and had met the man who was fated to have such an influence upon
her life at a dinner given by the American Consul. Many were the stories which were told about this Greek with his
Jove-like face, his handsome carriage and his limitless wealth. It
was said that his mother was an American lady who had been captured by
Albanian brigands and was sold to one of the Albanian chiefs who fell
in love with her, and for her sake became a Protestant. He had been
educated at Yale and at Oxford, and was known to be the possessor of
vast wealth, and was virtually king of a hill district forty miles out
of Durazzo. Here he reigned supreme, occupying a beautiful house which
he had built by an Italian architect, and the fittings and appointments
of which had been imported from the luxurious centres of the world. In Albania they called him "Kara Rumo," which meant "The Black Roman,"
for no particular reason so far as any one could judge, for his skin was
as fair as a Saxon's, and his close-cropped curls were almost golden. He had fallen in love with Grace Terrell. At first his attentions had
amused her, and then there came a time when they frightened her, for the
man's fire and passion had been unmistakable. She had made it plain to
him that he could base no hopes upon her returning his love, and, in a
scene which she even now shuddered to recall, he had revealed something
of his wild and reckless nature. On the following day she did not see
him, but two days later, when returning through the Bazaar from a dance
which had been given by the Governor General, her carriage was stopped,
she was forcibly dragged from its interior, and her cries were stifled
with a cloth impregnated with a scent of a peculiar aromatic sweetness. Her assailants were about to thrust her into another carriage, when a
party of British bluejackets who had been on leave came upon the scene,
and, without knowing anything of the nationality of the girl, had
rescued her. In her heart of hearts she did not doubt Kara's complicity in this
medieval attempt to gain a wife, but of this adventure she had told
her husband nothing. Until her marriage she was constantly receiving
valuable presents which she as constantly returned to the only address
she knew--Kara's estate at Lemazo. A few months after her marriage she
had learned through the newspapers that this "leader of Greek society"
had purchased a big house near Cadogan Square, and then, to her
amazement and to her dismay, Kara had scraped an acquaintance with her
husband even before the honeymoon was over. His visits had been happily few, but the growing intimacy between
John and this strange undisciplined man had been a source of constant
distress to her. Should she, at this, the eleventh hour, tell her husband all her fears
and her suspicions? She debated the point for some time. And never was she nearer taking him
into her complete confidence than she was as he sat in the big armchair
by the side of the piano, a little drawn of face, more than a little
absorbed in his own meditations. Had he been less worried she might have
spoken. As it was, she turned the conversation to his last work, the
big mystery story which, if it would not make his fortune, would mean a
considerable increase to his income. At a quarter to eleven he looked at his watch, and rose. She helped him
on with his coat. He stood for some time irresolutely. "Is there anything you have forgotten?" she asked. He asked himself whether he should follow Kara's advice. In any
circumstance it was not a pleasant thing to meet a ferocious little
man who had threatened his life, and to meet him unarmed was tempting
Providence. The whole thing was of course ridiculous, but it was
ridiculous that he should have borrowed, and it was ridiculous that the
borrowing should have been necessary, and yet he had speculated on the
best of advice--it was Kara's advice. The connection suddenly occurred to him, and yet Kara had not directly
suggested that he should buy Roumanian gold shares, but had merely
spoken glowingly of their prospects. He thought a moment, and then
walked back slowly into the study, pulled open the drawer of his desk,
took out the sinister little Browning, and slipped it into his pocket. "I shan't be long, dear," he said, and kissing the girl he strode out
into the darkness. Kara sat back in the luxurious depths of his car, humming a little tune,
as the driver picked his way cautiously over the uncertain road. The
rain was still falling, and Kara had to rub the windows free of the mist
which had gathered on them to discover where he was. From time to time
he looked out as though he expected to see somebody, and then with a
little smile he remembered that he had changed his original plan, and
that he had fixed the waiting room of Lewes junction as his rendezvous. Here it was that he found a little man muffled up to the ears in a big
top coat, standing before the dying fire. He started as Kara entered and
at a signal followed him from the room. The stranger was obviously not English. His face was sallow and peaked,
his cheeks were hollow, and the beard he wore was irregular-almost
unkempt. Kara led the way to the end of the dark platform, before he spoke. "You have carried out my instructions?" he asked brusquely. The language he spoke was Arabic, and the other answered him in that
language. "Everything that you have ordered has been done, Effendi," he said
humbly. "You have a revolver?" The man nodded and patted his pocket. "Loaded?" "Excellency," asked the other, in surprise, "what is the use of a
revolver, if it is not loaded?" "You understand, you are not to shoot this man," said Kara. "You are
merely to present the pistol. To make sure, you had better unload it
now." Wonderingly the man obeyed, and clicked back the ejector. "I will take the cartridges," said Kara, holding out his hand. He slipped the little cylinders into his pocket, and after examining the
weapon returned it to its owner. "You will threaten him," he went on. "Present the revolver straight at
his heart. You need do nothing else." The man shuffled uneasily. "I will do as you say, Effendi," he said. "But--"

"There are no 'buts,'" replied the other harshly. "You are to carry out
my instructions without any question. What will happen then you shall
see. I shall be at hand. That I have a reason for this play be assured." "But suppose he shoots?" persisted the other uneasily. "He will not shoot," said Kara easily. "Besides, his revolver is not
loaded. Now you may go. You have a long walk before you. You know the
way?" The man nodded. "I have been over it before," he said confidently. Kara returned to the big limousine which had drawn up some distance from
the station. He spoke a word or two to the chauffeur in Greek, and the
man touched his hat. CHAPTER II


Assistant Commissioner of Police T. X. Meredith did not occupy offices
in New Scotland Yard. It is the peculiarity of public offices that they
are planned with the idea of supplying the margin of space above
all requirements and that on their completion they are found wholly
inadequate to house the various departments which mysteriously come into
progress coincident with the building operations. "T. X.," as he was known by the police forces of the world, had a big
suite of offices in Whitehall. The house was an old one facing the Board
of Trade and the inscription on the ancient door told passers-by that
this was the "Public Prosecutor, Special Branch." The duties of T. X. were multifarious. People said of him--and like most
public gossip, this was probably untrue--that he was the head of the
"illegal" department of Scotland Yard. If by chance you lost the keys of
your safe, T. X. could supply you (so popular rumour ran) with a burglar
who would open that safe in half an hour. If there dwelt in England a notorious individual against whom the police
could collect no scintilla of evidence to justify a prosecution, and if
it was necessary for the good of the community that that person should
be deported, it was T. X. who arrested the obnoxious person, hustled
him into a cab and did not loose his hold upon his victim until he had
landed him on the indignant shores of an otherwise friendly power. It is very certain that when the minister of a tiny power which shall be
nameless was suddenly recalled by his government and brought to trial
in his native land for putting into circulation spurious bonds, it was
somebody from the department which T. X. controlled, who burgled His
Excellency's house, burnt the locks from his safe and secured the
necessary incriminating evidence. I say it is fairly certain and here I am merely voicing the opinion of
very knowledgeable people indeed, heads of public departments who speak
behind their hands, mysterious under-secretaries of state who discuss
things in whispers in the remote corners of their clubrooms and the more
frank views of American correspondents who had no hesitation in putting
those views into print for the benefit of their readers. That T. X. had a more legitimate occupation we know, for it was that
flippant man whose outrageous comment on the Home Office Administration
is popularly supposed to have sent one Home Secretary to his grave, who
traced the Deptford murderers through a labyrinth of perjury and who
brought to book Sir Julius Waglite though he had covered his trail of
defalcation through the balance sheets of thirty-four companies. On the night of March 3rd, T. X. sat in his inner office interviewing a
disconsolate inspector of metropolitan police, named Mansus. In appearance T. X. conveyed the impression of extreme youth, for his
face was almost boyish and it was only when you looked at him closely
and saw the little creases about his eyes, the setting of his straight
mouth, that you guessed he was on the way to forty. In his early days
he had been something of a poet, and had written a slight volume
of "Woodland Lyrics," the mention of which at this later stage was
sufficient to make him feel violently unhappy. In manner he was tactful but persistent, his language was at times
marked by a violent extravagance and he had had the distinction of
having provoked, by certain correspondence which had seen the light,
the comment of a former Home Secretary that "it was unfortunate that
Mr. Meredith did not take his position with the seriousness which was
expected from a public official." His language was, as I say, under great provocation, violent and
unusual. He had a trick of using words which never were on land or sea,
and illustrating his instruction or his admonition with the quaintest
phraseology. Now he was tilted back in his office chair at an alarming angle,
scowling at his distressed subordinate who sat on the edge of a chair at
the other side of his desk. "But, T. X.," protested the Inspector, "there was nothing to be found." It was the outrageous practice of Mr. Meredith to insist upon his
associates calling him by his initials, a practice which had earnt
disapproval in the highest quarters. "Nothing is to be found!" he repeated wrathfully. "Curious Mike!" He sat up with a suddenness which caused the police officer to start
back in alarm. "Listen," said T. X., grasping an ivory paperknife savagely in his hand
and tapping his blotting-pad to emphasize his words, "you're a pie!" "I'm a policeman," said the other patiently. "A policeman!" exclaimed the exasperated T. X. "You're worse than a pie,
you're a slud! I'm afraid I shall never make a detective of you," he
shook his head sorrowfully at the smiling Mansus who had been in the
police force when T. X. was a small boy at school, "you are neither Wise
nor Wily; you combine the innocence of a Baby with the grubbiness of a
County Parson--you ought to be in the choir." At this outrageous insult Mr. Mansus was silent; what he might have
said, or what further provocation he might have received may be never
known, for at that moment, the Chief himself walked in. The Chief of the Police in these days was a grey man, rather tired, with
a hawk nose and deep eyes that glared under shaggy eyebrows and he was a
terror to all men of his department save to T. X. who respected nothing
on earth and very little elsewhere. He nodded curtly to Mansus. "Well, T. X.," he said, "what have you discovered about our friend
Kara?" He turned from T. X. to the discomforted inspector. "Very little," said T. X. "I've had Mansus on the job." "And you've found nothing, eh?" growled the Chief. "He has found all that it is possible to find," said T. X. "We do not
perform miracles in this department, Sir George, nor can we pick up the
threads of a case at five minutes' notice." Sir George Haley grunted. "Mansus has done his best," the other went on easily, "but it is rather
absurd to talk about one's best when you know so little of what you
want." Sir George dropped heavily into the arm-chair, and stretched out his
long thin legs. "What I want," he said, looking up at the ceiling and putting his hands
together, "is to discover something about one Remington Kara, a wealthy
Greek who has taken a house in Cadogan Square, who has no particular
position in London society and therefore has no reason for coming
here, who openly expresses his detestation of the climate, who has
a magnificent estate in some wild place in the Balkans, who is an
excellent horseman, a magnificent shot and a passable aviator." T. X. nodded to Mansus and with something of gratitude in his eyes the
inspector took his leave. "Now Mansus has departed," said T. X., sitting himself on the edge of
his desk and selecting with great care a cigarette from the case he took
from his pocket, "let me know something of the reason for this sudden
interest in the great ones of the earth." Sir George smiled grimly. "I have the interest which is the interest of my department," he said. "That is to say I want to know a great deal about abnormal people. We
have had an application from him," he went on, "which is rather unusual. Apparently he is in fear of his life from some cause or other and wants
to know if he can have a private telephone connection between his house
and the central office. We told him that he could always get the nearest
Police Station on the 'phone, but that doesn't satisfy him. He has made
bad friends with some gentleman of his own country who sooner or later,
he thinks, will cut his throat." T. X. nodded. "All this I know," he said patiently, "if you will further unfold the
secret dossier, Sir George, I am prepared to be thrilled." "There is nothing thrilling about it," growled the older man, rising,
"but I remember the Macedonian shooting case in South London and I don't
want a repetition of that sort of thing. If people want to have blood
feuds, let them take them outside the metropolitan area." "By all means," said T. X., "let them. Personally, I don't care where
they go. But if that is the extent of your information I can supplement
it. He has had extensive alterations made to the house he bought in
Cadogan Square; the room in which he lives is practically a safe." Sir George raised his eyebrows. "A safe," he repeated. T. X. nodded. "A safe," he said; "its walls are burglar proof, floor and roof are
reinforced concrete, there is one door which in addition to its ordinary
lock is closed by a sort of steel latch which he lets fall when he
retires for the night and which he opens himself personally in the
morning. The window is unreachable, there are no communicating doors,
and altogether the room is planned to stand a siege." The Chief Commissioner was interested. "Any more?" he asked. "Let me think," said T. X., looking up at the ceiling. "Yes, the
interior of his room is plainly furnished, there is a big fireplace,
rather an ornate bed, a steel safe built into the wall and visible from
its outer side to the policeman whose beat is in that neighborhood." "How do you know all this?" asked the Chief Commissioner. "Because I've been in the room," said T. X. simply, "having by an
underhand trick succeeded in gaining the misplaced confidence of Kara's
housekeeper, who by the way"--he turned round to his desk and scribbled
a name on the blotting-pad--"will be discharged to-morrow and must be
found a place." "Is there any--er--?" began the Chief. "Funny business?" interrupted T. X., "not a bit. House and man are quite
normal save for these eccentricities. He has announced his intention of
spending three months of the year in England and nine months abroad. He
is very rich, has no relations, and has a passion for power." "Then he'll be hung," said the Chief, rising. "I doubt it," said the other, "people with lots of money seldom get
hung. You only get hung for wanting money." "Then you're in some danger, T. X.," smiled the Chief, "for according to
my account you're always more or less broke." "A genial libel," said T. X., "but talking about people being broke, I
saw John Lexman to-day--you know him!" The Chief Commissioner nodded. "I've an idea he's rather hit for money. He was in that Roumanian gold
swindle, and by his general gloom, which only comes to a man when he's
in love (and he can't possibly be in love since he's married) or when
he's in debt, I fear that he is still feeling the effect of that rosy
adventure." A telephone bell in the corner of the room rang sharply, and T. X.
picked up the receiver. He listened intently. "A trunk call," he said over his shoulder to the departing commissioner,
"it may be something interesting." A little pause; then a hoarse voice spoke to him. "Is that you, T. X.?" "That's me," said the Assistant Commissioner, commonly. "It's John Lexman speaking." "I shouldn't have recognized your voice," said T. X., "what is wrong
with you, John, can't you get your plot to went?" "I want you to come down here at once," said the voice urgently, and
even over the telephone T. X. recognized the distress. "I have shot a
man, killed him!" T. X. gasped. "Good Lord," he said, "you are a silly ass!" CHAPTER III


In the early hours of the morning a tragic little party was assembled in
the study at Beston Priory. John Lexman, white and haggard, sat on the
sofa with his wife by his side. Immediate authority as represented by
a village constable was on duty in the passage outside, whilst T. X.
sitting at the table with a writing pad and a pencil was briefly noting
the evidence. The author had sketched the events of the day. He had described his
interview with the money-lender the day before and the arrival of the
letter. "You have the letter!" asked T. X.

John Lexman nodded. "I am glad of that," said the other with a sigh of relief, "that will
save you from a great deal of unpleasantness, my poor old chap. Tell me
what happened afterward." "I reached the village," said John Lexman, "and passed through it. There
was nobody about, the rain was still falling very heavily and indeed I
didn't meet a single soul all the evening. I reached the place appointed
about five minutes before time. It was the corner of Eastbourne Road
on the station side and there I found Vassalaro waiting. I was rather
ashamed of myself at meeting him at all under these conditions, but I
was very keen on his not coming to the house for I was afraid it would
upset Grace. What made it all the more ridiculous was this infernal
pistol which was in my pocket banging against my side with every step I
took as though to nudge me to an understanding of my folly." "Where did you meet Vassalaro?" asked T. X. "He was on the other side of the Eastbourne Road and crossed the road
to meet me. At first he was very pleasant though a little agitated but
afterward he began to behave in a most extraordinary manner as though he
was lashing himself up into a fury which he didn't feel. I promised him
a substantial amount on account, but he grew worse and worse and then,
suddenly, before I realised what he was doing, he was brandishing a
revolver in my face and uttering the most extraordinary threats. Then it
was I remembered Kara's warning." "Kara," said T. X. quickly. "A man I know and who was responsible for introducing me to Vassalaro. He is immensely wealthy." "I see," said T. X., "go on." "I remembered this warning," the other proceeded, "and I thought it
worth while trying it out to see if it had any effect upon the little
man. I pulled the pistol from my pocket and pointed it at him, but that
only seemed to make it--and then I pressed the trigger....

"To my horror four shots exploded before I could recover sufficient
self-possession to loosen my hold of the butt. He fell without a word. I dropped the revolver and knelt by his side. I could tell he was
dangerously wounded, and indeed I knew at that moment that nothing would
save him. My pistol had been pointed in the region of his heart...."

He shuddered, dropping his face in his hands, and the girl by his side,
encircling his shoulder with a protecting arm, murmured something in his
ear. Presently he recovered. "He wasn't quite dead. I heard him murmur something but I wasn't able
to distinguish what he said. I went straight to the village and told the
constable and had the body removed." T. X. rose from the table and walked to the door and opened it. "Come in, constable," he said, and when the man made his appearance,
"I suppose you were very careful in removing this body, and you took
everything which was lying about in the immediate ate vicinity'?" "Yes, sir," replied the man, "I took his hat and his walkingstick, if
that's what you mean." "And the revolver!" asked T. X. The man shook his head. "There warn't any revolver, sir, except the pistol which Mr. Lexman
had." He fumbled in his pocket and pulled it out gingerly, and T. X. took it
from him. "I'll look after your prisoner; you go down to the village, get any help
you can and make a most careful search in the place where this man
was killed and bring me the revolver which you will discover. You'll
probably find it in a ditch by the side of the road. I'll give a
sovereign to the man who finds it." The constable touched his hat and went out. "It looks rather a weird case to me," said T. X., as he came back to the
table, "can't you see the unusual features yourself, Lexman! It isn't
unusual for you to owe money and it isn't unusual for the usurer to
demand the return of that money, but in this case he is asking for
it before it was due, and further than that he was demanding it with
threats. It is not the practice of the average money lender to go after
his clients with a loaded revolver. Another peculiar thing is that if he
wished to blackmail you, that is to say, bring you into contempt in
the eyes of your friends, why did he choose to meet you in a dark and
unfrequented road, and not in your house where the moral pressure would
be greatest? Also, why did he write you a threatening letter which would
certainly bring him into the grip of the law and would have saved you a
great deal of unpleasantness if he had decided upon taking action!" He tapped his white teeth with the end of his pencil and then suddenly,

"I think I'll see that letter," he said. John Lexman rose from the sofa, crossed to the safe, unlocked it and
was unlocking the steel drawer in which he had placed the incriminating
document. His hand was on the key when T. X. noticed the look of
surprise on his face. "What is it!" asked the detective suddenly. "This drawer feels very hot," said John,--he looked round as though to
measure the distance between the safe and the fire. T. X. laid his hand upon the front of the drawer. It was indeed warm. "Open it," said T. X., and Lexman turned the key and pulled the drawer
open. As he did so, the whole contents burst up in a quick blaze of flame. It
died down immediately and left only a little coil of smoke that flowed
from the safe into the room. "Don't touch anything inside," said T. X. quickly. He lifted the drawer carefully and placed it under the light. In the
bottom was no more than a few crumpled white ashes and a blister of
paint where the flame had caught the side. "I see," said T. X. slowly. He saw something more than that handful of ashes, he saw the deadly
peril in which his friend was standing. Here was one half of the
evidence in Lexman's favour gone, irredeemably. "The letter was written on a paper which was specially prepared by a
chemical process which disintegrated the moment the paper was exposed
to the air. Probably if you delayed putting the letter in the drawer
another five minutes, you would have seen it burn before your eyes. As
it was, it was smouldering before you had turned the key of the box. The
envelope!" "Kara burnt it," said Lexman in a low voice, "I remember seeing him take
it up from the table and throw it in the fire." T. X. nodded. "There remains the other half of the evidence," he said grimly, and when
an hour later, the village constable returned to report that in spite
of his most careful search he had failed to discover the dead man's
revolver, his anticipations were realized. The next morning John Lexman was lodged in Lewes gaol on a charge of
wilful murder. A telegram brought Mansus from London to Beston Tracey, and T. X.
received him in the library. "I sent for you, Mansus, because I suffer from the illusion that you
have more brains than most of the people in my department, and that's
not saying much." "I am very grateful to you, sir, for putting me right with
Commissioner," began Mansus, but T. X. stopped him. "It is the duty of every head of departments," he said oracularly, "to
shield the incompetence of his subordinates. It is only by the adoption
of some such method that the decencies of the public life can be
observed. Now get down to this." He gave a sketch of the case from start
to finish in as brief a space of time as possible. "The evidence against Mr. Lexman is very heavy," he said. "He borrowed
money from this man, and on the man's body were found particulars of the
very Promissory Note which Lexman signed. Why he should have brought it
with him, I cannot say. Anyhow I doubt very much whether Mr. Lexman will
get a jury to accept his version. Our only chance is to find the Greek's
revolver--I don't think there's any very great chance, but if we are to
be successful we must make a search at once." Before he went out he had an interview with Grace. The dark shadows
under her eyes told of a sleepless night. She was unusually pale and
surprisingly calm. "I think there are one or two things I ought to tell you," she said, as
she led the way into the drawing room, closing the door behind him. "And they concern Mr. Kara, I think," said T. X. She looked at him startled. "How did you know that?" "I know nothing." He hesitated on the brink of a flippant claim of omniscience, but
realizing in time the agony she must be suffering he checked his natural
desire. "I really know nothing," he continued, "but I guess a lot," and that was
as near to the truth as you might expect T. X. to reach on the spur of
the moment. She began without preliminary. "In the first place I must tell you that Mr. Kara once asked me to marry
him, and for reasons which I will give you, I am dreadfully afraid of
him." She described without reserve the meeting at Salonika and Kara's
extravagant rage and told of the attempt which had been made upon her. "Does John know this?" asked T. X. She shook her head sadly. "I wish I had told him now," she said. "Oh, how I wish I had!" She wrung
her hands in an ecstasy of sorrow and remorse. T. X. looked at her sympathetically. Then he asked,

"Did Mr. Kara ever discuss your husband's financial position with you!" "Never." "How did John Lexman happen to meet Vassalaro!" "I can tell you that," she answered, "the first time we met Mr. Kara
in England was when we were staying at Babbacombe on a summer
holiday--which was really a prolongation of our honeymoon. Mr. Kara came
to stay at the same hotel. I think Mr. Vassalaro must have been there
before; at any rate they knew one another and after Kara's introduction
to my husband the rest was easy. "Can I do anything for John!" she asked piteously. T. X. shook his head. "So far as your story is concerned, I don't think you will advantage him
by telling it," he said. "There is nothing whatever to connect Kara with
this business and you would only give your husband a great deal of pain. I'll do the best I can." He held out his hand and she grasped it and somehow at that moment
there came to T. X. Meredith a new courage, a new faith and a greater
determination than ever to solve this troublesome mystery. He found Mansus waiting for him in a car outside and in a few minutes
they were at the scene of the tragedy. A curious little knot of
spectators had gathered, looking with morbid interest at the place where
the body had been found. There was a local policeman on duty and to him
was deputed the ungracious task of warning his fellow villagers to keep
their distance. The ground had already been searched very carefully. The
two roads crossed almost at right angles and at the corner of the cross
thus formed, the hedges were broken, admitting to a field which had
evidently been used as a pasture by an adjoining dairy farm. Some rough
attempt had been made to close the gap with barbed wire, but it was
possible to step over the drooping strands with little or no difficulty. It was to this gap that T. X. devoted his principal attention. All the
fields had been carefully examined without result, the four drains which
were merely the connecting pipes between ditches at the sides of the
crossroads had been swept out and only the broken hedge and its tangle
of bushes behind offered any prospect of the new search being rewarded. "Hullo!" said Mansus, suddenly, and stooping down he picked up something
from the ground. T. X. took it in his hand. It was unmistakably a revolver cartridge. He marked the spot where
it had been found by jamming his walking stick into the ground and
continued his search, but without success. "I am afraid we shall find nothing more here," said T. X., after half
an hour's further search. He stood with his chin in his hand, a frown on
his face. "Mansus," he said, "suppose there were three people here, Lexman, the
money lender and a third witness. And suppose this third person for some
reason unknown was interested in what took place between the two men and
he wanted to watch unobserved. Isn't it likely that if he, as I think,
instigated the meeting, he would have chosen this place because this
particular hedge gave him a chance of seeing without being seen?" Mansus thought. "He could have seen just as well from either of the other hedges, with
less chance of detection," he said, after a long pause. T. X. grinned. "You have the makings of a brain," he said admiringly. "I agree with
you. Always remember that, Mansus. That there was one occasion in your
life when T. X. Meredith and you thought alike." Mansus smiled a little feebly. "Of course from the point of view of the observer this was the worst
place possible, so whoever came here, if they did come here, dropping
revolver bullets about, must have chosen the spot because it was
get-at-able from another direction. Obviously he couldn't come down the
road and climb in without attracting the attention of the Greek who was
waiting for Mr. Lexman. We may suppose there is a gate farther along the
road, we may suppose that he entered that gate, came along the field by
the side of the hedge and that somewhere between here and the gate, he
threw away his cigar." "His cigar!" said Mansus in surprise. "His cigar," repeated T. X., "if he was alone, he would keep his cigar
alight until the very last moment." "He might have thrown it into the road," said Mansus. "Don't jibber," said T. X., and led the way along the hedge. From where
they stood they could see the gate which led on to the road about a
hundred yards further on. Within a dozen yards of that gate, T. X. found
what he had been searching for, a half-smoked cigar. It was sodden with
rain and he picked it up tenderly. "A good cigar, if I am any judge," he said, "cut with a penknife, and
smoked through a holder." They reached the gate and passed through. Here they were on the road
again and this they followed until they reached another cross road that
to the left inclining southward to the new Eastbourne Road and that to
the westward looking back to the Lewes-Eastbourne railway. The rain had
obliterated much that T. X. was looking for, but presently he found a
faint indication of a car wheel. "This is where she turned and backed," he said, and walked slowly to the
road on the left, "and this is where she stood. There is the grease from
her engine." He stooped down and moved forward in the attitude of a Russian dancer,
"And here are the wax matches which the chauffeur struck," he counted,
"one, two, three, four, five, six, allow three for each cigarette on a
boisterous night like last night, that makes three cigarettes. Here is
a cigarette end, Mansus, Gold Flake brand," he said, as he examined it
carefully, "and a Gold Flake brand smokes for twelve minutes in normal
weather, but about eight minutes in gusty weather. A car was here for
about twenty-four minutes--what do you think of that, Mansus?" "A good bit of reasoning, T. X.," said the other calmly, "if it happens
to be the car you're looking for." "I am looking for any old car," said T. X. He found no other trace of car wheels though he carefully followed
up the little lane until it reached the main road. After that it was
hopeless to search because rain had fallen in the night and in the early
hours of the morning. He drove his assistant to the railway station in
time to catch the train at one o'clock to London. "You will go straight to Cadogan Square and arrest the chauffeur of Mr.
Kara," he said. "Upon what charge!" asked Mansus hurriedly. When it came to the step which T. X. thought fit to take in the
pursuance of his duty, Mansus was beyond surprise. "You can charge him with anything you like," said T. X., with fine
carelessness, "probably something will occur to you on your way up to
town. As a matter of fact the chauffeur has been called unexpectedly
away to Greece and has probably left by this morning's train for the
Continent. If that is so, we can do nothing, because the boat will have
left Dover and will have landed him at Boulogne, but if by any luck you
get him, keep him busy until I get back." T. X. himself was a busy man that day, and it was not until night was
falling that he again turned to Beston Tracey to find a telegram waiting
for him. He opened it and read,

"Chauffeur's name, Goole. Formerly waiter English Club, Constantinople. Left for east by early train this morning, his mother being ill."

"His mother ill," said T. X. contemptuously, "how very feeble,--I should
have thought Kara could have gone one better than that." He was in John Lexman's study as the door opened and the maid announced,
"Mr. Remington Kara." CHAPTER IV


T. X. folded the telegram very carefully and slipped it into his
waistcoat pocket. He favoured the newcomer with a little bow and taking upon himself the
honours of the establishment, pushed a chair to his visitor. "I think you know my name," said Kara easily, "I am a friend of poor
Lexman's." "So I am told," said T. X., "but don't let your friendship for Lexman
prevent your sitting down." For a moment the Greek was nonplussed and then, with a little smile and
bow, he seated himself by the writing table. "I am very distressed at this happening," he went on, "and I am
more distressed because I feel that as I introduced Lexman to this
unfortunate man, I am in a sense responsible." "If I were you," said T. X., leaning back in the chair and looking
half questioningly and half earnestly into the face of the other, "I
shouldn't let that fact keep me awake at night. Most people are murdered
as a result of an introduction. The cases where people murder total
strangers are singularly rare. That I think is due to the insularity of
our national character." Again the other was taken back and puzzled by the flippancy of the man
from whom he had expected at least the official manner. "When did you see Mr. Vassalaro last?" asked T. X. pleasantly. Kara raised his eyes as though considering. "I think it must have been nearly a week ago." "Think again," said T. X. For a second the Greek started and again relaxed into a smile. "I am afraid," he began. "Don't worry about that," said T. X., "but let me ask you this question. You were here last night when Mr. Lexman received a letter. That he did
receive a letter, there is considerable evidence," he said as he saw
the other hesitate, "because we have the supporting statements of the
servant and the postman." "I was here," said the other, deliberately, "and I was present when Mr.
Lexman received a letter." T. X. nodded. "A letter written on some brownish paper and rather bulky," he
suggested. Again there was that momentary hesitation. "I would not swear to the color of the paper or as to the bulk of the
letter," he said. "I should have thought you would," suggested T. X., "because you see,
you burnt the envelope, and I presumed you would have noticed that." "I have no recollection of burning any envelope," said the other easily. "At any rate," T. X. went on, "when Mr. Lexman read this letter out to
you..."

"To which letter are you referring?" asked the other, with a lift of his
eyebrows. "Mr. Lexman received a threatening letter," repeated T. X. patiently,
"which he read out to you, and which was addressed to him by Vassalaro. This letter was handed to you and you also read it. Mr. Lexman to your
knowledge put the letter in his safe--in a steel drawer." The other shook his head, smiling gently. "I am afraid you've made a great mistake," he said almost
apologetically, "though I have a recollection of his receiving a letter,
I did not read it, nor was it read to me." The eyes of T. X. narrowed to the very slits and his voice became
metallic and hard. "And if I put you into the box, will you swear, that you did not see
that letter, nor read it, nor have it read to you, and that you have no
knowledge whatever of such a letter having been received by Mr. Lexman?" "Most certainly," said the other coolly. "Would you swear that you have not seen Vassalaro for a week?" "Certainly," smiled the Greek. "That you did not in fact see him last night," persisted T. X., "and
interview him on the station platform at Lewes, that you did not after
leaving him continue on your way to London and then turn your car and
return to the neighbourhood of Beston Tracey?" The Greek was white to the lips, but not a muscle of his face moved. "Will you also swear," continued T. X. inexorably, "that you did not
stand at the corner of what is known as Mitre's Lot and re-enter a gate
near to the side where your car was, and that you did not watch the
whole tragedy?" "I'd swear to that," Kara's voice was strained and cracked. "Would you also swear as to the hour of your arrival in London?" "Somewhere in the region of ten or eleven," said the Greek. T. X. smiled. "Would you swear that you did not go through Guilford at half-past
twelve and pull up to replenish your petrol?" The Greek had now recovered his self-possession and rose. "You are a very clever man, Mr. Meredith--I think that is your name?" "That is my name," said T. X. calmly. "There has been, no need for me to
change it as often as you have found the necessity." He saw the fire blazing in the other's eyes and knew that his shot had
gone home. "I am afraid I must go," said Kara. "I came here intending to see Mrs.
Lexman, and I had no idea that I should meet a policeman." "My dear Mr. Kara," said T. X., rising and lighting a cigarette, "you
will go through life enduring that unhappy experience." "What do you mean?" "Just what I say. You will always be expecting to meet one person, and
meeting another, and unless you are very fortunate indeed, that other
will always be a policeman." His eyes twinkled for he had recovered from the gust of anger which had
swept through him. "There are two pieces of evidence I require to save Mr. Lexman from very
serious trouble," he said, "the first of these is the letter which was
burnt, as you know." "Yes," said Kara. T. X. leant across the desk. "How did you know?" he snapped. "Somebody told me, I don't know who it was." "That's not true," replied T. X.; "nobody knows except myself and Mrs. Lexman." "But my dear good fellow," said Kara, pulling on his gloves, "you have
already asked me whether I didn't burn the letter." "I said envelope," said T. X., with a little laugh. "And you were going to say something about the other clue?" "The other is the revolver," said T. X. "Mr. Lexman's revolver!" drawled the Greek. "That we have," said T. X. shortly. "What we want is the weapon which
the Greek had when he threatened Mr. Lexman." "There, I'm afraid I cannot help you." Kara walked to the door and T. X. followed. "I think I will see Mrs. Lexman." "I think not," said T. X. The other turned with a sneer. "Have you arrested her, too?" he asked. "Pull yourself together!" said T. X. coarsely. He escorted Kara to his
waiting limousine. "You have a new chauffeur to-night, I observe," he said. Kara towering with rage stepped daintily into the car. "If you are writing to the other you might give him my love," said T.
X., "and make most tender enquiries after his mother. I particularly ask
this." Kara said nothing until the car was out of earshot then he lay back
on the down cushions and abandoned himself to a paroxysm of rage and
blasphemy. CHAPTER V


Six months later T. X. Meredith was laboriously tracing an elusive line
which occurred on an ordnance map of Sussex when the Chief Commissioner
announced himself. Sir George described T. X. as the most wholesome corrective a public
official could have, and never missed an opportunity of meeting his
subordinate (as he said) for this reason. "What are you doing there?" he growled. "The lesson this morning," said T. X. without looking up, "is maps." Sir George passed behind his assistant and looked over his shoulder. "That is a very old map you have got there," he said. "1876. It shows the course of a number of interesting little streams in
this neighbourhood which have been lost sight of for one reason or
the other by the gentleman who made the survey at a later period. I
am perfectly sure that in one of these streams I shall find what I am
seeking." "You haven't given up hope, then, in regard to Lexman?" "I shall never give up hope," said T. X., "until I am dead, and possibly
not then." "Let me see, what did he get--fifteen years!" "Fifteen years," repeated T. X., "and a very fortunate man to escape
with his life." Sir George walked to the window and stared out on to busy Whitehall. "I am told you are quite friendly with Kara again." T. X. made a noise which might be taken to indicate his assent to the
statement. "I suppose you know that gentleman has made a very heroic attempt to get
you fired," he said. "I shouldn't wonder," said T. X. "I made as heroic an attempt to get him
hung, and one good turn deserves another. What did he do? See ministers
and people?" "He did," said Sir George. "He's a silly ass," responded T. X. "I can understand all that"--the Chief Commissioner turned round--"but
what I cannot understand is your apology to him." "There are so many things you don't understand, Sir George," said T. X.
tartly, "that I despair of ever cataloguing them." "You are an insolent cub," growled his Chief. "Come to lunch." "Where will you take me?" asked T. X. cautiously. "To my club." "I'm sorry," said the other, with elaborate politeness, "I have lunched
once at your club. Need I say more?" He smiled, as he worked after his Chief had gone, at the recollection
of Kara's profound astonishment and the gratification he strove so
desperately to disguise. Kara was a vain man, immensely conscious of his good looks, conscious of
his wealth. He had behaved most handsomely, for not only had he accepted
the apology, but he left nothing undone to show his desire to create a
good impression upon the man who had so grossly insulted him. T. X. had accepted an invitation to stay a weekend at Kara's "little
place in the country," and had found there assembled everything that
the heart could desire in the way of fellowship, eminent politicians
who might conceivably be of service to an ambitious young Assistant
Commissioner of Police, beautiful ladies to interest and amuse him. Kara
had even gone to the length of engaging a theatrical company to play
"Sweet Lavender," and for this purpose the big ballroom at Hever Court
had been transformed into a theatre. As he was undressing for bed that night T. X. remembered that he had
mentioned to Kara that "Sweet Lavender" was his favorite play, and he
realized that the entertainment was got up especially for his benefit. In a score of other ways Kara had endeavoured to consolidate the
friendship. He gave the young Commissioner advice about a railway
company which was operating in Asia Minor, and the shares of which stood
a little below par. T. X. thanked him for the advice, and did not take
it, nor did he feel any regret when the shares rose 3 pounds in as many
weeks. T. X. had superintended the disposal of Beston Priory. He had the
furniture removed to London, and had taken a flat for Grace Lexman. She had a small income of her own, and this, added to the large
royalties which came to her (as she was bitterly conscious) in
increasing volume as the result of the publicity of the trial, placed
her beyond fear of want. "Fifteen years," murmured T. X., as he worked and whistled. There had been no hope for John Lexman from the start. He was in debt
to the man he killed. His story of threatening letters was not
substantiated. The revolver which he said had been flourished at him
had never been found. Two people believed implicitly in the story, and a
sympathetic Home Secretary had assured T. X. personally that if he could
find the revolver and associate it with the murder beyond any doubt,
John Lexman would be pardoned. Every stream in the neighbourhood had been dragged. In one case a small
river had been dammed, and the bed had been carefully dried and sifted,
but there was no trace of the weapon, and T. X. had tried methods more
effective and certainly less legal. A mysterious electrician had called at 456 Cadogan Square in Kara's
absence, and he was armed with such indisputable authority that he
was permitted to penetrate to Kara's private room, in order to examine
certain fitments. Kara returning next day thought no more of the matter when it was
reported to him, until going to his safe that night he discovered that
it had been opened and ransacked. As it happened, most of Kara's valuable and confidential possessions
were at the bank. In a fret of panic and at considerable cost he had
the safe removed and another put in its place of such potency that the
makers offered to indemnify him against any loss from burglary. T. X. finished his work, washed his hands, and was drying them when
Mansus came bursting into the room. It was not usual for Mansus to
burst into anywhere. He was a slow, methodical, painstaking man, with a
deliberate and an official, manner. "What's the matter?" asked T. X. quickly. "We didn't search Vassalaro's lodgings," cried Mansus breathlessly. "It
just occurred to me as I was coming over Westminster Bridge. I was on
top of a bus--"

"Wake up!" said T. X. "You're amongst friends and cut all that 'bus'
stuff out. Of course we searched Vassalaro's lodgings!" "No, we didn't, sir," said the other triumphantly. "He lived in Great
James Street." "He lived in the Adelphi," corrected T. X. "There were two places where he lived," said Mansus. "When did you learn this?" asked his Chief, dropping his flippancy. "This morning. I was on a bus coming across Westminster Bridge, and
there were two men in front of me, and I heard the word 'Vassalaro' and
naturally I pricked up my ears." "It was very unnatural, but proceed," said T. X. "One of the men--a very respectable person--said, 'That chap Vassalaro
used to lodge in my place, and I've still got a lot of his things. What
do you think I ought to do?'" "And you said," suggested the other. "I nearly frightened his life out of him," said Mansus. "I said, 'I am a
police officer and I want you to come along with me.'" "And of course he shut up and would not say another word," said T. X. "That's true, sir," said Mansus, "but after awhile I got him to talk. Vassalaro lived in Great James Street, 604, on the third floor. In fact,
some of his furniture is there still. He had a good reason for keeping
two addresses by all accounts." T. X. nodded wisely. "What was her name?" he asked. "He had a wife," said the other, "but she left him about four months
before he was killed. He used the Adelphi address for business purposes
and apparently he slept two or three nights of the week at Great James
Street. I have told the man to leave everything as it is, and that we
will come round." Ten minutes later the two officers were in the somewhat gloomy
apartments which Vassalaro had occupied. The landlord explained that most of the furniture was his, but that
there were certain articles which were the property of the deceased
man. He added, somewhat unnecessarily, that the late tenant owed him six
months' rent. The articles which had been the property of Vassalaro included a tin
trunk, a small writing bureau, a secretaire bookcase and a few clothes. The secretaire was locked, as was the writing bureau. The tin box, which
had little or nothing of interest, was unfastened. The other locks needed very little attention. Without any difficulty
Mansus opened both. The leaf of the bureau, when let down, formed
the desk, and piled up inside was a whole mass of letters opened and
unopened, accounts, note-books and all the paraphernalia which an untidy
man collects. Letter by letter, T. X. went through the accumulation without finding
anything to help him. Then his eye was attracted by a small tin case
thrust into one of the oblong pigeon holes at the back of the desk. This
he pulled out and opened and found a small wad of paper wrapped in tin
foil. "Hello, hello!" said T. X., and he was pardonably exhilarated. CHAPTER VI


A Man stood in the speckless courtyard before the Governor's house at
Dartmoor gaol. He wore the ugly livery of shame which marks the convict. His head was clipped short, and there was two days' growth of beard upon
his haggard face. Standing with his hands behind him, he waited for the
moment when he would be ordered to his work. John Lexman--A. O. 43--looked up at the blue sky as he had looked so
many times from the exercise yard, and wondered what the day would bring
forth. A day to him was the beginning and the end of an eternity. He
dare not let his mind dwell upon the long aching years ahead. He dare
not think of the woman he left, or let his mind dwell upon the agony
which she was enduring. He had disappeared from the world, the world he
loved, and the world that knew him, and all that there was in life; all
that was worth while had been crushed and obliterated into the granite
of the Princetown quarries, and its wide horizon shrunken by the gaunt
moorland with its menacing tors. New interests made up his existence. The quality of the food was one. The character of the book he would receive from the prison library
another. The future meant Sunday chapel; the present whatever task they
found him. For the day he was to paint some doors and windows of an
outlying cottage. A cottage occupied by a warder who, for some reason,
on the day previous, had spoken to him with a certain kindness and a
certain respect which was unusual. "Face the wall," growled a voice, and mechanically he turned, his hands
still behind him, and stood staring at the grey wall of the prison
storehouse. He heard the shuffling feet of the quarry gang, his ears caught the
clink of the chains which bound them together. They were desperate men,
peculiarly interesting to him, and he had watched their faces furtively
in the early period of his imprisonment. He had been sent to Dartmoor after spending three months in Wormwood
Scrubbs. Old hands had told him variously that he was fortunate or
unlucky. It was usual to have twelve months at the Scrubbs before
testing the life of a convict establishment. He believed there was some
talk of sending him to Parkhurst, and here he traced the influence which
T. X. would exercise, for Parkhurst was a prisoner's paradise. He heard his warder's voice behind him. "Right turn, 43, quick march." He walked ahead of the armed guard, through the great and gloomy gates
of the prison, turned sharply to the right, and walked up the village
street toward the moors, beyond the village of Princetown, and on the
Tavistock Road where were two or three cottages which had been lately
taken by the prison staff; and it was to the decoration of one of these
that A. O. 43 had been sent. The house was as yet without a tenant. A paper-hanger under the charge of another warder was waiting for the
arrival of the painter. The two warders exchanged greetings, and the
first went off leaving the other in charge of both men. For an hour they worked in silence under the eyes of the guard. Presently the warder went outside, and John Lexman had an opportunity of
examining his fellow sufferer. He was a man of twenty-four or twenty-five, lithe and alert. By no means
bad looking, he lacked that indefinable suggestion of animalism which
distinguished the majority of the inhabitants at Dartmoor. They waited until they heard the warder's step clear the passage, and
until his iron-shod boots were tramping over the cobbled path which led
from the door, through the tiny garden to the road, before the second
man spoke. "What are you in for?" he asked, in a low voice. "Murder," said John Lexman, laconically. He had answered the question before, and had noticed with a little
amusement the look of respect which came into the eyes of the
questioner. "What have you got!" "Fifteen years," said the other. "That means 11 years and 9 months," said the first man. "You've never
been here before, I suppose?" "Hardly," said Lexman, drily. "I was here when I was a kid," confessed the paper-hanger. "I am going
out next week." John Lexman looked at him enviously. Had the man told him that he had
inherited a great fortune and a greater title his envy would not have
been so genuine. Going out! The drive in the brake to the station, the ride to London in creased,
but comfortable clothing, free as the air, at liberty to go to bed and
rise when he liked, to choose his own dinner, to answer no call save the
call of his conscience, to see--he checked himself. "What are you in for?" he asked in self-defence. "Conspiracy and fraud," said the other cheerfully. "I was put away by
a woman after three of us had got clear with 12,000 pounds. Damn rough
luck, wasn't it?" John nodded. It was curious, he thought, how sympathetic one grows with these
exponents of crimes. One naturally adopts their point of view and sees
life through their distorted vision. "I bet I'm not given away with the next lot," the prisoner went on. "I've got one of the biggest ideas I've ever had, and I've got a real
good man to help me." "How?" asked John, in surprise. The man jerked his head in the direction of the prison. "Larry Green," he said briefly. "He's coming out next month, too, and we
are all fixed up proper. We are going to get the pile and then we're off
to South America, and you won't see us for dust." Though he employed all the colloquialisms which were common, his tone
was that of a man of education, and yet there was something in his
address which told John as clearly as though the man had confessed as
much, that he had never occupied any social position in life. The warder's step on the stones outside reduced them to silence. Suddenly his voice came up the stairs. "Forty-three," he called sharply, "I want you down here." John took his paint pot and brush and went clattering down the
uncarpeted stairs. "Where's the other man?" asked the warder, in a low voice. "He's upstairs in the back room." The warder stepped out of the door and looked left and right. Coming up
from Princetown was a big, grey car. "Put down your paint pot," he said. His voice was shaking with excitement. "I am going upstairs. When that car comes abreast of the gate, ask no
questions and jump into it. Get down into the bottom and pull a sack
over you, and do not get up until the car stops." The blood rushed to John Lexman's head, and he staggered. "My God!" he whispered. "Do as I tell you," hissed the warder. Like an automaton John put down his brushes, and walked slowly to the
gate. The grey car was crawling up the hill, and the face of the driver
was half enveloped in a big rubber mask. Through the two great goggles
John could see little to help him identify the man. As the machine came
up to the gate, he leapt into the tonneau and sank instantly to the
bottom. As he did so he felt the car leap forward underneath him. Now
it was going fast, now faster, now it rocked and swayed as it gathered
speed. He felt it sweeping down hill and up hill, and once he heard a
hollow rumble as it crossed a wooden bridge. He could not detect from his hiding place in what direction they were
going, but he gathered they had switched off to the left and were making
for one of the wildest parts of the moor. Never once did he feel the car
slacken its pace, until, with a grind of brakes, it stopped suddenly. "Get out," said a voice. John Lexman threw off the cover and leapt out and as he did so the car
turned and sped back the way it had come. For a moment he thought he was alone, and looked around. Far away in
the distance he saw the grey bulk of Princetown Gaol. It was an accident
that he should see it, but it so happened that a ray of the sun fell
athwart it and threw it into relief. He was alone on the moors! Where could he go? He turned at the sound of a voice. He was standing on the slope of a small tor. At the foot there was a
smooth stretch of green sward. It was on this stretch that the people of
Dartmoor held their pony races in the summer months. There was no sign
of horses; but only a great bat-like machine with out-stretched pinions
of taut white canvas, and by that machine a man clad from head to foot
in brown overalls. John stumbled down the slope. As he neared the machine he stopped and
gasped. "Kara," he said, and the brown man smiled. 