

E-text prepared by Alan Winterrowd



MALCOLM SAGE, DETECTIVE

by

HERBERT GEORGE JENKINS







CONTENTS


    I     Sir John Dene Receives His Orders
   II     The Strange Case of Mr. Challoner
  III     Malcolm Sage's Mysterious Movements
   IV     The Surrey Cattle-Maiming Mystery
    V     Inspector Wensdale Is Surprised
   VI     The Stolen Admiralty Memorandum
  VII     The Outrage at the Garage
 VIII     Gladys Norman Dines with Thompson
   IX     The Holding Up of Lady Glanedale
    X     A Lesson in Deduction
   XI     The McMurray Mystery
  XII     The Marmalade Clue
 XIII     The Gylston Slander
  XIV     Malcolm Sage Plays Patience
   XV     The Missing Heavyweight
  XVI     The Great Fight at the Olympia
 XVII     Lady Dene Calls on Malcolm Sage




CHAPTER I     SIR JOHN DENE RECEIVES HIS ORDERS




I


"John!" "Yeh!" "Don't say 'yeh,' say 'yes,' Dorothy dear." "Yes, Dorothy de----"

Sir John Dene was interrupted in his apology by a napkin-ring
whizzing past his left ear. "What's wrong?" he enquired, laying aside his paper and picking up
the napkin-ring. "I'm trying to attract your attention," replied Lady Dene, slipping
from her place at the breakfast-table and perching herself upon the
arm of her husband's chair. She ran her fingers lightly through his
hair. "Are you listening?" "Sure!" "Well, what are you going to do for Mr. Sage?" In his surprise at the question, Sir John Dene jerked up his head to
look at her, and Dorothy's forefinger managed to find the corner of
his eye. He blinked vigorously, whilst she, crooning apologies into his ear,
dabbed his eye with her handkerchief. "Now," she said, when the damage had been repaired, "I'll go and sit
down like a proper, respectable wife of a D.S.O.," and she returned
to her seat. "Well?" she demanded, as he did not speak. "Yes, dear." "What are you going to do for Mr. Sage, now that Department Z is
being demobbed? You know you like him, because you didn't want to
ginger him up, and you mustn't forget that he saved your life," she
added. "Sure!" "Don't say 'sure,' John," she cried. "You're a British baronet, and
British baronets don't say 'sure,' 'shucks' or vamoose.' Do you
understand?" He nodded thoughtfully;

"I like Mr. Sage," announced Dorothy. Then a moment later she added,
"He always reminds me of the superintendent of a Sunday-school, with
his conical bald head and gold spectacles. He's not a bit like a
detective, is he?" "Sure!" "If you say it again, John, I shall scream," she cried. For some seconds there was silence, broken at length by Dorothy. "I like his wonderful hands, too," she continued. "I'm sure he's
proud of them, because he can never keep them still. If you say
'sure,' I'll divorce you," she added hastily. He smiled, that sudden, sunny smile she had learned to look for and
love. "Then again I like him because he's always courteous and kind. At
Department Z they'd have had their appendixes out if Mr. Sage wanted
them. Now have you made up your mind?" "Made it up to what?" he asked, lighting a cigar. "That you're going to set him up as a private detective," she said
coolly. "I don't want him to come here and not find everything
planned out." "He won't do that," said Sir John Dene with conviction. "He's no
lap-dog." "I wrote and asked him to call at ten to-day," she said coolly. "Snakes, you did!" he cried, sitting up in his chair. "Alligators, I did!" she mocked. "You're sure some wife;" he looked at her admiringly. "I sure am," she laughed lightly, "but I'm only just beginning, John
dear. By the way, I asked Sir James Walton to come too," she added
casually. "You----" he began, when the door opened and a little, silver-haired
lady entered. Sir John Dene jumped to his feet. "Behold the mother of the bride," cried Dorothy gaily. "Good morning, John," said Mrs. West as he bent and kissed her cheek. She always breakfasted in her room; she abounded in tact. "Now we'll get away from the eggs and bacon," cried Dorothy. "In the
language of the woolly West, we'll vamoose," and she led the way out
of the dining-room along the corridor to Sir John Dene's den. "Come along, mother-mine," she cried over her shoulder. "We've got a
lot to discuss before ten o'clock." Sir John Dene's "den" was a room of untidiness and comfort. As
Dorothy said, he was responsible for the untidiness and she the
comfort. "Heigh-ho!" she sighed, as she sank down into a comfortable chair. "I wonder what Whitehall would have done without Mr. Sage;" she
smiled reminiscently. "He was the source of half its gossip." "He was very kind to you, Dorothy, when John was--was lost," said
Mrs. West gently, referring to the time when Sir John Dene had
disappeared and a reward of 20,000 pounds had been offered for news
of him. "Sure!" Sir John Dene acquiesced. "He's a white man, clean to the
bone." "It was very wonderful that an accountant should become such a
clever detective," said Mrs. West. "It shows----" she paused. "You see, he wasn't a success as an accountant," said Dorothy. "He
was always finding out little wangles that he wasn't supposed to see. So when they wouldn't have him in the army, he went to the Ministry
of Supply and found out a great, big wangle, and Mr. Llewellyn John
was very pleased. You get me, Honest John?" she demanded, turning to
her husband. Sir John Dene nodded and blew clouds of cigar smoke from his lips. He liked nothing better than to sit listening to his wife's
reminiscences of Whitehall, despite the fact that he had heard most
of them before. "Poor Mr. Sage," continued Dorothy, "nobody liked him, and he's got
such lovely down on his head, just like a baby," she added, with a
far-away look in her eyes. "Perhaps no one understood him," suggested Mrs. West, with
instinctive charity for the Ishmaels of the world. "Isn't that like her," cried Dorothy, "but this time she's right,"
she smiled across at her mother. "When a few thousand tons of copper
went astray, or someone ordered millions of shells the wrong size,
Mr. Sage got the wind up, and tried to find out all about it, and in
Whitehall such things weren't done." "They tried to put it up on me," grumbled Sir John Dene, twirling
his cigar with his lips, "but I soon stopped their funny work." "Everybody was too busy winning the war to bother about trifles,"
Dorothy continued. "The poor dears who looked after such things
found life quite difficult enough, with only two hours for lunch and
pretty secretaries to be----"

"Dorothy!" cried Mrs. West reproachfully. "Well, it's true, mother," she protested. It was true, as Malcolm Sage had discovered. "Let us concentrate on
what we know we _have_ got," one of his chiefs had once gravely said
to him. "Something is sure to be swallowed up in the fog of war," he
had added. Pleased with the phrase, which he conceived to be
original, he had used it as some men do a titled relative, with the
result that Whitehall had clutched at it gratefully. "The fog of war," General Conyers Bardulph had muttered when, for
the life of him, he could not find a division that was due upon the
Western Front. and which it was his duty to see was sent out. "The fog of war," murmured spiteful Anita McGowan, when the pretty
little widow, Mrs. Sleyton, was being interrogated as to the
whereabouts of her husband. "The fog of war," laughed the girls in Department J.P.Q., when at
half-past four one afternoon neither its chief nor his dark-eyed
secretary had returned from lunch. "But when he went to Department Z he was wonderful," said Mrs. West,
still clinging tenderly to her Ishmael. "He was," said Sir John Dene. "He was the plumb best man at his job
I ever came across." "Yes, John dear, that's all very well," said Dorothy, her eyes
dancing, "but suppose you had been the War Cabinet and you had sent
for Mr. Sage;" she paused. "Well?" he demanded. "And he had come in a cap and a red tie," she proceeded, "and had
resigned within five minutes, saying that you were talking of things
you didn't know anything about." She laughed at the recollection. "He was right," said Sir John Dene with conviction. "I've come
across some fools; but----"

"There, there, dear," said Dorothy, "remember there are ladies
present. In Whitehall we all loved Mr. Sage because he snubbed
Ministers, and we hadn't the pluck to do it ourselves," she added. Sir John Dene snorted. His mind travelled back to the time when he
had been "up against the whole sunflower-patch," as he had once
expressed it. "But why did they keep him if they didn't like him?" enquired Mrs.
West. "When you don't like anyone in Whitehall," Dorothy continued, "you
don't give him the push, mother dear, you just transfer him to
another department." "Like circulating bad money," grumbled Sir John Dene. "It sure was, John," she agreed. "Poor Mr. Sage soon became the most
transferred man in Whitehall. They used to say, 'Uneasy lies the
head that has a Sage.'" She laughed at the recollection. "But wasn't it rather unkind?" said Mrs. West gently. "It was, mother-mine; but Whitehall was a funny place. One of Mr.
Sage's chiefs went about for months trying to get rid of him. He
offered to give a motor-cycle to anyone who would take him, it was a
Government cycle," she added; "but there was nothing doing. We
called him Henry the Second and Mr. Sage Becket, the archbishop not
the boxer," 'she explained. "You know," she added, "there was once
an English king who wanted to get rid of----"

"We'll have it the sort of concern that insurance companies can look
to," Sir John Dene broke in. "What on earth are you talking about, John?" cried Dorothy. Whilst his wife talked Sir John Dene had been busy planning Malcolm
Sage's future, and he had uttered his thoughts aloud. He proceeded
to explain. When he had finished, Dorothy clapped her hands. "Hurrah! for Malcolm Sage, Detective," she cried and, jumping up,
she perched herself upon the arm of her husband's chair, and rumpled
the fair hair, which with her was always a sign of approval. "That's
his ring, or Sir James's," she added as the bell sounded. "Now we'll leave you lords of creation to carry out my idea," she
said as she followed Mrs. West to the door. And Sir John Dene smiled. II


"In the States they've got Pinkerton's," said Sir John Dene,
twirling with astonishing rapidity an unlit cigar between his lips. "If you've lost anything, from a stick-pin to a mountain, you just
blow in there, tell them all about it, and go away and don't worry. Here you've got nothing." "We have Scotland Yard," remarked Malcolm Sage quietly, without
looking up from the contemplation of his hands, which, with fingers
wide apart, rested upon the table before him. His bald, conical head seemed to contradict the determined set of
his jaw and the steel-coloured eyes that gazed keenly through large
gold-rimmed spectacles. Even his ears, that stood squarely out from
his head, appeared to emphasise by their aggressiveness that they
had nothing to do with the benevolent shape of the head above. "Yes, and you've got Cleopatra's Needle, and the pelicans in St.
James's Park," Sir John Dene retorted scornfully. He had never
forgotten the occasion when, at a critical moment in the country's
history, the First Lord of the Admiralty had casually enquired if he
had seen the pelicans. For the last half-hour Sir John Dene, with characteristic
impulsiveness, had been engaged in brushing aside all Malcolm Sage's
"cons" with his almighty "Pro." "We'll have a Pinkerton's in England," he resumed, as neither of his
listeners took up his challenge, "and we'll call it Sage's." "I shall in all probability receive quite a number of orders for
shop-fronts," murmured Malcolm Sage, with a slight fluttering at the
corners of his mouth, which those who knew him understood how to
interpret. "Shop-fronts!" repeated Sir John Dene, looking from one to the other,
"I don't get you." "There is already a well-known firm of shop-furnishers called
'Sage's,'" explained Sir James, who throughout the battle had been
an amused listener. "Well, we'll call it the Malcolm Sage Detective Bureau," replied Sir
John Dene, "and we'll have it a concern that insurance companies can
look to." He proceeded to light his cigar, with him always a sign
that something of importance had been settled. Sir John Dene liked getting his own way. That morning he had
resolutely brushed aside every objection, ethical or material, that
had been advanced. To Malcolm Sage he considered that he owed a
lot,* and with all the aggressiveness of his nature, he overwhelmed
and engulfed objection and protest alike. To this was added the fact
that the idea was his wife's, and in his own phraseology, "that
goes." [* See John Dene of Toronto for the story of how Malcolm Sage
frustrated the enemies of Sir John Dene.] Passive and attentive, his long shapely hands seldom still, Malcolm
Sage had listened. From time to time he ventured some objection,
only to have it brushed aside by Sir John Dene's overwhelming
determination. For some minutes Malcolm Sage had been stroking the back of his head
with the palm of his right hand, a habit of his when thoughtful. Suddenly he raised his eyes and looked across at his would-be
benefactor. "Why should you want to do this for me, Sir John?" he asked. "If you're going to put up a barrage of whys," was the irascible
retort, "you'll never cut any ice." "I fully appreciate the subtlety of the metaphor," said Malcolm Sage,
the corners of his mouth twitching; "but still why?" "Well, for one thing I owe you something," barked Sir John Dene,
"and remembering's my long suit. For another, Lady Dene----"

"That is what I wanted to know," said Malcolm Sage, as he drew his
briar from his pocket and proceeded to fill it. "Will you thank Lady
Dene and tell her that I am proud to be under an obligation to her--
and to you, Sir John," he added. "Say, that's fine," cried Sir John Dene, jumping to his feet and
extending his hand, which Malcolm Sage took, an odd, quizzical
expression in his eyes. "This Detective Bureau notion is a whale." "The zoological allusion, I'm afraid, is beyond me," said Malcolm
Sage as he struck a match, "but no doubt you are right," and he
looked across at Sir James Walton, whose eyes smiled his approval. "It's all fixed up," cried Sir John Dene to his wife as she came out
into the hall as the visitors were departing. "I'm so glad," she cried, giving her hand to Malcolm Sage. "You'll
be such a success, Mr. Sage," and she smiled confidently up into his
eyes. "With such friends," he replied, "failure would be an impertinence,"
and he and Sir James Walton passed out of the flat to return to what
was left of the rapidly demobilising Department Z, which had made
history by its Secret Service work. In a few days the news leaked out that "M.S.," as Malcolm Sage was
called by the staff, was to start, a private-detective agency. The
whole staff promptly offered its services, and there was much
speculation and heart-burning as to who would be selected. On hearing that she was to continue to act as Malcolm Sage's
secretary, Miss Gladys Norman had done a barn-dance across the room,
her arrival at the door synchronising with the appearance of Malcolm
Sage from without. It had become a tradition at Department Z that
"M.S." could always be depended upon to arrive at the most
embarrassing moment of any little dramatic episode; but it was
equally well-known that he possessed a "blind-side" to his vision. They called it "the Nelson touch." James Thompson, Malcolm Sage's principal assistant, and William
Johnson, the office junior, had also been engaged, and their
enthusiasm has been as great as that of their colleague, although
less dramatically expressed. A battle royal was fought over the body of Arthur Tims, Malcolm
Sage's chauffeur. Sir John Dene had insisted that a car and a
chauffeur were indispensable to a man who was to rival Pinkerton's. Malcolm Sage, on the other hand, had protested that it was an
unnecessary expense in the early days of a concern that had yet to
justify itself. To this Sir John Dene had replied, "Shucks!" at the
same time notifying Tims that he was engaged for a year, and
authorising him to select a car, find a garage, and wait
instructions. Tims did not do a barn-dance. He contented himself for the time
being with ruffling William Johnson's dark, knut-like hair, a thing
to which he was much addicted. Returning home on the evening of his
engagement he had bewildered Mrs. Tims by seizing her as she stood
in front of the kitchen-stove, a frying-pan full of sausages in her
hand, and waltzing her round the kitchen, frying-pan and all. Subsequently five of the six sausages had been recovered; but the
sixth was not retrieved until the next morning when, in dusting, Mrs.
Tims discovered it on the mantelpiece. CHAPTER II     THE STRANGE CASE OF MR. CHALLONER




I


"Please, sir, Miss Norman's fainted." William Johnson, known to his
colleagues as the innocent, stood at Malcolm Sage's door, with
widened eyes and a general air that bespoke helplessness. Without a word Malcolm Sage rose from his table, as if accustomed
all his life to the fainting of secretaries. William Johnson stood
aside, with the air of one who has rung a fire-alarm and now feels
he is at liberty to enjoy the fire itself. Entering her room, Malcolm Sage found Gladys Norman lying in a heap
beside her typewriter. Picking her up he carried her into his own
room, placed her in an arm-chair, fetched some brandy from a small
cupboard and, still watched by the wide-eyed William Johnson,
proceeded to force a little between her teeth. Presently her lids flickered and, a moment later, she opened her
eyes. For a second there was in them a look of uncertainty, then
suddenly they opened to their fullest extent and became fixed upon
the door beyond. Malcolm Sage glanced over his shoulder and saw
framed in the doorway Sir James Walton. "Sit down, Chief," he said quietly, his gaze returning to the girl
sitting limply in the large leather-covered arm-chair. "I shall be
free in a moment." It was characteristic of him to attempt no explanation. To his mind
the situation explained itself. As Miss Norman made an effort to rise, he placed a detaining hand
upon her arm. "Send Mr. Thompson." With a motion of his hand Malcolm Sage indicated to William Johnson
that the dramatic possibilities of the situation were exhausted, at
least as far as he was concerned. With reluctant steps the lad left
the room and, having told Thompson he was wanted, returned to his
seat in the outer office, where it was his mission to sit in
preliminary judgment upon callers. When Thompson entered, Malcolm Sage instructed him to move the
leather-covered chair into Miss Norman's room and, when she was
rested, to take her home in the car. Thompson's face beamed. His devotion to Gladys Norman was notorious. The girl rose and raised to Malcolm Sage a pair of dark eyes from
which tears were not far distant. "I'm so ashamed, Mr. Sage," she began, her lower lip trembling
ominously. "I've never done such a thing before." "I've been working you too hard," he said, as he held back the door. "You must go home and rest." She shook her head and passed out, whilst Malcolm Sage returned to
his seat at the table. "Working till two o'clock this morning," he remarked as he resumed
his seat. "She won't have assistance. Strange creatures, women," he
added musingly, "but beautifully loyal." Sir James had dropped into a chair on the opposite side of Malcolm
Sage's table. Having selected a cigar from the box his late
chief-of-staff pushed across to him, he cut off the end and
proceeded to light it. "Good cigars these," he remarked, as he critically examined the
lighted end. "They're your own brand, Chief," was the reply. Malcolm Sage always used the old name of "Chief" when addressing Sir
James Walton. It seemed to constitute a link with the old days when
they had worked together with a harmony that had bewildered those
heads of departments who had regarded Malcolm Sage as something
between a punishment and a misfortune. "Busy?" "Very." For some seconds they were silent. It was like old times to be
seated one on each side of a table, and both seemed to realise the
fact. "I've just motored up from Hurstchurch," began Sir James at length,
having assured himself that his cigar was drawing as a good cigar
should draw. "Been staying with an old friend of mine, Geoffrey
Challoner." Malcolm Sage nodded. "He was shot last night. That's why I'm here." He paused; but
Malcolm Sage made no comment. His whole attention was absorbed in an
ivory paper-knife, which he was endeavouring to balance upon the
handle of the silver inkstand. More than one client had been
disconcerted by Malcolm Sage's restless hands, which they
interpreted as a lack of interest in their affairs. "At half-past seven this morning," continued Sir James, "Peters, the
butler, knocked at Challoner's door with his shaving-water. As there
was no reply he entered and found, not only that Challoner was not
there, but that the bed had not been slept in over night." Malcolm lifted his hands from the paper-knife. It balanced. "He thought Challoner had fallen asleep in the library," continued
Sir James, "which he sometimes did, he is rather a night-owl. Peters
then went downstairs, but found the library door locked on the
inside. As there was no response to his knocking, he went round to
the French-windows that open from the library on to the lawn at the
back of the house. The curtains were drawn, however, and he could
see nothing." "Is it usual to draw the curtains?" enquired Malcolm Sage, regarding
with satisfaction the paper-knife as it gently swayed up and down
upon the inkstand. "Yes, except in the summer, when the windows are generally kept
open." Malcolm Sage nodded, and Sir James resumed his story. "Peters then went upstairs to young Dane's room; Dane is Challoner's
nephew, who lives with him. While he dressed he sent Peters to tell
me. "A few minutes later we all went down to the library and tried to
attract Challoner's attention; but without result. I then suggested
forcing an entry from the garden, which was done by breaking the
glass of one of the French-windows. "We found Challoner seated at his table dead, shot through the head. He had an automatic pistol in his hand." Sir James paused; his voice
had become husky with emotion. Presently he resumed. "We telephoned for the police and a doctor, and I spent the time
until they came in a thorough examination of the room. The
French-windows had been securely bolted top and bottom from within,
by means of a central handle. All the panes of glass were intact,
with the exception of that we had broken. The door had been locked _on
the inside_, and the key was in position. It was unlocked by Peters
when he went into the hall to telephone. It has a strong mortice-lock
and the key did not protrude through to the outer side, so that
there was no chance of manipulating the lock from without. In the
fireplace there was an electric stove, and from the shower of soot
that fell when I raised the trap, it was clear that this had not
been touched for some weeks at least. "The doctor was the first to arrive. At my urgent request he
refrained from touching the body. He said death had taken place from
seven to ten hours previously as the result of the bullet wound in
the temple. He had scarcely finished his examination when an
inspector of police, who had motored over from Lewes, joined us. "It took him very few minutes to decide that poor Challoner had shot
himself. In this he was confirmed by the doctor. Still, I insisted
that the body should not be removed." "Why did you do that, Chief?" enquired Malcolm Sage, who had
discarded the paper-knife and was now busy drawing geometrical
figures with the thumb-nail of his right hand upon the blotting pad
before him. "Because I was not satisfied," was the reply. "There was absolutely
no motive for suicide. Challoner was in good health and, if I know
anything about men, determined to live as long as the gods give." Again Malcolm Sage nodded his head meditatively. "The jumping to hasty conclusions," he remarked, "has saved many a
man his neck. Whom did you leave in charge?" he queried. "The inspector. I locked the door; here is the key," he said,
producing it from his jacket pocket. "I told him to allow no one
into the room." "Why were you there?" Malcolm Sage suddenly looked up, flashing that
keen, steely look through his gold-rimmed spectacles that many men
had found so disconcerting. "Ordinary visit?" he queried. "No.11 Sir James paused, apparently deliberating something in his
own mind. He was well acquainted with Malcolm Sage's habit of asking
apparently irrelevant questions. "There's been a little difficulty between Challoner and his nephew,"
he said slowly. "Some days back the boy announced his determination
of marrying a girl he had met in London, a typist or secretary. Challoner was greatly upset, and threatened to cut him out of his
will if he persisted. There was a scene, several scenes in fact, and
eventually I was sent for as Challoner's oldest friend." "To bring the nephew to reason," suggested Malcolm Sage. "To give advice ostensibly; but in reality to talk things over," was
the reply. "You advised?" When keenly interested, Malcolm Sage's questions were
like pistol-shots. "That Challoner should wait and see the girl." "Did he?" Malcolm Sage was intent upon outlining his hand with the point of
the paper-knife upon the blotting pad. Again Sir James hesitated, only for a fraction of a second, however. "Yes; but unfortunately with the object of endeavouring to buy her
off. Yesterday afternoon Dane brought her over. Challoner saw her
alone. She didn't stay more than a quarter of an hour. Then she and
Dane left the house together, he to see her to the station. An hour
later he returned. I was in the hall at the time. He was in a very
excited state. He pushed past me, burst into the library, banging
the door behind him. "That evening at dinner Challoner told me there had been a very
unpleasant scene. He had warned the boy that unless he apologised
to-day he would telephone to London for his lawyer, and make a fresh
will entirely disinheriting him. Soon after the interview Dane went
out of the house, and apparently did not return until late--as a
matter of fact, after I had gone to bed. I was feeling tired and
said 'good night' to Challoner about half-past ten in the library." For some time Malcolm Sage gazed upon the outline he had completed,
as if in it lay the solution of the mystery. "It's a pity you let the butler unlock the door," he remarked
regretfully. Sir James looked across at his late chief-of-staff keenly. He
detected something of reproach in his tone. "Did you happen to notice if the electric light was on when you
entered the library?" "No," said Sir James, after a slight pause; "it was not." Malcolm Sage reached across to the private telephone and gave the
"three on the buzzer" that always galvanised Miss Gladys Norman into
instant vitality. "Miss Norman," said Sage as she entered, "can you lend me the small
mirror I have seen you use occasionally?" "Yes, Mr. Sage," and she disappeared, returning a moment later with
the mirror from her handbag. She was accustomed to Malcolm Sage's
strange requests. "Feeling better?" he enquired as she turned to go. "I'm all right now," she smiled, "and please don't send me home, Mr.
Sage," she added, and she went out before he had time to reply. A quarter of an hour later the two men entered Sir James's car,
whilst Thompson and Dawkins, the official photographer to the Bureau,
followed in that driven by Tims. Malcolm Sage would cheerfully have
sacrificed anybody and anything to serve his late chief. "And how am I to keep the shine off my nose without a looking-glass,
Johnny?" asked Miss Norman of William Johnson, as she turned to
resume her work. "He won't mind if it shines," said the youth seriously; and Miss
Norman gave him a look, which only his years prevented him from
interpreting. II


As the car drew up, the hall-door of "The Cedars" was thrown open by
the butler, a fair-haired clean-shaven man of about forty-five, with
grave, impassive face, and eyes that gave the impression of allowing
little to escape them. As he descended the flight of stone-steps to open the door of the
car, a young man appeared behind him. A moment later Sir James was
introducing him to Malcolm Sage as "Mr. Richard Dane." Dark, with smoothly-brushed hair and a toothbrush moustache, he
might easily have been passed over in a crowd without a second
glance. He was obviously and acutely nervous. His fingers moved
jerkily, and there were twitchings at the corners of his mouth that
he seemed unable to control. It was not a good-tempered mouth. He
appeared unconscious of the presence of Malcolm Sage. His eyes were
fixed upon the second car, which had just drawn up, and from which
Thompson and Dawkins were removing the photographic paraphernalia. Peters conducted Sir James and Malcolm Sage to the dining-room,
where luncheon was laid. "Shall I serve luncheon, Sir James?" he enquired, ignoring Dane, who
was clearly unequal to the strain of the duties of host. Sir James looked across at Malcolm Sage, who shook his head. "I'll see the library first," he said. "Sir James will show me. Fetch Dawkins," he said to Thompson, and he followed Sir James
through the house out on to the lawn. As they entered the library by the French-windows, a tall, sandy man
rose from the armchair in which he was seated. He was Inspector
Gorton of the Sussex County Constabulary. Malcolm Sage nodded a
little absently. His eyes were keenly taking in every detail of the
figure sprawling across the writing-table. The head rested on the
left cheek, and there was an ugly wound in the right temple from
which blood had dripped and congealed upon the table. In the right
hand was clutched a small, automatic pistol. The arm was slightly
curved, the weapon pointing to the left. Having concluded his examination of the wound, Malcolm Sage drew a
silk-handkerchief from his pocket, shook out its folds and spread it
carefully over the blood-stained head of Mr. Challoner. Sir James looked across at him, appreciation in his eyes. It was one
of those little human touches, of which he had discovered so many in
Malcolm Sage, and the heads of government departments in Whitehall
so few. Malcolm Sage next proceeded to regard the body from every angle,
even going down on his knees to see the position of the legs beneath
the table. He then walked round the room and examined everything
with minute attention, particularly the key of the door, which Sir
James had replaced in its position on the inside. The keyhole on
both sides of the door came in for careful scrutiny. He tried the door of a small safe at the far-end of the room; it was
locked. He then examined the fastenings of the French-windows. Finally he returned to the table, where, dropping on one knee on the
left-hand side of the body, he drew a penknife from his pocket, and
proceeded with great care and deliberation to slit up the outer seam
of the trousers so that the pocket lay exposed. This in turn he cut open, taking care not to disturb the bunch of
keys, which, attached to a chain, lay on the thigh, a little to the
left. The others watched him with wide-eyed interest, the inspector
breathing heavily. Having assured himself that the keys would not slide off, Malcolm
Sage rose and turned to Dawkins:

"I want a plate from the right, the left, the front, and from behind
and above. Also an exposure showing the position of the legs, and
another of the keys." Dawkins inclined his head. He was a grey, bald-headed little man who
had only one thought in life, his profession. He seldom spoke, and
when he did his lips seemed scarcely to part, the words slipping out
as best they could. Happy in the knowledge that his beloved camera was once more to be
one of the principal witnesses in the detection of a crime, Dawkins
set himself to his task. "When Dawkins has finished," said Malcolm Sage, turning to the
inspector, who had been watching the proceedings with ill-disguised
impatience, "you can remove the body; but leave the pistol. Give Mr.
Challoner's keys to Sir James. And now I think we might lunch," he
said, turning to Sir James. Malcolm Sage's attitude towards the official police was generally
determined by their attitude towards him. In the Department Z days,
he had been known at Scotland Yard as "Sage & Onions." What the
phrase lacked in wit was compensated for by the feeling with which
it was frequently uttered. The police officers made no effort to
dissemble the contempt they felt for a department in which they saw
a direct rebuke to themselves. Later, however, their attitude
changed, and Malcolm Sage was brought into close personal touch with
many of the best-known officers of the Criminal Investigation
Department. He had never been known to speak disparagingly, or patronisingly, of
Scotland Yard. On the other hand, he lost no opportunity of
emphasising the fact that it was the head-quarters of the most
efficient police force in the world. He did not always agree with
its methods, which in many ways he regarded as out-of-date. As Malcolm Sage left the room, the inspector shrugged his shoulders. The whole thing was so obvious that, but for the presence of Sir
James Walton, he would have refused to delay the removal of the body. The doctor had pronounced the wound self-inflicted, and even if he
had not done so, the circumstantial evidence was conclusive. Luncheon was eaten in silence, a constrained and uncomfortable meal. Malcolm Sage ate as he always ate when his mind was occupied, with
entire indifference as to what was on the plate, from which his eyes
never lifted. Sir James made several ineffectual efforts to draw Dane into
conversation; but at each remark the young man started violently, as
if suddenly recalled to his surroundings. Finally Sir James desisted,
and the meal concluded in abysmal silence. Malcolm Sage then announced that he would examine the various
members of the household, and Dane and Peters left the room. One by one the servants entered, were interrogated, and departed. Even the gardener and his wife, who lived at the lodge by the
main-gates, were cross-questioned. Mrs. Trennett, the housekeeper, was incoherent in her voluble
anxiety to give information. The maids were almost too frightened to
speak, and from none was anything tangible extracted. No one had any reason for being near the library late at night. When Peters' turn came, he told his story with a clearness and
economy of words that caused Malcolm Sage mentally to register him
as a good witness. He was a superior kind of man, who had been in
his present position only some six months; but during that time he
had given every satisfaction, so much so that Mr. Challoner had
remarked to Sir James that he believed he had found a treasure. According to Peters' account, at a quarter-past eleven on the
previous evening he had gone to the library, as was his custom, to
see if there were anything else that Mr. Challoner required before
he locked up for the night. On being told there was nothing, he had
accordingly seen to the fastenings of doors and windows and gone to
bed. "What was Mr. Challoner doing when you entered the room?" enquired
Malcolm Sage, intent upon a design he was drawing upon the surface
of the salt. "He was sitting at the table where I found him this morning." "What was he actually doing?" "I think he was checking his bankbook, sir." "Did you notice anything strange about his manner?" "No, sir." "When you found that his bed had not been slept in were you
surprised?" "Not greatly, sir," was the response. "Once before a similar thing
happened, and I heard from the other servants that on several
occasions Mr. Challoner had spent the night in the library, having
fallen asleep there." "When you told Mr. Dane that his uncle had not slept in his room,
and that the library door was locked on the inside, what did he
say?" "He said, 'Good Lord! Peters, something must have happened.'" "Mr. Dane knew that on previous occasions his uncle had spent the
night in his study?" enquired Malcolm Sage, smoothing out the design
upon which he had been engaged and beginning another. "I think so, sir," was the response. "The pistol was the one he used at target-practice?" "Yes, sir." "Where did he keep it?" "In the third right-hand drawer of his table, sir." "He was a good shot, I think you said?" Malcolm Sage turned to Sir
James. "Magnificent," he said warmly. "I have often shot with him." "Do you know of any reason why Mr. Challoner should commit suicide?" Malcolm Sage enquired of Peters. "None whatever, sir; he always seemed very happy." "He had no domestic worries?" Peters hesitated for a moment. "He never mentioned any to me, sir." "You have in mind certain events that occurred during the last few
days, I take it?" said Malcolm Sage. "That was in my mind, sir," was the response. "You know of no way by which anyone could have got into the library
and then out again, other than through the door or the window?" Malcolm Sage had relinquished the salt-spoon and was now
meditatively twirling a wineglass by its stem between his thumb and
first finger. "There is no other way, sir." "Who has access to the library in the ordinary way? Tell me the
names of everybody who is likely to go in at any time." "Outside Mr. Challoner and Mr. Dane, there is myself, Mrs. Trennett,
the housekeeper, and Meston, the housemaid." "No one else?" "No one, sir, except, of course, the guests who might be staying in
the house." "I shall want the finger-prints of all those you have named,
including yours, Sir James." Malcolm Sage looked across at Sir James
Walton. "I can then identify those of any stranger that I may find." Sir James nodded. "It would be quite easy for Mr. Challoner to let anyone in through
the French-windows?" enquired Malcolm Sage, turning once more to
Peters. "Quite, sir." "What time did Mr. Dane return last evening?" "I think about a quarter to eleven, sir. He went straight to his
room." "That will be all now. Tell Mr. Dane I should like to see him." Peters noiselessly withdrew. A few minutes later Dane entered the room. Malcolm Sage gave him a
keen, appraising look, then dropped his eyes. Dane was still acutely
nervous. His fingers moved jerkily and the corners of his mouth
twitched. "Will you tell me what took place yesterday between you and your
uncle?" said Malcolm Sage. Dane looked about him nervously, as an animal might who has been
trapped and seeks some means of escape. "We had a row," he began, then paused; "a terrible row," he added,
as if to emphasise the nature of the quarrel. "So I understand," said Malcolm Sage. "I know what it was about. Just tell me what actually took place. In as few words as possible,
please." "A week ago I told my uncle of my engagement, and he was very angry
when he knew that my fiancee was--was----

"A secretary," suggested Malcolm Sage, without looking up. "Yes. He ordered me to break off the engagement at once, no matter
what it might cost." "He referred to his pocket rather than to your feelings, I take it?" said Malcolm Sage. "Yes." There was a world of bitterness in the tone in which the word
was uttered. "I refused. Four days ago Sir James came and, I think,
talked things over with my uncle, who said he would see Enid, that
is, my fiancee. She came yesterday afternoon. My uncle insisted on
seeing her alone. She stayed only a few minutes." His voice broke. He swallowed rapidly several times in succession,
struggling to regain control of himself. "You walked back to the station with her," remarked Malcolm Sage,
"and she told you what had taken place. Your uncle had offered to
buy her off. You were furious. You said many wild and extravagant
things. Then you came back and went immediately into the library. What took place there?" "I don't remember what I said. I think for the time I was insane. He
had actually offered her money, notes. He had drawn them out of the
bank on purpose." Again he stopped, as if the memory of the insult
were too much for him. "And you said?" suggested Malcolm Sage, twirling the wineglass
slowly between his thumb and finger. "I probably said what any other man would have said under similar
circumstances." There was a quiet dignity about the way in which he
uttered these words, although his fingers still continued to twitch. "Did he threaten you, or you him?" "I don't remember what I said; but my uncle told me that, unless I
wrote to Enid to-day giving her up and apologised to him, he would
telephone for his lawyer and make a fresh will, cutting me out of it
entirely. I was to have until the next morning to decide, that is,
to-day." Malcolm Sage still kept his eyes averted. He contended that to look
fixedly into the eyes of anyone undergoing interrogation was
calculated to confuse him and render the replies less helpful. "And what would your decision have been?" he asked. "I told him that if he gave me ten years it would be the same." "That you would not do as he wished?" "Certainly not." "Until this episode you were on good terms with each other?" Malcolm
Sage had got a dessert spoon and fork to balance on the blade of a
knife. "Yes." "You know of no reason why your uncle should take his life?" "None whatever." "This episode in itself would not be sufficient to cause him to
commit suicide?" "Certainly not. Sir James will tell you that he was a man of strong
character." "Do you believe he shot himself?" Malcolm Sage seemed absorbed in
the rise and fall of the balancing silver. "But for the locked door I should have said 'no.'" "What were you proposing to do in the light of your refusal to break
the engagement?" "I had everything packed up ready. I meant to go away this morning." "By the way, where did your uncle bank?" enquired Malcolm Sage
casually. "At the Southern Counties and Brown's Bank, Lewes," was the reply. "Thank you. That will do, I think, for the present. You had better
run round to your doctor and get him to give you something to steady
your nerves," said Malcolm Sage, with eyes that had lost their
professional glint. "They are all on edge." Dane glanced at him in surprise; but there was only a cone of
baldness visible. "Thank you," he said. "I think I will," and he turned and left the
room. He still seemed dazed and incapable of realising what was
taking place. Malcolm Sage rose and, walking over to the door, removed the key,
examined the wards intently, then replaced it and, opening the door,
walked across to the library. CHAPTER III     MALCOLM SAGE'S MYSTERIOUS MOVEMENTS




I


Malcolm Sage found that Dawkins had completed his work, and the body
of Mr. Challoner had been removed. Seating himself at the table, he took the automatic pistol in his
hand and deliberately removed the cartridges. Then placing the
muzzle against his right temple he turned his eyes momentarily on
Dawkins, who, having anticipated his wishes, had already adjusted
the camera. He removed the cap, replaced it, and then quickly
reversed the plate. Pulling the trigger, Malcolm Sage allowed his head to fall forward,
his right hand, which held the pistol, dropping on the table before
him. Dawkins took another photograph. "Now," said Malcolm Sage to Sir James. "You shoot me through the
right temple, approaching from behind. Grip my head as if you
expected me to resist." Sir James did as he was requested, Dawkins making another exposure. Malcolm Sage motioned Thompson to draw the curtains. Then dropping
on to his knees by the library door, he took the small mirror he had
borrowed from Miss Norman and, placing it partly beneath the door,
carefully examined the reflection by the aid of an electric torch. When he rose it was with the air of a man who had satisfied himself
upon some important point. He then turned to Sir James. "You might get those finger-prints," he said casually. "Get everyone
together in the dining-room. See that no one leaves it for at least
a quarter of an hour. Thompson will go with you." "Then you think it was murder?" questioned Sir James. "I would sooner say nothing just at the moment," was the reply. Whilst Sir James Walton and Thompson were occupied with a room-full
of domestics, talking in whispers as if in the presence of death,
Malcolm Sage was engaged in a careful examination of the bottoms of
all the doors in the house by means of a mirror placed upwards
beneath each. He also removed the keys and gave a swift look at the
wards of each. He moved quickly; yet without haste, as if his brain had entire
control of the situation. One door in particular appeared to interest him, so much so that he
entered the room and proceeded to examine it with great thoroughness,
taking the utmost care to replace everything as he found it. From the middle-drawer of the chest-of-drawers, he extracted from
under a pile of clothes a thin steel object, some five or six inches
in length, wound round with a fine, strong twine. This he slipped
into his pocket and, going down into the hall, rang up the manager
of the Lewes branch of the Southern Counties and Brown's Bank. Passing into the library, he searched the drawers of the table at
which Mr. Challoner had been found. In one of them he discovered the
pass-book. Seating himself at the table, he proceeded to examine it
carefully. Turning to the pockets at either end, where cancelled
cheques are usually placed, he found both were empty. When a few minutes later Sir James and Thompson entered with the
finger-prints, Malcolm Sage was seated at the table smoking, his
gaze concentrated upon the nail of the fourth finger of his right
hand. With him a contemplation of his finger-nails in general
indicated thoughtful attention; when, however, he raised the hand
and began to subject some particular finger-nail to a thorough and
elaborate examination, it generally meant the germination of some
constructive thesis. Taking the sheets of paper from Thompson, he went through them
rapidly, then drawing a sheet of note-paper from the rack before him
he scribbled a hasty note, enclosed it with one of the fingerprints
in an envelope, which he sealed, addressed, and handed to Thompson
with instructions to see that it was delivered without delay. He
also told him to send Peters and Dane to the library. Three minutes later Tims swung down the drive, his face beaming. He
was to drive to Scotland Yard and "never mind the poultry on the
road," as Thompson had phrased it. "Have you the key of the safe, Mr. Dane?" enquired Malcolm Sage as
the young man entered, followed by Peters. Dane shook his head and
looked at Peters. "Mr. Challoner always wore it on his key-chain, sir," said the
butler. "Have you any objection to the safe being opened?" enquired Malcolm
Sage to Dane. "None whatever." "Then perhaps you will open it?" said Malcolm Sage, turning to Sir
James. In the safe were found several bundles of letters and
share-certificates, and an old cash-box containing some loose
stamps; but nothing else. Malcolm Sage dismissed Peters and Dane, saying that he would be
returning to town after dinner. In the meantime he and Sir James
strolled about the grounds, discussing the remarkable rise in the
chess-world of Capablanca, whilst Dawkins was busily occupied in a
darkened bath-room. Dinner proved a far less sombre meal than luncheon. Malcolm Sage and
Sir James between them succeeded in placing young Dane more at his
ease. The haunted, shell-shock look left his eyes, and the twitching
disappeared from the corners of his mouth. It was nearly nine o'clock when the distant moan of a hooter
announced to Malcolm Sage's alert ears the return of Tims. He rose
from the table and walked slowly to the door, where for some seconds
he stood with his hand upon the knob. As the car drew up he slipped into the hall, just as Peters opened
the door. A moment later the butler started back, his right hand seemed to fly
to his left breast pocket. At the same moment Malcolm Sage sprang
forward. There was a flash, a report, and two bodies fell at the
feet of Inspector Wensdale, of Scotland Yard, and another man
standing beside him. In a second, however, they had thrown themselves upon the struggling
heap, and when Malcolm Sage rose to his feet it was to look down
upon Peters pinned to the floor by the inspector, with the strange
man sitting on his legs. II


"There is no witness so sure as the camera," remarked Malcolm Sage
as he gazed from one to the other of two photographs before him, one
representing him holding an automatic pistol to his own head, and
the other in which Sir James was posing as a murderer. "It is strange that it should be so neglected at Scotland Yard," he
added. Silent and absorbed when engaged upon a problem, Malcolm Sage
resented speech as a sick man resents arrowroot. At other times he
seemed to find pleasure in lengthy monologues, invariably of a
professional nature. "But we use it a lot, Mr. Sage," protested Inspector Wensdale. "For recording the features of criminals," was the retort. "No,
Wensdale, you are obsessed by the finger-print heresy, quite
regardless of the fact that none but an amateur ever leaves such a
thing behind him, and the amateur is never difficult to trace." He paused for a moment; but the inspector made no comment. "The two greatest factors in the suppression of crime," continued
Malcolm Sage, "are photography and finger-prints. Both are in use at
Scotland Yard; but each in place of the other. Finger-prints are
regarded as clues, and photography is a means of identification,
whereas finger-prints are of little use except to identify past
offenders, and photography is the greatest aid to the actual tracing
of the criminal." Malcolm Sage never failed to emphasise the importance of photography
in the detection of crime. He probably used it more than all other
investigators put together. He contended that a photographic print
established for all time what the eye could only dimly register for
the moment, with the consequent danger of forgetfulness. As the links in a chain multiplied, it was frequently necessary to
refer to the scene of a crime, or tragedy, and then probably some
important point would crop up, which the eye had not considered of
sufficient importance to dwell upon. By then, in the case of a
murder, the body would have been removed, and everything about it
either re-ordered or obliterated. Malcolm Sage proceeded to stuff his pipe with tobacco which he drew
from the left-hand pocket of his jacket. He had discovered that a
rubber-lined pocket was the best and safest pouch. He picked up a third photograph and laid it beside the others. It
was a print of Mr. Challoner's head, showing, marked in ink, the
course of the bullet towards the left of the frontal bone. "A man shooting himself," began Malcolm Sage, "places the pistol in
a position so that the muzzle is directed towards the back of the
head. On the other hand, anyone approaching his victim from behind
would have a tendency to direct the muzzle towards the front of the
head. That is why I got Dawkins to take a photograph of me holding
the pistol to my head and of you holding it from behind. These
photographs will constitute the principal evidence at the trial." Sir James nodded. He was too interested to interrupt. "On this enlargement of the wound," continued Malcolm Sage, "you
will see an abrasion on the side nearer the ear, as if the head had
suddenly been jerked backwards between the time of the muzzle being
placed against the temple and the actual firing of the shot." Thompson leaned across to examine the photograph. "If the eyes of someone sitting at a table are suddenly and
unexpectedly covered from behind, the natural instinct is to jerk
backwards so that the head may be turned to see who it is. That is
exactly what occurred with Challoner. He jerked backwards,  and the
barrel of the pistol grazed the skin and was deflected still more
towards the frontal bone." Sir James and Thompson exchanged glances. Dawkins stood by, a look
of happiness in his eyes. His beloved camera was justifying itself
once more. Inspector Wensdale breathed heavily. "Apart from all this, the position of the head on the table, and the
way in which the hand was holding the pistol, not to speak of the
curve of the arm, were unnatural. You get some idea of this from the
photograph that Dawkins took of me, although I could only simulate
death by relaxing the muscles. Again, the head would hardly be
likely to twist on to its side." "The doctor ought to have seen that," said the inspector. Another thing against the theory of suicide was that the second
joint of the first finger was pressing against the trigger. Mr.
Challoner was an expert shot, and would instinctively have used the
pad of the finger, not the second joint. "The next step," continued Malcolm Sage, "was how could anyone get
into the room and approach Challoner without being heard or
'sensed.'" "He must have been very much absorbed in what he was doing,"
suggested Sir James. Malcolm Sage shook his head, and for a few seconds gazed at the
photographs before him. "You will remember there was nothing on the table in front of him. I
shall come to that presently. It is very unlikely that a man sitting
at a table would not be conscious of someone approaching him from
behind, no matter how quietly he stepped, _unless that man's
presence in the room were quite a normal and natural thing_. That
gave me the clue to Peters. He is the only person who could be in
the library without Challoner taking any notice of him. Consequently
it was easy for him to approach his master and shoot him." "But the locked door, sir," said Thompson. "That is a very simple matter. An ordinary lead-pencil, with a piece
of string tied to one end, put through the ring of the key to act as
a lever, the cord being passed beneath the door, will lock any door
in existence. The pencil can then be drawn under the door. This will
show how it's done." Malcolm Sage reached across for a sheet of
paper, and drew a rough sketch. [Illustration]

"That is why you examined the under-edge of the door?" suggested Sir
James. Malcolm Sage nodded. "The marks of the cord were clearly defined and
reflected in the mirror. Had the key not been touched, it would have
helped." "How?" asked Inspector Wensdale. "By means of the string the key is turned only just to the point
where the lever falls through the hole to the floor. The fingers
would turn beyond that point, not being so delicate." "Mr. Sage, you're a wonder," burst out the inspector. "I then," proceeded Malcolm Sage, "examined all the other doors in
the house, and I found that of one room, which I after discovered to
be Peters', was heavily scored at the bottom. He had evidently
practised fairly extensively before putting the plan into operation. He had also done the same thing with the library door, as there were
marks of more than one operation. Furthermore, he was wiser than to
take the risk of so clumsy a tool as a lead-pencil. He used this." Malcolm Sage drew from his pocket the roll of twine with the thin
steel instrument down the centre. It was a canvas-needle, to the eye
of which the cord was attached. "This was absolutely safe," he remarked. "Another thing I discovered
was that one lock, and only one lock in the house, had recently been
oiled--that of the library-door." Sir James nodded his head several times. There was something of
self-reproach in the motion. "Now," continued Malcolm Sage, "we come back to why a man should be
sitting at a table absorbed in gazing at nothing, and at a time when
most of the household are either in bed or preparing for bed." "Peters said that he was checking his pass-book," suggested Sir
James. "That is undoubtedly what he _was_ doing," continued Malcolm Sage,
"and Peters removed the passbook, put it in a drawer, first
destroying the cancelled cheques. He made a blunder in not replacing
the pass-book with something else. That was the last link in the
chain," he added. "I don't quite see----" began Sir James. "Perhaps you did not read of a case that was reported from New York
some eighteen months ago. It was very similar to that of Mr.
Challoner. A man was found shot through the head, the door being
locked on the inside, and a verdict of suicide was returned; but
there was absolutely no reason why he should have taken his life. "What actually happened was that Mr. Challoner went to his bank to
draw five hundred pounds with which he hoped to bribe his nephew's
fiancee. He trusted to the temptation of the actual money rather
than a cheque. When he was at the bank the manager once more asked
him to return his pass-book, which had not been balanced for several
months. He was very dilatory in such matters." "That is true," said Dane, speaking for the first time. "That evening he proceeded to compare it with his cheque-book. I
suspect that Peters had been forging cheques and he saw here what
would lead to discovery. Furthermore, there was a considerable sum
of money in the safe, and the quarrel between uncle and nephew
to divert suspicion. This, however, was mere conjecture--that
trouser-pocket photo, Dawkins," said Malcolm Sage, turning to the
photographer, who handed it across to him. "Now notice the position of those keys. They are put in head
foremost, and do not reach the bottom of the pocket. They had
obviously been taken away and replaced in the pocket as Challoner
sat there. Had he gone to the safe himself and walked back to his
chair, the position of the keys would have been quite different." Instinctively each man felt in his trousers pocket, and found in his
own bunch of keys a verification of the statement. "The whole scheme was too calculated and deliberate for an amateur,"
said Malcolm Sage, knocking the ashes out of his pipe on to a brass
ashtray. "That is what prompted me to get the fingerprints of Peters,
so that I might send them to Scotland Yard to see if anything was
known of him there. The result you have seen." "We've been on the look-out for him for more than a year," said
Inspector Wensdale. "The New York police are rather interested in
him about a forgery stunt that took place there some time ago." "I am confident that when Challoner's affairs are gone into there
will be certain cheques which it will be difficult to explain. "Then, again, there was the electric light," proceeded Malcolm Sage. "A man about to blow out his brains would certainly not walk across
the room, switch off the light, and then find his way back to the
table." "That's true enough," said Inspector Wensdale. "On the other hand, a murderer, who has to stand at a door for at
least some seconds, would not risk leaving on the light, which would
attract the attention of anyone who might by chance be in the hall,
or on the stairs." Inspector Wensdale caught Thompson's left eye, which deliberately
closed and then re-opened. There was a world of meaning in the
movement. "Well, I'm glad I didn't get you down on a fool's errand, Sage,"
said Sir James, rising. "I wonder what the local inspector will
think." "He won't," remarked Malcolm Sage; "that is why he assumed it was
suicide." "Did you suspect Peters was armed?" enquired Sir James. "I saw the pistol under his left armpit," said Malcolm Sage. "It's
well known with American gunmen as a most convenient place for quick
drawing." "If it hadn't been for you, Mr. Sage, he'd have got me," said
Inspector Wensdale. "There'll be a heavy car-full for Tims," remarked Malcolm Sage, as
he walked towards the door. CHAPTER IV     THE SURREY CATTLE-MAIMING MYSTERY



I


"Disguise," Malcolm Sage had once re-marked, "is the chief
characteristic of the detective of fiction. In actual practise it
is rarely possible. I am a case in point. No one but a builder,
or an engineer, could disguise the shape of a head like mine;" as
he spoke he had stroked the top of his head, which rose above his
strongly-marked brows like a down-covered cone. He maintained that a disguise can always be identified, although not
necessarily penetrated. This in itself would be sufficient to defeat
the end of the disguised man by rendering him an object of suspicion. Few men can disguise their walk or bearing, no matter how clever
they might be with false beards, grease-paint and wigs. In this Malcolm Sage was a bitter disappointment to William Johnson,
the office junior. His conception of the sleuth-hound had been
tinctured by the vivid fiction with which he beguiled his spare time. In the heart of William Johnson there were three great emotions: his
hero-worship of Malcolm Sage, his romantic devotion to Gladys Norman,
and his wholesome fear of the robustious humour of Tims. In his more imaginative moments he would create a world in which he
was the recognised colleague of Malcolm Sage, the avowed admirer of
Miss Norman, and the austere employer of Tims--chauffeurs never took
liberties with the hair of their employers, no matter how knut-like
it might be worn. It was with the object of making sure of the first turret of his
castle in Spain, that William Johnson devoted himself to the earnest
study of what he conceived to be his future profession. He read voraciously all the detective stories and police-reports he
came across. Every moment he could snatch from his official duties
he devoted to some scrap of paper, booklet, or magazine. He strove
to cultivate his reasoning powers. Never did a prospective client
enter the Malcolm Sage Bureau without automatically setting into
operation William Johnson's mental induction-coil. With eyes that
were covertly keen, he would examine the visitor as he sat waiting
for the two sharp buzzes on the private telephone which indicated
that Malcolm Sage was at liberty. It mattered little to William Johnson that error seemed to dog his
footsteps; that he had "deduced" a famous pussyfoot admiral as a
comedian addicted to drink; a lord, with a ten century lineage, as a
man selling something or other; a Cabinet Minister as a company
promoter in the worst sense of the term; nothing could damp his zeal. Malcolm Sage's "cases" he studied as intimately as he could from his
position as junior; but they disappointed him. They seemed lacking
in that element of drama he found so enthralling in the literature
he read and the films he saw. Malcolm Sage would enter the office as Malcolm Sage, and leave it as
Malcolm Sage, as obvious and as easily recognisable as St. Paul's
Cathedral. He seemed indifferent to the dramatic possibilities of
disguise. William Johnson longed for some decrepit and dirty old man or woman
to enter the Bureau, selling boot-laces or bananas and, on being
peremptorily ordered out, to see the figure suddenly straighten
itself, and hear his Chief's well-known voice remark, "So you don't
recognise me, Johnson--good." There was romance. He yearned for a "property-room," where executive members of the
staff would disguise themselves beyond recognition. In his more
imaginative moments he saw come out from that mysterious room a
full-blooded Kaffir, whereas he knew that only Thompson had entered. He would have liked to see Miss Norman shed her pretty brunetteness
and reappear as an old apple-woman, who besought him to buy of her
wares. He even saw himself being transformed into a hooligan, or a
smart R.A.F. officer, complete with a toothbrush moustache and
"swish." In his own mind he was convinced that, given the opportunity, he
could achieve greatness as a master of disguise, rivalling the
highly-coloured stories of Charles Peace. He had even put his
theories to the test. One evening as Miss Norman, who had been working late, was on her
way to Charing Cross Underground Station, she was accosted by a
youth with upturned collar, wearing a shabby cap and a queer Charlie
Chaplain moustache that was not on straight. In a husky voice he
enquired his way to the Strand. "Good gracious, Johnnie!" she cried involuntarily. "What on earth's
the matter?" A moment later, as she regarded the vanishing form of William
Johnson, she wanted to kill herself for her lack of tact. "Poor little Innocent!" she had murmured as she continued down
Villiers Street, and there was in her eyes a reflection of the tears
she had seen spring to those of William Johnson, whose first attempt
at disguise had proved so tragic a failure. Neither ever referred to the incident subsequently--although for
days William Johnson experienced all the unenviable sensations of
Damocles. From that moment his devotion to Gladys Norman had become almost
worship. But William Johnson was not deterred, either by his own initial
failure or his chief's opinion. He resolutely stuck to his own
ideas, and continued to expend his pocket-money upon tinted glasses,
false-moustaches and grease paint; for hidden away in the inner
recesses of his mind was the conviction that it was not quite
playing the game, as the game should be played, to solve a mystery
or bring a criminal to justice without having recourse to disguise. It was to him as if Nelson had won the Battle of Trafalgar in a soft
hat and a burberry, or Wellington had met Bluecher in flannels and
silk socks. Somewhere in the future he saw himself the head of a "William
Johnson Bureau," and in the illustrated papers a portrait of "Mr.
William Johnson as he is," and beneath it a series of characters
that would rival a Dickens novel, with another legend reading, "Mr.
William Johnson as he appears." With these day-dreams, the junior at the Malcolm Sage Bureau would
occupy the time when not actually engaged either in the performance
of his by no means arduous duties, or in reading the highly-coloured
detective stories from which he drew his inspiration. From behind the glass-panelled door would come the tick-tack of Miss
Norman's typewriter, whilst outside droned the great symphony of
London, growing into a crescendo as the door was opened, dying away
again as it fell to once more, guided by an automatic self-closer. From these reveries William Johnson would be aroused either by
peremptory blasts upon the buzzer of the private-telephone, or by
the entry of a client. One morning, as he was hesitating between assuming the disguise of a
naval commander and a street-hawker, a florid little man with purple
jowl and a white, bristling moustache hurtled through the swing-door,
followed by a tall, spare man, whose clothing indicated his clerical
calling. "Mr. Sage in?" demanded the little man fiercely. "Mr. Sage is engaged, sir," said the junior, his eyes upon the
clergyman, in whose appearance there was something that caused
William Johnson to like him on the spot. "Take my card in to him," said the little, bristly man. "Tell him
that General Sir John Hackblock wishes to see him immediately." The
tone was suggestive of the parade-ground rather than a London office. At that moment Gladys Norman appeared through the glass-panelled
door. The clergyman immediately removed his hat, the general merely
turned as if changing front to receive a new foe. "Mr. Sage will be engaged for about a quarter of an hour. I am his
secretary," she explained. She, also, looked at the general's
companion, wondering what sort of teeth were behind that gentle, yet
firm mouth. "Perhaps you will take a seat," she added. This time the clergyman smiled, and Gladys Norman knew that she too
liked him. Sir John looked about him aggressively, blew out his
cheeks several times, then flopped into a chair. His companion also
seated himself, and appeared to become lost in a fit of abstraction. William Johnson returned to his table and became engrossed,
ostensibly in the exploits of an indestructible trailer of men; but
really in a surreptitious examination of the two callers. He had just succeeded in deducing from their manner that they
were father and son, and from the boots of the younger that he
was low church and a bad walker, when two sharp blasts on the
telephone-buzzer brought him to his feet and half-way across the
office in what was practically one movement. With Malcolm Sage there
were two things to be avoided, delay in answering a summons, and
unnecessary words. "This way, sir," he said, and led them through the glass-panelled
door to Malcolm Sage's private room. With a short, jerky movement of his head Malcolm Sage motioned his
visitors to be seated. In that one movement his steel-coloured eyes
had registered a mental photograph of the two men. That glance
embraced all the details; the dark hair of the younger, greying at
the temples, the dreamy grey eyes, the gentle curves of a mouth that
was, nevertheless, capable of great sternness, and the spare, almost
lean frame; then the self-important, overbearing manner of the older
man. "High Anglican, ascetic, out-of-doors," was Malcolm Sage's
mental classification of the one, thus unconsciously reversing the
William Johnson's verdict. The other he dismissed as a pompous ass. "You Mr. Sage?" Sir John regarded the bald conical head and
gold-rimmed spectacles as if they had been unpolished buttons on
parade. Malcolm Sage inclined his head slightly, and proceeded to gaze down
at his fingers spread out on the table before him. After the first
appraising glance he rarely looked at a client. "I am Sir John Hackblock; this is my friend, the Rev. Geoffrey
Callice." Again a slight inclination of the head indicated that Malcolm Sage
had heard. Mr. Llewellyn John would have recognised in Sir John Hackblock the
last man in the world who should have been brought into contact with
Malcolm Sage. The Prime Minister's own policy had been to keep
Malcolm Sage from contact with other Ministers, and thus reduce the
number of his embarrassing resignations. "I want to consult you about a most damnable outrage," exploded the
general. "It's inconceivable that in this----"

"Will you kindly be as brief as possible?" said Malcolm Sage,
fondling the lobe of his left ear. "I can spare only a few minutes." Sir John gasped, glared across at him angrily; then, seeming to take
himself in hand, continued:

"You've heard of the Surrey cattle-maiming outrages?" he enquired. Malcolm Sage nodded. "Well, this morning a brood-mare of mine was found hacked about in
an unspeakable manner. Oh, the damn scoundrels!" he burst out as he
jumped from his chair and began pacing up and down the room. "I think it will be better if Mr. Callice tells me the details,"
said Malcolm Sage, evenly. "You seem a little over-wrought." "Over-wrought!" cried Sir John. "Over-wrought! Dammit, so would you
be if you had lost over a dozen beasts." In the army he was known as
"Dammit Hackblock." Mr. Callice looked across to the general, who, nodding acquiescence,
proceeded to blow his nose violently, as if to bid Malcolm Sage
defiance. "This morning a favourite mare belonging to Sir John was found
mutilated in a terrible manner----"  Mr. Callice paused; there was
something in his voice that caused Malcolm Sage to look up. The
gentle look had gone from his face, his eyes flashed, and his mouth
was set in a stern, severe line. "Good preacher," Malcolm Sage decided as he dropped his eyes once
more, and upon his blotting pad proceeded to develop the Pons
Asinorum into a church. In a voice that vibrated with feeling and suggested great
self-restraint, Mr. Callice proceeded to tell the story of the
latest outrage. How when found that morning the mare was still alive,
of the terrible nature of her injuries, and that the perpetrator had
disappeared, leaving no trace. "Her look, sir! Dammit!" the general broke in. "Her eyes have
haunted me ever since. They----" His voice broke, and he proceeded
once more to blow his nose violently. Mr. Callice went on to explain that after having seen the mare put
out of her misery, Sir John had motored over to his lodgings and
insisted that they should go together to Scotland Yard and demand
that something be done. "Callice is Chairman of the Watchers' Committee," broke in Sir John. "I should explain," proceeded Mr. Callice, "that some time ago we
formed ourselves into a committee to patrol the neighbourhood at
night in the hope of tracing the criminal. On the way up Sir John
remembered hearing of you in connection with Department Z and, as he
was not satisfied with his call at Scotland Yard, he decided to come
on here and place the matter in your hands." "This is the twenty-ninth maiming?" Malcolm Sage remarked, as he
proceeded to add a graveyard to the church. "Yes, the first occurred some two years ago." Then, as if suddenly
realising what Malcolm Sage's question implied, he added: "You have
interested yourself in the affair?" "Yes," was the reply. "Tell me what has been done." "The police seem utterly at fault," continued Mr. Callice. "Locally
we have organised watch-parties. My boys and I have been out night
after night; but without result. I am a scout-master," he explained. "The poor beasts' sufferings are terrible," he continued after a
slight pause. "It is a return to barbarism;" again there was the
throb of indignation in his voice. "You have discovered nothing?" "Nothing," was the response, uttered in a tone of deep despondency. "We have even tried bloodhounds; but without result." "And now I want you to take up the matter, and don't spare expense,"
burst out Sir John, unable to contain himself longer. "I will consider the proposal and let you know," said Malcolm Sage,
evenly. "As it is, my time is fully occupied at present; but
later----" He never lost an opportunity of resenting aggression by
emphasising the democratic tendency of the times. Mr. Llewellyn John
had called it "incipient Bolshevism." "Later!" cried Sir John in consternation. "Why, dammit, sir! there
won't be an animal left in the county. This thing has been going on
for two years now, and those damn fools at Scotland Yard----"

"If it were not for Scotland Yard," said Malcolm Sage quietly, as he
proceeded to shingle the roof of the church, the graveyard having
proved a failure, "we should probably have to sleep at night with
pistols under our pillows." "Eh!" Sir John looked across at him with a startled expression. "Scotland Yard is the head-quarters of the most efficient and
highly-organised police force in the world," was the quiet reply. "But, dammit! if they're so clever why don't they put a stop to this
torturing of poor dumb beasts?" cried the general indignantly. "I've
shown them the man. It's Hinds; I know it. I've just been to see
that fellow Wensdale. Why, dammit! he ought to be cashiered, and I
told him so." "Who is Hinds?" Malcolm Sage addressed the question to Mr. Callice. "He used to be Sir John's head gamekeeper----"

"And I discharged him," exploded the general. "I'll shoot a poacher
or his dog; but, dammit! I won't set traps for them," and he puffed
out his cheeks aggressively. "Hinds used to set traps to save himself the trouble of patrolling
the preserves," explained Mr. Callice, "and one day Sir John
discovered him actually watching the agonies of a dog caught across
the hind-quarters in a man-trap." Again there was the wave of
feeling in the voice, and a stern set about the mouth. "It's Hinds right enough," cried the general with conviction. "The
man's a brute. Now will you----?" "I will let you know as soon as possible whether or no I can take up
the enquiry," said Malcolm Sage, rising. "I fear that is the best I
can promise." "But----" began Sir John; then he stopped and stared at Malcolm Sage
as he moved towards the door. "Dammit! I don't care what it costs," he spluttered explosively. "It'll be worth five hundred pounds to the man who catches the
scoundrel. Poor Betty," he added in a softer tone. "I will write to you shortly," said Malcolm Sage. There was
dismissal in his tone. With darkened jowl and bristling moustache Sir John strutted towards
the door. Mr. Callice paused to shake hands with Malcolm Sage, and
then followed the general, who, with a final glare at William
Johnson, as he held open the swing-door, passed out into the street,
convinced that now the country was no longer subject to conscription
it would go rapidly to the devil. For the next half-hour Malcolm Sage pored over a volume of
press-cuttings containing accounts of previous cattle-maimings. Following his usual custom in such matters, he had caused the
newspaper accounts of the various mutilations to be collected and
pasted in a press-cutting book. Sooner or later he had determined to
devote time to the affair. Without looking up from the book he pressed three times in rapid
succession a button of the private-telephone. Instantly Gladys
Norman appeared, note-book in hand. She had been heard to remark
that if she were dead "three on the buzzer" would bring her to life
again. "Whitaker and Inspector Wensdale," said Malcolm Sage, his eyes still
on the book before him. When deep in a problem Malcolm Sage's economy in words made it
difficult for anyone but his own staff to understand his
requirements. Without a word the girl vanished and, a moment later, William
Johnson placed _Whitaker's Almanack_ on the table, then he in turn
disappeared as silently as Gladys Norman. Malcolm Sage turned to the calendar, and for some time studied the
pages devoted to the current month (June) and July. As he closed
the book there were three buzzes from the house-telephone, the
signal that he was through to the number required. Drawing the
pedestal-instrument towards him, he put the receiver to his ear. "That Inspector Wensdale?--Yes! Mr. Sage speaking. It's about the
cattle-maiming business.--I've just heard of it.--I've not decided
yet. I want a large-scale map of the district, with the exact spot
of each outrage indicated, and the date.--To-morrow will do.--Yes,
come round. Give me half an hour with the map first." Malcolm Sage replaced the receiver as the buzzer sounded, announcing
another client. II


"So there is nothing?" Malcolm Sage looked up enquiringly from the
map before him. "Nothing that even a stage detective could turn into a clue," said
Inspector Wensdale, a big, cleanshaven man with hard, alert eyes. Malcolm Sage continued his study of the map. "Confound those magazine detectives!" the inspector burst out
explosively. "They've always got a dust-pan full of clues ready made
for 'em." "To say nothing of finger-prints," said Malcolm Sage dryly. He never
could resist a sly dig at Scotland Yard's faith in finger-prints as
clues instead of means of identification. "It's a bit awkward for me, too, Mr. Sage," continued the inspector,
confidentially. "Last time _The Daily Telegram_ went for us
because----"

"You haven't found a dust-pan full of clues?" suggested Malcolm Sage,
who was engaged in forming geometrical designs with spent matches. "They're getting a bit restive, too, at the Yard," he continued. He
was too disturbed in mind for flippancy. "It was this cattle-maiming
business that sent poor old Scott's number up," he added, referring
to Detective Inspector Scott's failure to solve the mystery. "Now
the general's making a terrible row. Threatens me with the
Commissioner." For some seconds Malcolm Sage devoted himself to his designs. "Any theory?" he enquired at length, without looking up. "I've given up theorising," was the dour reply. In response to a further question as to what had been done, the
inspector proceeded to detail how the whole neighbourhood had been
scoured after each maiming, and how, night after night, watchers had
been posted throughout the district, but without result. "I have had men out night and day," continued the inspector gloomily. "He's a clever devil whoever he is. It's my opinion the man's a
lunatic," he added. Malcolm Sage looked up slowly. "What makes you think that?" he asked. "His cunning, for one thing," was the reply. "Then it's so senseless. No," he added with conviction, "he's no more an ordinary man than
Jack-the-Ripper was." He went on to give details of his enquiries among those living in
the district. There was absolutely nothing to attach even the
remotest suspicion to any particular person. Rewards had been
offered for information; but all without producing the slightest
evidence or clue. "This man Hinds?" enquired Malcolm Sage, looking about for more
matches. "Oh! the general's got him on the brain. Absolutely nothing in it. I've turned him inside out. Why, even the Deputy Commissioner had a
go at him, and if he can get nothing out of a man, there's nothing
to get out." "Well," said Malcolm Sage rising, "keep the fact to yourself that I
am interested. I suppose, if necessary, you could arrange for twenty
or thirty men to run down there?" he queried. "The whole blessed Yard if you like, Mr. Sage," was the feeling
reply. "We'll leave it at that for the present then. By the way, if you
happen to think you see me in the neighbourhood you needn't remember
that we are acquainted." The inspector nodded comprehendingly and, with a heart lightened
somewhat of its burden, he departed. He had an almost child-like
faith in Malcolm Sage. For half an hour Malcolm Sage sat engrossed in the map of the scene
of the maimings. On it were a number of red-ink crosses with figures
beneath. In the left-hand bottom corner was a list of the various
outrages, with the date and the time, as near as could be
approximated, against each. The numbers in the bottom corner corresponded with those beneath the
crosses. From time to time he referred to the two copies of _Whitaker's
Almanack_ open before him, and made notes upon the writing-pad at
his side. Finally he ruled a square upon the map in red ink, and
then drew two lines diagonally from corner to corner. Then without
looking up from the map, he pressed one of the buttons of the
private-telephone. "Tims," he said through the mouthpiece. Five minutes later Malcolm Sage's chauffeur was standing opposite
his Chief's table, ready to go anywhere and do anything. "To-morrow will be Sunday, Tims." "Yessir." "A day of rest." "Yessir!" "We are going out to Hempdon, near Selford," Malcolm Sage continued,
pointing to the map. Tims stepped forward and bent over to identify
the spot. "The car will break down. It will take you or any other
mechanic two hours to put it right." "Yessir," said Tims, straightening himself. "You understand," said Malcolm Sage, looking at him sharply, "you
_or any other mechanic? "_

"Yessir," repeated Tims, his face sphinx-like in its lack of
expression. He was a clean-shaven, fleshless little man who, had he not been a
chauffeur, would probably have spent his life with a straw between
his teeth, hissing lullabies to horses. "I shall be ready at nine," said Malcolm Sage, and with another
"Yessir" Tims turned to go. "And Tims." "Yessir." He about-faced smartly on his right heel. "You might
apologise for me to Mrs. Tims for depriving her of you on Sunday. Take her out to dinner on Monday and charge it to me." "Thank you, sir, very much, sir," said Tims, his face expressionless. "That is all, Tims, thank you." Tims turned once more and left the room. As he walked towards the
outer door he winked at Gladys Norman and, with a sudden dive, made
a frightful riot of William Johnson's knut-like hair. Then, without
change of expression, he passed out to tune up the car for its run
on the morrow. Malcolm Sage's staff knew that when "the Chief" was what Tims called
"chatty" he was beginning to see light, so Tims whistled loudly at
his work: for he, like all his colleagues, was pleased when "the
Chief" saw reason to be pleased. The following morning, as they trooped out of church, the
inhabitants of Hempdon were greatly interested in the break-down of
a large car, which seemed to defy the best efforts of the chauffeur
to coax into movement. The owner drank cider at the Spotted
Woodpigeon and talked pleasantly with the villagers, who, on
learning that he had never even heard of the Surrey cattle-maimings,
were at great pains to pour information and theories into his
receptive ear. The episode quite dwarfed the remarkable sermon preached by Mr.
Callice, in which he exhorted his congregation to band themselves
together to track down him who was maiming and torturing God's
creatures, and defying the Master's merciful teaching. It was Tom Hinds, assisted by a boy scout, who conducted Malcolm
Sage to the scene of the latest outrage. It was Hinds who described
the position of the mare when she was discovered, and it was he who
pocketed two half-crowns as the car moved off Londonwards. That evening Malcolm Sage sat long and late at his table, engrossed
in the map that Inspector Wensdale had sent him. Finally he subjected to a thorough and exhaustive examination the
thumb-nail of his right hand. It was as if he saw in its polished
surface the tablets of destiny. The next morning he wrote a letter that subsequently caused Sir John
Hackblock to explode into a torrent of abuse of detectives in
general and one investigator in particular. It stated in a few words
that, owing to circumstances over which he had no control, Malcolm
Sage would not be able to undertake the enquiry with which Sir John
Hackblock had honoured him until the end of the month following. He
hoped, however, to communicate further with his client soon after
the 23rd of that month. CHAPTER V     INSPECTOR WENSDALE IS SURPRISED




I


Nearly a month had elapsed, and the cattle-maiming mystery seemed as
far off solution as ever. The neighbourhood in which the crimes had
been committed had once more settled down to its usual occupations,
and Scotland Yard had followed suit. Sir John Hackblock had written to the Chief Commissioner and a
question had been asked in the House. Inspector Wensdale's colleagues had learned that it was dangerous to
mention in his presence the words "cattle" or "maiming." The
inspector knew that the affair was referred to as "Wensdale's
Waterloo," and his failure to throw light on the mystery was
beginning to tell upon his nerves. For three weeks he had received no word from Malcolm Sage. 