



Produced by David Edwards, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                          The Big Bow Mystery

                            By I. Zangwill


Chicago and New York
Rand, McNally & Company

Copyright, 1895, by Rand, McNally & Co.




[Illustration: "My God!" he cried.] INTRODUCTION. OF MURDERS AND MYSTERIES. As this little book was written some four years ago, I feel able to
review it without prejudice. A new book just hot from the brain is
naturally apt to appear faulty to its begetter, but an old book has got
into the proper perspective and may be praised by him without fear or
favor. "The Big Bow Mystery" seems to me an excellent murder story, as
murder stories go, for, while as sensational as the most of them, it
contains more humor and character creation than the best. Indeed, the
humor is too abundant. Mysteries should be sedate and sober. There
should be a pervasive atmosphere of horror and awe such as Poe manages
to create. Humor is out of tone; it would be more artistic to preserve a
somber note throughout. But I was a realist in those days, and in real
life mysteries occur to real persons with their individual humors, and
mysterious circumstances are apt to be complicated by comic. The
indispensable condition of a good mystery is that it should be able and
unable to be solved by the reader, and that the writer's solution should
satisfy. Many a mystery runs on breathlessly enough till the denouement
is reached, only to leave the reader with the sense of having been
robbed of his breath under false pretenses. And not only must the
solution be adequate, but all its data must be given in the body of the
story. The author must not suddenly spring a new person or a new
circumstance upon his reader at the end. Thus, if a friend were to ask
me to guess who dined with him yesterday, it would be fatuous if he had
in mind somebody of whom he knew I had never heard. The only person who
has ever solved "The Big Bow Mystery" is myself. This is not paradox but
plain fact. For long before the book was written, I said to myself one
night that no mystery-monger had ever murdered a man in a room to which
there was no possible access. The puzzle was scarcely propounded ere the
solution flew up and the idea lay stored in my mind till, years later,
during the silly season, the editor of a popular London evening paper,
anxious to let the sea-serpent have a year off, asked me to provide him
with a more original piece of fiction. I might have refused, but there
was murder in my soul, and here was the opportunity. I went to work
seriously, though the _Morning Post_ subsequently said the skit was too
labored, and I succeeded at least in exciting my readers, so many of
whom sent in unsolicited testimonials in the shape of solutions during
the run of the story that, when it ended, the editor asked me to say
something by way of acknowledgement. Thereupon I wrote a letter to the
paper, thanking the would-be solvers for their kindly attempts to help
me out of the mess into which I had got the plot. I did not like to
wound their feelings by saying straight out that they had failed, one
and all, to hit on the real murderer, just like real police, so I tried
to break the truth to them in a roundabout, mendacious fashion, as thus:

     _To the Editor of "The Star. "_

     SIR: Now that "The Big Bow Mystery" is solved to the satisfaction
     of at least one person, will you allow that person the use of your
     invaluable columns to enable him to thank the hundreds of your
     readers who have favored him with their kind suggestions and
     solutions while his tale was running and they were reading? I ask
     this more especially because great credit is due to them for
     enabling me to end the story in a manner so satisfactory to myself. When I started it, I had, of course, no idea who had done the
     murder, but I was determined no one should guess it. Accordingly,
     as each correspondent sent in the name of a suspect, I determined
     he or she should not be the guilty party. By degrees every one of
     the characters got ticked off as innocent--all except one, and I
     had no option but to make that character the murderer. I was very
     sorry to do this, as I rather liked that particular person, but
     when one has such ingenious readers, what can one do? You can't let
     anybody boast that he guessed aright, and, in spite of the trouble
     of altering the plot five or six times, I feel that I have chosen
     the course most consistent with the dignity of my profession. Had I
     not been impelled by this consideration I should certainly have
     brought in a verdict against Mrs. Drabdump, as recommended by the
     reader who said that, judging by the illustration in the "Star,"
     she must be at least seven feet high, and, therefore, could easily
     have got on the roof and put her (proportionately) long arm down
     the chimney to effect the cut. I am not responsible for the
     artist's conception of the character. When I last saw the good lady
     she was under six feet, but your artist may have had later
     information. The "Star" is always so frightfully up to date. I
     ought not to omit the humorous remark of a correspondent, who said:
     "Mortlake might have swung in some wild way from one window to
     another, _at any rate in a story_." I hope my fellow-writers thus
     satirically prodded will not demand his name, as I object to
     murders, "at any rate in real life." Finally, a word with the
     legions who have taken me to task for allowing Mr. Gladstone to
     write over 170 words on a postcard. It is all owing to you, sir,
     who announced my story as containing humorous elements. I tried to
     put in some, and this gentle dig at the grand old correspondent's
     habits was intended to be one of them. However, if I _am_ to be
     taken "at the foot of the letter" (or rather of the postcard), I
     must say that only to-day I received a postcard containing about
     250 words. But this was not from Mr. Gladstone. At any rate, till
     Mr. Gladstone himself repudiates this postcard, I shall consider
     myself justified in allowing it to stand in the book. Again thanking your readers for their valuable assistance, Yours,
     etc. One would have imagined that nobody could take this seriously, for it is
obvious that the mystery-story is just the one species of story that can
not be told impromptu or altered at the last moment, seeing that it
demands the most careful piecing together and the most elaborate
dove-tailing. Nevertheless, if you cast your joke upon the waters, you
shall find it no joke after many days. This is what I read in the
_Lyttelton Times_, New Zealand: "The chain of circumstantial evidence
seems fairly irrefragable. From all accounts, Mr. Zangwill himself was
puzzled, after carefully forging every link, how to break it. The method
ultimately adopted I consider more ingenious than convincing." After
that I made up my mind never to joke again, but this good intention now
helps to pave the beaten path. I. ZANGWILL. LONDON, September, 1895. NOTE. The Mystery which the author will always associate with this story is
how he got through the task of writing it. It was written in a
fortnight--day by day--to meet a sudden demand from the "Star," which
made "a new departure" with it. The said fortnight was further disturbed by an extraordinary combined
attack of other troubles and tasks. This is no excuse for the
shortcomings of the book, as it was always open to the writer to revise
or suppress it. The latter function may safely be left to the public,
while if the work stands--almost to a letter--as it appeared in the
"Star," it is because the author cannot tell a story more than once. The introduction of Mr. Gladstone into a fictitious scene is defended on
the ground that he is largely mythical. I. Z. THE BIG BOW MYSTERY. CHAPTER I. On a memorable morning of early December London opened its eyes on a
frigid gray mist. There are mornings when King Fog masses his molecules
of carbon in serried squadrons in the city, while he scatters them
tenuously in the suburbs; so that your morning train may bear you from
twilight to darkness. But to-day the enemy's maneuvering was more
monotonous. From Bow even unto Hammersmith there draggled a dull,
wretched vapor, like the wraith of an impecunious suicide come into a
fortune immediately after the fatal deed. The barometers and
thermometers had sympathetically shared its depression, and their
spirits (when they had any) were low. The cold cut like a many-bladed
knife. Mrs. Drabdump, of 11 Glover Street, Bow, was one of the few persons in
London whom fog did not depress. She went about her work quite as
cheerlessly as usual. She had been among the earliest to be aware of the
enemy's advent, picking out the strands of fog from the coils of
darkness the moment she rolled up her bedroom blind and unveiled the
somber picture of the winter morning. She knew that the fog had come to
stay for the day at least, and that the gas bill for the quarter was
going to beat the record in high-jumping. She also knew that this was
because she had allowed her new gentleman lodger, Mr. Arthur Constant,
to pay a fixed sum of a shilling a week for gas, instead of charging him
a proportion of the actual account for the whole house. The
meteorologists might have saved the credit of their science if they had
reckoned with Mrs. Drabdump's next gas bill when they predicted the
weather and made "Snow" the favorite, and said that "Fog" would be
nowhere. Fog was everywhere, yet Mrs. Drabdump took no credit to herself
for her prescience. Mrs. Drabdump indeed took no credit for anything,
paying her way along doggedly, and struggling through life like a
wearied swimmer trying to touch the horizon. That things always went as
badly as she had foreseen did not exhilarate her in the least. Mrs. Drabdump was a widow. Widows are not born, but made, else you might
have fancied Mrs. Drabdump had always been a widow. Nature had given her
that tall, spare form, and that pale, thin-lipped, elongated, hard-eyed
visage, and that painfully precise hair, which are always associated
with widowhood in low life. It is only in higher circles that women can
lose their husbands and yet remain bewitching. The late Mr. Drabdump had
scratched the base of his thumb with a rusty nail, and Mrs. Drabdump's
foreboding that he would die of lockjaw had not prevented her wrestling
day and night with the shadow of Death, as she had wrestled with it
vainly twice before, when Katie died of diphtheria and little Johnny of
scarlet fever. Perhaps it is from overwork among the poor that Death has
been reduced to a shadow. Mrs. Drabdump was lighting the kitchen fire. She did it very
scientifically, as knowing the contrariety of coal and the anxiety of
flaming sticks to end in smoke unless rigidly kept up to the mark. Science was a success as usual; and Mrs. Drabdump rose from her knees
content, like a Parsee priestess who had duly paid her morning devotions
to her deity. Then she started violently, and nearly lost her balance. Her eye had caught the hands of the clock on the mantel. They pointed to
fifteen minutes to seven. Mrs. Drabdump's devotion to the kitchen fire
invariably terminated at fifteen minutes past six. What was the matter
with the clock? Mrs. Drabdump had an immediate vision of Snoppet, the neighboring
horologist, keeping the clock in hand for weeks and then returning it
only superficially repaired and secretly injured more vitally "for the
good of the trade." The evil vision vanished as quickly as it came,
exorcised by the deep boom of St. Dunstan's bells chiming the
three-quarters. In its place a great horror surged. Instinct had failed;
Mrs. Drabdump had risen at half-past six instead of six. Now she
understood why she had been feeling so dazed and strange and sleepy. She
had overslept herself. Chagrined and puzzled, she hastily set the kettle over the crackling
coal, discovering a second later that she had overslept herself because
Mr. Constant wished to be woke three-quarters of an hour earlier than
usual, and to have his breakfast at seven, having to speak at an early
meeting of discontented tram-men. She ran at once, candle in hand, to
his bedroom. It was upstairs. All "upstairs" was Arthur Constant's
domain, for it consisted of but two mutually independent rooms. Mrs.
Drabdump knocked viciously at the door of the one he used for a bedroom,
crying, "Seven o'clock, sir. You'll be late, sir. You must get up at
once." The usual slumbrous "All right" was not forthcoming; but, as she
herself had varied her morning salute, her ear was less expectant of the
echo. She went downstairs, with no foreboding save that the kettle would
come off second best in the race between its boiling and her lodger's
dressing. For she knew there was no fear of Arthur Constant's lying deaf to the
call of duty--temporarily represented by Mrs. Drabdump. He was a light
sleeper, and the tram conductors' bells were probably ringing in his
ears, summoning him to the meeting. Why Arthur Constant, B. A.--white-handed and white-shirted, and gentleman to the very purse of
him--should concern himself with tram-men, when fortune had confined his
necessary relations with drivers to cabmen at the least, Mrs. Drabdump
could not quite make out. He probably aspired to represent Bow in
Parliament; but then it would surely have been wiser to lodge with a
landlady who possessed a vote by having a husband alive. Nor was there
much practical wisdom in his wish to black his own boots (an occupation
in which he shone but little), and to live in every way like a Bow
working man. Bow working men were not so lavish in their patronage of
water, whether existing in drinking glasses, morning tubs, or laundress'
establishments. Nor did they eat the delicacies with which Mrs. Drabdump
supplied him, with the assurance that they were the artisan's appanage. She could not bear to see him eat things unbefitting his station. Arthur
Constant opened his mouth and ate what his landlady gave him, not first
deliberately shutting his eyes according to the formula, the rather
pluming himself on keeping them very wide open. But it is difficult for
saints to see through their own halos; and in practice an aureola about
the head is often indistinguishable from a mist. The tea to be scalded
in Mr. Constant's pot, when that cantankerous kettle should boil, was
not the coarse mixture of black and green sacred to herself and Mr.
Mortlake, of whom the thoughts of breakfast now reminded her. Poor Mr.
Mortlake, gone off without any to Devonport, somewhere about four in the
fog-thickened darkness of a winter night! Well, she hoped his journey
would be duly rewarded, that his perks would be heavy, and that he would
make as good a thing out of the "traveling expenses" as rival labor
leaders roundly accused him of to other people's faces. She did not
grudge him his gains, nor was it her business if, as they alleged, in
introducing Mr. Constant to her vacant rooms, his idea was not merely to
benefit his landlady. He had done her an uncommon good turn, queer as
was the lodger thus introduced. His own apostleship to the sons of toil
gave Mrs. Drabdump no twinges of perplexity. Tom Mortlake had been a
compositor; and apostleship was obviously a profession better paid and
of a higher social status. Tom Mortlake--the hero of a hundred
strikes--set up in print on a poster, was unmistakably superior to Tom
Mortlake setting up other men's names at a case. Still, the work was not
all beer and skittles, and Mrs. Drabdump felt that Tom's latest job was
not enviable. She shook his door as she passed it on her way to the
kitchen, but there was no response. The street door was only a few feet
off down the passage, and a glance at it dispelled the last hope that
Tom had abandoned the journey. The door was unbolted and unchained, and
the only security was the latch-key lock. Mrs. Drabdump felt a whit
uneasy, though, to give her her due, she never suffered as much as most
housewives do from criminals who never come. Not quite opposite, but
still only a few doors off, on the other side of the street, lived the
celebrated ex-detective, Grodman, and, illogically enough, his presence
in the street gave Mrs. Drabdump a curious sense of security, as of a
believer living under the shadow of the fane. That any human being of
ill-odor should consciously come within a mile of the scent of so famous
a sleuth-hound seemed to her highly improbable. Grodman had retired
(with a competence) and was only a sleeping dog now; still, even
criminals would have sense enough to let him lie. So Mrs. Drabdump did not really feel that there had been any danger,
especially as a second glance at the street door showed that Mortlake
had been thoughtful enough to slip the loop that held back the bolt of
the big lock. She allowed herself another throb of sympathy for the
labor leader whirling on his dreary way toward Devonport Dockyard. Not
that he had told her anything of his journey beyond the town; but she
knew Devonport had a Dockyard because Jessie Dymond--Tom's
sweetheart--once mentioned that her aunt lived near there, and it lay on
the surface that Tom had gone to help the dockers, who were imitating
their London brethren. Mrs. Drabdump did not need to be told things to
be aware of them. She went back to prepare Mr. Constant's superfine tea,
vaguely wondering why people were so discontented nowadays. But when she
brought up the tea and the toast and the eggs to Mr. Constant's
sitting-room (which adjoined his bedroom, though without communicating
with it), Mr. Constant was not sitting in it. She lit the gas, and laid
the cloth; then she returned to the landing and beat at the bedroom door
with an imperative palm. Silence alone answered her. She called him by
name and told him the hour, but hers was the only voice she heard, and
it sounded strangely to her in the shadows of the staircase. Then,
muttering, "Poor gentleman, he had the toothache last night; and p'r'aps
he's only just got a wink o' sleep. Pity to disturb him for the sake of
them grizzling conductors. I'll let him sleep his usual time," she bore
the tea-pot downstairs with a mournful, almost poetic, consciousness,
that soft-boiled eggs (like love) must grow cold. Half-past seven came--and she knocked again. But Constant slept on. His letters, always a strange assortment, arrived at eight, and a
telegram came soon after. Mrs. Drabdump rattled his door, shouted, and
at last put the wire under it. Her heart was beating fast enough now,
though there seemed to be a cold, clammy snake curling round it. She
went downstairs again and turned the handle of Mortlake's room, and went
in without knowing why. The coverlet of the bed showed that the occupant
had only lain down in his clothes, as if fearing to miss the early
train. She had not for a moment expected to find him in the room; yet
somehow the consciousness that she was alone in the house with the
sleeping Constant seemed to flash for the first time upon her, and the
clammy snake tightened its folds round her heart. She opened the street door, and her eye wandered nervously up and down. It was half-past eight. The little street stretched cold and still in
the gray mist, blinking bleary eyes at either end, where the street
lamps smoldered on. No one was visible for the moment, though smoke was
rising from many of the chimneys to greet its sister mist. At the house
of the detective across the way the blinds were still down and the
shutters up. Yet the familiar, prosaic aspect of the street calmed her. The bleak air set her coughing; she slammed the door to, and returned to
the kitchen to make fresh tea for Constant, who could only be in a deep
sleep. But the canister trembled in her grasp. She did not know whether
she dropped it or threw it down, but there was nothing in the hand that
battered again a moment later at the bedroom door. No sound within
answered the clamor without. She rained blow upon blow in a sort of
spasm of frenzy, scarce remembering that her object was merely to wake
her lodger, and almost staving in the lower panels with her kicks. Then
she turned the handle and tried to open the door, but it was locked. The
resistance recalled her to herself--she had a moment of shocked decency
at the thought that she had been about to enter Constant's bedroom. Then
the terror came over her afresh. She felt that she was alone in the
house with a corpse. She sank to the floor, cowering; with difficulty
stifling a desire to scream. Then she rose with a jerk and raced down
the stairs without looking behind her, and threw open the door and ran
out into the street, only pulling up with her hand violently agitating
Grodman's door-knocker. In a moment the first floor window was
raised--the little house was of the same pattern as her own--and
Grodman's full, fleshy face loomed through the fog in sleepy irritation
from under a nightcap. Despite its scowl the ex-detective's face dawned
upon her like the sun upon an occupant of the haunted chamber. "What in the devil's the matter?" he growled. Grodman was not an early
bird, now that he had no worms to catch. He could afford to despise
proverbs now, for the house in which he lived was his, and he lived in
it because several other houses in the street were also his, and it is
well for the landlord to be about his own estate in Bow, where poachers
often shoot the moon. Perhaps the desire to enjoy his greatness among
his early cronies counted for something, too, for he had been born and
bred at Bow, receiving when a youth his first engagement from the local
police quarters, whence he drew a few shillings a week as an amateur
detective in his leisure hours. Grodman was still a bachelor. In the celestial matrimonial bureau a
partner might have been selected for him, but he had never been able to
discover her. It was his one failure as a detective. He was a
self-sufficing person, who preferred a gas stove to a domestic; but in
deference to Glover Street opinion he admitted a female factotum between
ten a. m. and ten p. m., and, equally in deference to Glover Street
opinion, excluded her between ten p. m. and ten a. m.

"I want you to come across at once," Mrs. Drabdump gasped. "Something
has happened to Mr. Constant." "What! Not bludgeoned by the police at the meeting this morning, I
hope?" "No, no! He didn't go. He is dead." "Dead?" Grodman's face grew very serious now. "Yes. Murdered!" "What?" almost shouted the ex-detective. "How? When? Where? Who?" "I don't know. I can't get to him. I have beaten at his door. He does
not answer." Grodman's face lit up with relief. "You silly woman! Is that all? I shall have a cold in my head. Bitter
weather. He's dog-tired after yesterday--processions, three speeches,
kindergarten, lecture on 'the moon,' article on co-operation. That's his
style." It was also Grodman's style. He never wasted words. "No," Mrs. Drabdump breathed up at him solemnly, "he's dead." "All right; go back. Don't alarm the neighborhood unnecessarily. Wait
for me. Down in five minutes." Grodman did not take this Cassandra of
the kitchen too seriously. Probably he knew his woman. His small,
bead-like eyes glittered with an almost amused smile as he withdrew them
from Mrs. Drabdump's ken, and shut down the sash with a bang. The poor
woman ran back across the road and through her door, which she would not
close behind her. It seemed to shut her in with the dead. She waited in
the passage. After an age--seven minutes by any honest clock--Grodman
made his appearance, looking as dressed as usual, but with unkempt hair
and with disconsolate side-whisker. He was not quite used to that
side-whisker yet, for it had only recently come within the margin of
cultivation. In active service Grodman had been clean-shaven, like all
members of the profession--for surely your detective is the most
versatile of actors. Mrs. Drabdump closed the street door quietly, and
pointed to the stairs, fear operating like a polite desire to give him
precedence. Grodman ascended, amusement still glimmering in his eyes. Arrived on the landing he knocked peremptorily at the door, crying,
"Nine o'clock, Mr. Constant; nine o'clock!" When he ceased there was no
other sound or movement. His face grew more serious. He waited, then
knocked, and cried louder. He turned the handle, but the door was fast. He tried to peer through the keyhole, but it was blocked. He shook the
upper panels, but the door seemed bolted as well as locked. He stood
still, his face set and rigid, for he liked and esteemed the man. "Ay, knock your loudest," whispered the pale-faced woman. "You'll not
wake him now." The gray mist had followed them through the street door, and hovered
about the staircase, charging the air with a moist, sepulchral odor. "Locked and bolted," muttered Grodman, shaking the door afresh. "Burst it open," breathed the woman, trembling violently all over, and
holding her hands before her as if to ward off the dreadful vision. Without another word, Grodman applied his shoulder to the door, and made
a violent muscular effort. He had been an athlete in his time, and the
sap was yet in him. The door creaked, little by little it began to give,
the woodwork enclosing the bolt of the lock splintered, the panels bent
upward, the large upper bolt tore off its iron staple; the door flew
back with a crash. Grodman rushed in. "My God!" he cried. The woman shrieked. The sight was too terrible. *       *       *       *       *

Within a few hours the jubilant news-boys were shrieking "Horrible
Suicide in Bow," and "The Star" poster added, for the satisfaction of
those too poor to purchase: "A Philanthropist Cuts His Throat." CHAPTER II. But the newspapers were premature. Scotland Yard refused to prejudge the
case despite the penny-a-liners. Several arrests were made, so that the
later editions were compelled to soften "Suicide" into "Mystery." The
people arrested were a nondescript collection of tramps. Most of them
had committed other offenses for which the police had not arrested them. One bewildered-looking gentleman gave himself up (as if he were a
riddle), but the police would have none of him, and restored him
forthwith to his friends and keepers. The number of candidates for each
new opening in Newgate is astonishing. The full significance of this tragedy of a noble young life cut short
had hardly time to filter into the public mind, when a fresh sensation
absorbed it. Tom Mortlake had been arrested the same day at Liverpool on
suspicion of being concerned in the death of his fellow-lodger. The news
fell like a bombshell upon a land in which Tom Mortlake's name was a
household word. That the gifted artisan orator, who had never shrunk
upon occasion from launching red rhetoric at Society, should actually
have shed blood seemed too startling, especially as the blood shed was
not blue, but the property of a lovable young middle-class idealist, who
had now literally given his life to the Cause. But this supplementary
sensation did not grow to a head, and everybody (save a few labor
leaders) was relieved to hear that Tom had been released almost
immediately, being merely subpoenaed to appear at the inquest. In an
interview which he accorded to the representative of a Liverpool paper
the same afternoon, he stated that he put his arrest down entirely to
the enmity and rancor entertained toward him by the police throughout
the country. He had come to Liverpool to trace the movements of a friend
about whom he was very uneasy, and he was making anxious inquiries at
the docks to discover at what times steamers left for America, when the
detectives stationed there in accordance with instructions from
headquarters had arrested him as a suspicious-looking character. "Though," said Tom, "they must very well have known my phiz, as I have
been sketched and caricatured all over the shop. When I told them who I
was they had the decency to let me go. They thought they'd scored off me
enough, I reckon. Yes, it certainly is a strange coincidence that I
might actually have had something to do with the poor fellow's death,
which has cut me up as much as anybody; though if they had known I had
just come from the 'scene of the crime,' and actually lived in the
house, they would probably have--let me alone." He laughed
sarcastically. "They are a queer lot of muddle-heads are the police. Their motto is, 'First catch your man, then cook the evidence.' If
you're on the spot you're guilty because you're there, and if you're
elsewhere you're guilty because you have gone away. Oh, I know them! If
they could have seen their way to clap me in quod, they'd ha' done it. Lucky I know the number of the cabman who took me to Euston before five
this morning." "If they clapped you in quod," the interviewer reported himself as
facetiously observing, "the prisoners would be on strike in a week." "Yes, but there would be so many black-legs ready to take their places,"
Mortlake flashed back, "that I'm afraid it 'ould be no go. But do excuse
me. I am so upset about my friend. I'm afraid he has left England, and I
have to make inquiries; and now there's poor Constant gone--horrible! horrible! and I'm due in London at the inquest. I must really run away. Good-by. Tell your readers it's all a police grudge." "One last word, Mr. Mortlake, if you please. Is it true that you were
billed to preside at a great meeting of clerks at St. James' Hall
between one and two to-day to protest against the German invasion?" "Whew! so I had. But the beggars arrested me just before one, when I was
going to wire, and then the news of poor Constant's end drove it out of
my head. What a nuisance! Lord, how troubles do come together! Well,
good-by, send me a copy of the paper." Tom Mortlake's evidence at the inquest added little beyond this to the
public knowledge of his movements on the morning of the Mystery. The
cabman who drove him to Euston had written indignantly to the papers to
say that he had picked up his celebrated fare at Bow Railway Station at
about half-past four a. m., and the arrest was a deliberate insult to
democracy, and he offered to make an affidavit to that effect, leaving
it dubious to which effect. But Scotland Yard betrayed no itch for the
affidavit in question, and No. 2,138 subsided again into the obscurity
of his rank. Mortlake--whose face was very pale below the black mane
brushed back from his fine forehead--gave his evidence in low,
sympathetic tones. He had known the deceased for over a year, coming
constantly across him in their common political and social work, and had
found the furnished rooms for him in Glover Street at his own request,
they just being to let when Constant resolved to leave his rooms at
Oxford House in Bethnal Green and to share the actual life of the
people. The locality suited the deceased, as being near the People's
Palace. He respected and admired the deceased, whose genuine goodness
had won all hearts. The deceased was an untiring worker; never grumbled,
was always in fair spirits, regarded his life and wealth as a sacred
trust to be used for the benefit of humanity. He had last seen him at a
quarter past nine p. m. on the day preceding his death. He (witness) had
received a letter by the last post which made him uneasy about a friend. Deceased was evidently suffering from toothache, and was fixing a piece
of cotton-wool in a hollow tooth, but he did not complain. Deceased
seemed rather upset by the news he brought, and they both discussed it
rather excitedly. By a Juryman: Did the news concern him? Mortlake: Only impersonally. He knew my friend, and was keenly
sympathetic when one was in trouble. Coroner: Could you show the jury the letter you received? Mortlake: I have mislaid it, and cannot make out where it has got to. If
you, sir, think it relevant or essential, I will state what the trouble
was. Coroner: Was the toothache very violent? Mortlake: I cannot tell. I think not, though he told me it had disturbed
his rest the night before. Coroner: What time did you leave him? Mortlake: About twenty to ten. Coroner: And what did you do then? Mortlake: I went out for an hour or so to make some inquiries. Then I
returned, and told my landlady I should be leaving by an early train
for--for the country. Coroner: And that was the last you saw of the deceased? Mortlake (with emotion): The last. Coroner: How was he when you left him? Mortlake: Mainly concerned about my trouble. Coroner: Otherwise you saw nothing unusual about him? Mortlake: Nothing. Coroner: What time did you leave the house on Tuesday morning? Mortlake: At about five and twenty minutes past four. Coroner: Are you sure that you shut the street door? Mortlake: Quite sure. Knowing my landlady was rather a timid person, I
even slipped the bolt of the big lock, which was usually tied back. It
was impossible for any one to get in even with a latch-key. Mrs. Drabdump's evidence (which, of course, preceded his) was more
important, and occupied a considerable time, unduly eked out by
Drabdumpian padding. Thus she not only deposed that Mr. Constant had the
toothache, but that it was going to last about a week; in tragic-comic
indifference to the radical cure that had been effected. Her account of
the last hours of the deceased tallied with Mortlake's, only that she
feared Mortlake was quarreling with him over something in the letter
that came by the nine o'clock post. Deceased had left the house a little
after Mortlake, but had returned before him, and had gone straight to
his bedroom. She had not actually seen him come in, having been in the
kitchen, but she heard his latch-key, followed by his light step up the
stairs. A Juryman: How do you know it was not somebody else? (Sensation, of
which the juryman tries to look unconscious.) Witness: He called down to me over the banisters, and says in his
sweetish voice: "Be hextra sure to wake me at a quarter to seven, Mrs.
Drabdump, or else I shan't get to my tram meeting." (Juryman collapses.) Coroner: And did you wake him? Mrs. Drabdump (breaking down): Oh, my lud, how can you ask? Coroner: There, there, compose yourself. I mean did you try to wake him? Mrs. Drabdump: I have taken in and done for lodgers this seventeen
years, my lud, and have always gave satisfaction; and Mr. Mortlake, he
wouldn't ha' recommended me otherwise, though I wish to Heaven the poor
gentleman had never----

Coroner: Yes, yes, of course. You tried to rouse him? But it was some time before Mrs. Drabdump was sufficiently calm to
explain that though she had overslept herself, and though it would have
been all the same anyhow, she had come up to time. Bit by bit the tragic
story was forced from her lips--a tragedy that even her telling could
not make tawdry. She told with superfluous detail how--when Mr. Grodman
broke in the door--she saw her unhappy gentleman lodger lying on his
back in bed, stone dead, with a gaping red wound in his throat; how her
stronger-minded companion calmed her a little by spreading a
handkerchief over the distorted face; how they then looked vainly about
and under the bed for any instrument by which the deed could have been
done, the veteran detective carefully making a rapid inventory of the
contents of the room, and taking notes of the precise position and
condition of the body before anything was disturbed by the arrival of
gapers or bunglers; how she had pointed out to him that both the windows
were firmly bolted to keep out the cold night air; how, having noted
this down with a puzzled, pitying shake of the head, he had opened the
window to summon the police, and espied in the fog one Denzil Cantercot,
whom he called and told to run to the nearest police-station and ask
them to send on an inspector and a surgeon. How they both remained in
the room till the police arrived, Grodman pondering deeply the while and
making notes every now and again, as fresh points occurred to him, and
asking her questions about the poor, weak-headed young man. Pressed as
to what she meant by calling the deceased "weak-headed," she replied
that some of her neighbors wrote him begging letters, though, Heaven
knew, they were better off than herself, who had to scrape her fingers
to the bone for every penny she earned. Under further pressure from Mr.
Talbot, who was watching the inquiry on behalf of Arthur Constant's
family, Mrs. Drabdump admitted that the deceased had behaved like a
human being, nor was there anything externally eccentric or queer in his
conduct. He was always cheerful and pleasant spoken, though certainly
soft--God rest his soul. No; he never shaved, but wore all the hair that
Heaven had given him. By a Juryman: She thought deceased was in the habit of locking his door
when he went to bed. Of course, she couldn't say for certain. (Laughter.) There was no need to bolt the door as well. The bolt slid
upward, and was at the top of the door. When she first let lodgings, her
reasons for which she seemed anxious to publish, there had only been a
bolt, but a suspicious lodger, she would not call him a gentleman, had
complained that he could not fasten his door behind him, and so she had
been put to the expense of having a lock made. The complaining lodger
went off soon after without paying his rent. (Laughter.) She had always
known he would. The Coroner: Was deceased at all nervous? Witness: No, he was a very nice gentleman. (A laugh.) Coroner: I mean did he seem afraid of being robbed? Witness: No, he was always goin' to demonstrations. (Laughter.) I told
him to be careful. I told him I lost a purse with 3s. 2d. myself on
Jubilee Day. Mrs. Drabdump resumed her seat, weeping vaguely. The Coroner: Gentlemen, we shall have an opportunity of viewing the room
shortly. The story of the discovery of the body was retold, though more
scientifically, by Mr. George Grodman, whose unexpected resurgence into
the realm of his early exploits excited as keen a curiosity as the
reappearance "for this occasion only" of a retired prima donna. His
book, "Criminals I Have Caught," passed from the twenty-third to the
twenty-fourth edition merely on the strength of it. Mr. Grodman stated
that the body was still warm when he found it. He thought that death was
quite recent. The door he had had to burst was bolted as well as locked. He confirmed Mrs. Drabdump's statement about the windows; the chimney
was very narrow. The cut looked as if done by a razor. There was no
instrument lying about the room. He had known the deceased about a
month. He seemed a very earnest, simple-minded young fellow who spoke a
great deal about the brotherhood of man. (The hardened old man-hunter's
voice was not free from a tremor as he spoke jerkily of the dead man's
enthusiasms.) He should have thought the deceased the last man in the
world to commit suicide. Mr. Denzil Cantercot was next called. He was a poet. (Laughter.) He was
on his way to Mr. Grodman's house to tell him he had been unable to do
some writing for him because he was suffering from writer's cramp, when
Mr. Grodman called to him from the window of No. 11 and asked him to run
for the police. No, he did not run; he was a philosopher. (Laughter.) He
returned with them to the door, but did not go up. He had no stomach for
crude sensations. (Laughter.) The gray fog was sufficiently unbeautiful
for him for one morning. (Laughter.) Inspector Howlett said: About 9:45 on the morning of Tuesday, 4th
December, from information received, he went with Sergeant Runnymede and
Dr. Robinson to 11 Glover Street, Bow, and there found the dead body of
a young man, lying on his back with his throat cut. The door of the room
had been smashed in, and the lock and the bolt evidently forced. The
room was tidy. There were no marks of blood on the floor. A purse full
of gold was on the dressing-table beside a big book. A hip-bath with
cold water stood beside the bed, over which was a hanging bookcase. There was a large wardrobe against the wall next to the door. The
chimney was very narrow. There were two windows, one bolted. It was
about 18 feet to the pavement. There was no way of climbing up. No one
could possibly have got out of the room, and then bolted the doors and
windows behind him; and he had searched all parts of the room in which
anyone might have been concealed. He had been unable to find any
instrument in the room, in spite of exhaustive search, there being not
even a penknife in the pockets of the clothes of the deceased, which lay
on a chair. The house and the back yard, and the adjacent pavement, had
also been fruitlessly searched. Sergeant Runnymede made an identical statement, saving only that he had
gone with Dr. Robinson and Inspector Howlett. Dr. Robinson, divisional surgeon, said: The deceased was lying on his
back, with his throat cut. The body was not yet cold, the abdominal
region being quite warm. Rigor mortis had set in in the lower jaw, neck
and upper extremities. The muscles contracted when beaten. I inferred
that life had been extinct some two or three hours, probably not longer,
it might have been less. The bedclothes would keep the lower part warm
for some time. The wound, which was a deep one, was 5-1/2 inches from
right to left across the throat to a point under the left ear. The upper
portion of the windpipe was severed, and likewise the jugular vein. The
muscular coating of the carotid artery was divided. There was a slight
cut, as if in continuation of the wound, on the thumb of the left hand. The hands were clasped underneath the head. There was no blood on the
right hand. The wound could not have been self-inflicted. A sharp
instrument had been used, such as a razor. The cut might have been made
by a left-handed person. No doubt death was practically instantaneous. I
saw no signs of a struggle about the body or the room. I noticed a purse
on the dressing-table, lying next to Madame Blavatsky's big book on
Theosophy. Sergeant Runnymede drew my attention to the fact that the
door had evidently been locked and bolted from within. By a Juryman: I do not say the cuts could not have been made by a
right-handed person. I can offer no suggestion as to how the inflicter
of the wound got in or out. Extremely improbable that the cut was
self-inflicted. There was little trace of the outside fog in the room. Police Constable Williams said he was on duty in the early hours of the
morning of the 4th inst. Glover Street lay within his beat. He saw or
heard nothing suspicious. The fog was never very dense, though nasty to
the throat. He had passed through Glover Street about half-past four. He
had not seen Mr. Mortlake or anybody else leave the house. The Court here adjourned, the Coroner and the jury repairing in a body
to 11 Glover Street to view the house and the bedroom of the deceased. And the evening posters announced, "The Bow Mystery Thickens." CHAPTER III. Before the inquiry was resumed, all the poor wretches in custody had
been released on suspicion that they were innocent; there was not a
single case even for a magistrate. Clues, which at such seasons are
gathered by the police like blackberries off the hedges, were scanty and
unripe. Inferior specimens were offered them by bushels, but there was
not a good one among the lot. The police could not even manufacture a
clue. Arthur Constant's death was already the theme of every hearth, railway
carriage and public house. The dead idealist had points of contact with
so many spheres. The East End and West End alike were moved and excited,
the Democratic Leagues and the Churches, the Doss-houses and the
Universities. The pity of it! And then the impenetrable mystery of it! The evidence given in the concluding portion of the investigation was
necessarily less sensational. There were no more witnesses to bring the
scent of blood over the coroner's table; those who had yet to be heard
were merely relatives and friends of the deceased, who spoke of him as
he had been in life. His parents were dead, perhaps luckily for them;
his relatives had seen little of him, and had scarce heard as much about
him as the outside world. No man is a prophet in his own country, and,
even if he migrates, it is advisable for him to leave his family at
home. His friends were a motley crew; friends of the same friend are not
necessarily friends of one another. But their diversity only made the
congruity of the tale they had to tell more striking. It was the tale of
a man who had never made an enemy even by benefiting him, nor lost a
friend even by refusing his favors; the tale of a man whose heart
overflowed with peace and good will to all men all the year round; of a
man to whom Christmas came not once, but three hundred and sixty-five
times a year; it was the tale of a brilliant intellect, who gave up to
mankind what was meant for himself, and worked as a laborer in the
vineyard of humanity, never crying that the grapes were sour; of a man
uniformly cheerful and of good courage, living in that forgetfulness of
self which is the truest antidote to despair. And yet there was not
quite wanting the note of pain to jar the harmony and make it human. Richard Elton, his chum from boyhood, and vicar of Somerton, in
Midlandshire, handed to the coroner a letter from the deceased about ten
days before his death, containing some passages which the coroner read
aloud: "Do you know anything of Schopenhauer? I mean anything beyond the
current misconceptions? I have been making his acquaintance lately. He
is an agreeable rattle of a pessimist; his essay on 'The Misery of
Mankind' is quite lively reading. At first his assimilation of
Christianity and Pessimism (it occurs in his essay on 'Suicide') dazzled
me as an audacious paradox. But there is truth in it. Verily, the whole
creation groaneth and travaileth, and man is a degraded monster, and sin
is over all. Ah, my friend, I have shed many of my illusions since I
came to this seething hive of misery and wrongdoing. What shall one
man's life--a million men's lives--avail against the corruption, the
vulgarity and the squalor of civilization? Sometimes I feel like a
farthing rush-light in the Hall of Eblis. Selfishness is so long and
life so short. And the worst of it is that everybody is so beastly
contented. The poor no more desire comfort than the rich culture. The
woman to whom a penny school fee for her child represents an appreciable
slice of her income is satisfied that the rich we shall always have with
us. "The real crusted old Tories are the paupers in the Workhouse. The
Radical working men are jealous of their own leaders, and the leaders of
one another. Schopenhauer must have organized a labor party in his salad
days. And yet one can't help feeling that he committed suicide as a
philosopher by not committing it as a man. He claims kinship with
Buddha, too; though Esoteric Buddhism at least seems spheres removed
from the philosophy of 'The Will and the Idea'. What a wonderful woman
Madame Blavatsky must be. I can't say I follow her, for she is up in the
clouds nearly all the time, and I haven't as yet developed an astral
body. Shall I send you on her book? It is fascinating.... I am becoming
quite a fluent orator. One soon gets into the way of it. The horrible
thing is that you catch yourself saying things to lead up to 'Cheers'
instead of sticking to the plain realities of the business. Lucy is
still doing the galleries in Italy. It used to pain me sometimes to
think of my darling's happiness when I came across a flat-chested
factory girl. Now I feel her happiness is as important as a factory
girl's." Lucy, the witness explained, was Lucy Brent, the betrothed of the
deceased. The poor girl had been telegraphed for, and had started for
England. The witness stated that the outburst of despondency in this
letter was almost a solitary one, most of the letters in his possession
being bright, buoyant and hopeful. Even this letter ended with a
humorous statement of the writer's manifold plans and projects for the
new year. The deceased was a good Churchman. Coroner: Was there any private trouble in his own life to account for
the temporary despondency? Witness: Not so far as I am aware. His financial position was
exceptionally favorable. Coroner: There had been no quarrel with Miss Brent? Witness: I have the best authority for saying that no shadow of
difference had ever come between them. Coroner: Was the deceased left-handed? Witness: Certainly not. He was not even ambidextrous. A Juryman: Isn't Shoppinhour one of the infidel writers, published by
the Freethought Publication Society? Witness: I do not know who publishes his books. The Juryman (a small grocer and big raw-boned Scotchman, rejoicing in
the name of Sandy Sanderson and the dignities of deaconry and membership
of the committee of the Bow Conservative Association): No equeevocation,
sir. Is he not a secularist, who has lectured at the Hall of Science? Witness: No, he is a foreign writer--(Mr. Sanderson was heard to thank
Heaven for this small mercy)--who believes that life is not worth
living. The Juryman: Were you not shocked to find the friend of a meenister
reading such impure leeterature? Witness: The deceased read everything. Schopenhauer is the author of a
system of philosophy, and not what you seem to imagine. Perhaps you
would like to inspect the book? (Laughter.) The Juryman: I would na' touch it with a pitchfork. Such books should be
burnt. And this Madame Blavatsky's book--what is that? Is that also
pheelosophy? Witness: No. It is Theosophy. (Laughter.) Mr. Allen Smith, secretary of the Trammel's Union, stated that he had
had an interview with the deceased on the day before his death, when he
(the deceased) spoke hopefully of the prospects of the movement, and
wrote him out a check for 10 guineas for his union. Deceased promised to
speak at a meeting called for a quarter past seven a.m. the next day. Mr. Edward Wimp, of the Scotland Yard Detective Department, said that
the letters and papers of the deceased threw no light upon the manner of
his death, and they would be handed back to the family. His Department
had not formed any theory on the subject. The Coroner proceeded to sum up the evidence. "We have to deal,
gentlemen," he said, "with a most incomprehensible and mysterious case,
the details of which are yet astonishingly simple. On the morning of
Tuesday, the 4th inst., Mrs. Drabdump, a worthy, hard-working widow, who
lets lodgings at 11 Grover Street, Bow, was unable to arouse the
deceased, who occupied the entire upper floor of the house. Becoming
alarmed, she went across to fetch Mr. George Grodman, a gentleman known
to us all by reputation, and to whose clear and scientific evidence we
are much indebted, and got him to batter in the door. They found the
deceased lying back in bed with a deep wound in his throat. Life had
only recently become extinct. There was no trace of any instrument by
which the cut could have been effected; there was no trace of any person
who could have effected the cut. No person could apparently have got in
or out. The medical evidence goes to show that the deceased could not
have inflicted the wound himself. And yet, gentlemen, there are, in the
nature of things, two--and only two--alternative explanations of his
death. Either the wound was inflicted by his own hand, or it was
inflicted by another's. I shall take each of these possibilities
separately. First, did the deceased commit suicide? The medical evidence
says deceased was lying with his hands clasped behind his head. Now the
wound was made from right to left, and terminated by a cut on the left
thumb. If the deceased had made it he would have had to do it with his
right hand, while his left hand remained under his head--a most peculiar
and unnatural position to assume. Moreover, in making a cut with the
right hand, one would naturally move the hand from left to right. It is
unlikely that the deceased would move his right hand so awkwardly and
unnaturally, unless, of course, his object was to baffle suspicion. Another point is that on this hypothesis, the deceased would have had to
replace his right hand beneath his head. But Dr. Robinson believes that
death was instantaneous. If so, deceased could have had no time to pose
so neatly. It is just possible the cut was made with the left hand, but
then the deceased was right-handed. The absence of any signs of a
possible weapon undoubtedly goes to corroborate the medical evidence. The police have made an exhaustive search in all places where the razor
or other weapon or instrument might by any possibility have been
concealed, including the bedclothes, the mattress, the pillow, and the
street into which it might have been dropped. But all theories involving
the willful concealment of the fatal instrument have to reckon with the
fact or probability that death was instantaneous, also with the fact
that there was no blood about the floor. Finally, the instrument used
was in all likelihood a razor, and the deceased did not shave, and was
never known to be in possession of any such instrument. If, then, we
were to confine ourselves to the medical and police evidence, there
would, I think, be little hesitation in dismissing the idea of suicide. Nevertheless, it is well to forget the physical aspect of the case for a
moment and to apply our minds to an unprejudiced inquiry into the mental
aspect of it. Was there any reason why the deceased should wish to take
his own life? He was young, wealthy and popular, loving and loved; life
stretched fair before him. He had no vices. Plain living, high thinking,
and noble doing were the three guiding stars of his life. If he had had
ambition, an illustrious public career was within reach. He was an
orator of no mean power, a brilliant and industrious man. His outlook
was always on the future--he was always sketching out ways in which he
could be useful to his fellow-men. His purse and his time were ever at
the command of whosoever could show fair claim upon them. If such a man
were likely to end his own life, the science of human nature would be at
an end. Still, some of the shadows of the picture have been presented to
us. The man had his moments of despondency--as which of us has not? But
they seem to have been few and passing. Anyhow, he was cheerful enough
on the day before his death. He was suffering, too, from toothache. But
it does not seem to have been violent, nor did he complain. Possibly, of
course, the pain became very acute in the night. Nor must we forget that
he may have overworked himself, and got his nerves into a morbid state. He worked very hard, never rising later than half-past seven, and doing
far more than the professional 'labor leader.' He taught and wrote as
well as spoke and organized. But on the other hand all witnesses agree
that he was looking forward eagerly to the meeting of tram-men on the
morning of the 4th inst. His whole heart was in the movement. Is it
likely that this was the night he would choose for quitting the scene of
his usefulness? Is it likely that if he had chosen it, he would not have
left letters and a statement behind, or made a last will and testament? Mr. Wimp has found no possible clue to such conduct in his papers. Or is
it likely he would have concealed the instrument? The only positive sign
of intention is the bolting of his door in addition to the usual locking
of it, but one cannot lay much stress on that. Regarding the mental
aspects alone, the balance is largely against suicide; looking at the
physical aspects, suicide is well nigh impossible. Putting the two
together, the case against suicide is all but mathematically complete. The answer, then, to our first question, Did the deceased commit
suicide? is, that he did not." The coroner paused, and everybody drew a long breath. The lucid
exposition had been followed with admiration. If the coroner had stopped
now, the jury would have unhesitatingly returned a verdict of "murder." But the coroner swallowed a mouthful of water and went on. "We now come to the second alternative--was the deceased the victim of
homicide? In order to answer that question in the affirmative it is
essential that we should be able to form some conception of the _modus
operandi_. It is all very well for Dr. Robinson to say the cut was made
by another hand; but in the absence of any theory as to how the cut
could possibly have been made by that other hand, we should be driven
back to the theory of self-infliction, however improbable it may seem to
medical gentlemen. Now, what are the facts? When Mrs. Drabdump and Mr.
Grodman found the body it was yet warm, and Mr. Grodman, a witness
fortunately qualified by special experience, states that death had been
quite recent. This tallies closely enough with the view of Dr. Robinson,
who, examining the body about an hour later, put the time of death at
two or three hours before, say seven o'clock. Mrs. Drabdump had
attempted to wake the deceased at a quarter to seven, which would put
back the act to a little earlier. As I understand from Dr. Robinson,
that it is impossible to fix the time very precisely, death may have
very well taken place several hours before Mrs. Drabdump's first attempt
to wake deceased. Of course, it may have taken place between the first
and second calls, as he may merely have been sound asleep at first; it
may also not impossibly have taken place considerably earlier than the
first call, for all the physical data seem to prove. Nevertheless, on
the whole, I think we shall be least likely to err if we assume the time
of death to be half-past six. Gentlemen, let us picture to ourselves No. 11 Glover Street at half-past six. We have seen the house; we know
exactly how it is constructed. On the ground floor a front room tenanted
by Mr. Mortlake, with two windows giving on the street, both securely
bolted; a back room occupied by the landlady; and a kitchen. Mrs.
Drabdump did not leave her bedroom till half-past six, so that we may be
sure all the various doors and windows have not yet been unfastened;
while the season of the year is a guarantee that nothing had been left
open. The front door through which Mr. Mortlake has gone out before
half-past four, is guarded by the latch-key lock and the big lock. On
the upper floor are two rooms--a front room used by deceased for a
bedroom, and a back room which he used as a sitting-room. The back room
has been left open, with the key inside, but the window is fastened. The
door of the front room is not only locked, but bolted. We have seen the
splintered mortise and the staple of the upper bolt violently forced
from the woodwork and resting on the pin. The windows are bolted, the
fasteners being firmly fixed in the catches. The chimney is too narrow
to admit of the passage of even a child. This room, in fact, is as
firmly barred in as if besieged. It has no communication with any other
part of the house. It is as absolutely self-centered and isolated as if
it were a fort in the sea or a log-hut in the forest. Even if any
strange person is in the house, nay, in the very sitting-room of the
deceased, he cannot get into the bedroom, for the house is one built for
the poor, with no communication between the different rooms, so that
separate families, if need be, may inhabit each. Now, however, let us
grant that some person has achieved the miracle of getting into the
front room, first floor, 18 feet from the ground. At half-past six, or
thereabouts, he cuts the throat of the sleeping occupant. How is he then
to get out without attracting the attention of the now roused landlady? But let us concede him that miracle, too. How is he to go away and yet
leave the doors and windows locked and bolted from within? This is a
degree of miracle at which my credulity must draw the line. No, the room
had been closed all night--there is scarce a trace of fog in it. No one
could get in or out. Finally, murders do not take place without motive. Robbery and revenge are the only conceivable motives. The deceased had
not an enemy in the world; his money and valuables were left untouched. Everything was in order. There were no signs of a struggle. The answer
then to our second inquiry--was the deceased killed by another
person?--is, that he was not. "Gentlemen, I am aware that this sounds impossible and contradictory. But it is the facts that contradict themselves. It seems clear that the
deceased did not commit suicide. It seems equally clear that the
deceased was not murdered. There is nothing for it, therefore,
gentlemen, but to return a verdict tantamount to an acknowledgment of
our incompetence to come to any adequately grounded conviction whatever
as to the means or the manner by which the deceased met his death. It is
the most inexplicable mystery in all my experience." (Sensation.) The Foreman (after a colloquy with Mr. Sandy Sanderson): "We are not
agreed, sir. One of the jurors insists on a verdict of "Death from
visitation by the act of God."" CHAPTER IV. But Sandy Sanderson's burning solicitude to fix the crime flickered out
in the face of opposition, and in the end he bowed his head to the
inevitable "open verdict." Then the floodgates of inkland were opened,
and the deluge pattered for nine days on the deaf coffin where the poor
idealist moldered. The tongues of the Press were loosened, and the
leader writers reveled in recapitulating the circumstances of "The Big
Bow Mystery," though they could contribute nothing but adjectives to the
solution. The papers teemed with letters--it was a kind of Indian summer
of the silly season. But the editors could not keep them out, nor cared
to. The mystery was the one topic of conversation everywhere--it was on
the carpet and the bare boards alike, in the kitchen and the
drawing-room. It was discussed with science or stupidity, with aspirates
or without. It came up for breakfast with the rolls, and was swept off
the supper table with the last crumbs. No. 11 Glover Street, Bow, remained for days a shrine of pilgrimage. The
once sleepy little street buzzed from morning till night. From all parts
of the town people came to stare up at the bedroom window and wonder
with a foolish look of horror. The pavement was often blocked for hours
together, and itinerant vendors of refreshment made it a new market
center, while vocalists hastened thither to sing the delectable ditty of
the deed without having any voice in the matter. It was a pity the
Government did not erect a toll-gate at either end of the street. But
Chancellors of the Exchequer rarely avail themselves of the more obvious
expedients for paying off the National debt. Finally, familiarity bred contempt, and the wits grew facetious at the
expense of the Mystery. Jokes on the subject appeared even in the comic
papers. To the proverb, "You must not say Boo to a goose," one added, "or else
she will explain you the Mystery." The name of the gentleman who asked
whether the Bow Mystery was not 'arrowing shall not be divulged. There
was more point in "Dagonet's" remark that, if he had been one of the
unhappy jurymen, he should have been driven to "suicide." A professional
paradox-monger pointed triumphantly to the somewhat similar situation in
"the murder in the Rue Morgue," and said that Nature had been
plagiarizing again--like the monkey she was--and he recommended Poe's
publishers to apply for an injunction. More seriously, Poe's solution
was re-suggested by "Constant Reader" as an original idea. He thought
that a small organ-grinder's monkey might have got down the chimney with
its master's razor, and, after attempting to shave the occupant of the
bed, have returned the way it came. This idea created considerable
sensation, but a correspondent with a long train of letters draggling
after his name pointed out that a monkey small enough to get down so
narrow a flue would not be strong enough to inflict so deep a wound. This was disputed by a third writer, and the contest raged so keenly
about the power of monkeys' muscles that it was almost taken for granted
that a monkey was the guilty party. The bubble was pricked by the pen of
"Common Sense," who laconically remarked that no traces of soot or blood
had been discovered on the floor, or on the nightshirt, or the
counterpane. The "Lancet's" leader on the Mystery was awaited with
interest. It said: "We cannot join in the praises that have been
showered upon the coroner's summing up. It shows again the evils
resulting from having coroners who are not medical men. He seems to have
appreciated but inadequately the significance of the medical evidence. He should certainly have directed the jury to return a verdict of murder
on that. What was it to do with him that he could see no way by which
the wound could have been inflicted by an outside agency? It was for the
police to find how that was done. Enough that it was impossible for the
unhappy young man to have inflicted such a wound and then have strength
and will power enough to hide the instrument and to remove perfectly
every trace of his having left the bed for the purpose." It is
impossible to enumerate all the theories propounded by the amateur
detectives, while Scotland Yard religiously held its tongue. Ultimately
the interest on the subject became confined to a few papers which had
received the best letters. Those papers that couldn't get interesting
letters stopped the correspondence and sneered at the "sensationalism"
of those that could. Among the mass of fantasy there were not a few
notable solutions, which failed brilliantly, like rockets posing as
fixed stars. One was that in the obscurity of the fog the murderer had
ascended to the window of the bedroom by means of a ladder from the
pavement. He had then with a diamond cut one of the panes away, and
effected an entry through the aperture. On leaving he fixed in the pane
of glass again (or another which he had brought with him), and thus the
room remained with its bolts and locks untouched. On its being pointed
out that the panes were too small, a third correspondent showed that
that didn't matter, as it was only necessary to insert the hand and undo
the fastening, when the entire window could be opened, the process being
reversed by the murderer on leaving. This pretty edifice of glass was
smashed by a glazier, who wrote to say that a pane could hardly be fixed
in from only one side of a window frame, that it would fall out when
touched, and that in any case the wet putty could not have escaped
detection. A door panel sliced out and replaced was also put forward,
and as many trap-doors and secret passages were ascribed to No. 11
Glover Street as if it were a medieval castle. Another of these clever
theories was that the murderer was in the room the whole time the police
were there--hidden in the wardrobe. Or he had got behind the door when
Grodman broke it open, so that he was not noticed in the excitement of
the discovery, and escaped with his weapon at the moment when Grodman
and Mrs. Drabdump were examining the window fastenings. Scientific explanations also were to hand to explain how the assassin
locked and bolted the door behind him. Powerful magnets outside the door
had been used to turn the key and push the bolt within. Murderers armed
with magnets loomed on the popular imagination like a new microbe. There
was only one defect in this ingenious theory--the thing could not be
done. A physiologist recalled the conjurers who swallowed swords--by an
anatomical peculiarity of the throat--and said that the deceased might
have swallowed the weapon after cutting his own throat. This was too
much for the public to swallow. As for the idea that the suicide had
been effected with a penknife or its blade, or a bit of steel, which had
got buried in the wound, not even the quotation of Shelley's line:

    "Makes such a wound, the knife is lost in it,"

could secure it a moment's acceptance. The same reception was accorded
to the idea that the cut had been made with a candlestick (or other
harmless article) constructed like a sword-stick. Theories of this sort
caused a humorist to explain that the deceased had hidden the razor in
his hollow tooth! Some kind friend of Messrs. Maskelyne and Cook
suggested that they were the only persons who could have done the deed,
as no one else could get out of a locked cabinet. But perhaps the most
brilliant of these flashes of false fire was the facetious, yet probably
half-seriously meant, letter that appeared in the "Pell Mell Press"
under the heading of

     THE BIG BOW MYSTERY SOLVED. "Sir--You will remember that when the Whitechapel murders were
     agitating the universe, I suggested that the district coroner was
     the assassin. My suggestion has been disregarded. The coroner is
     still at large. So is the Whitechapel murderer. Perhaps this
     suggestive coincidence will incline the authorities to pay more
     attention to me this time. The problem seems to be this. The
     deceased could not have cut his own throat. The deceased could not
     have had his throat cut for him. As one of the two must have
     happened, this is obvious nonsense. As this is obvious nonsense I
     am justified in disbelieving it. As this obvious nonsense was
     primarily put in circulation by Mrs. Drabdump and Mr. Grodman, I am
     justified in disbelieving them. In short, sir, what guarantee have
     we that the whole tale is not a cock-and-bull story, invented by
     the two persons who first found the body? What proof is there that
     the deed was not done by these persons themselves, who then went to
     work to smash the door and break the locks and the bolts, and
     fasten up all the windows before they called the police in? I
     enclose my card, and am, sir, yours truly, One Who Looks Through
     His Own Spectacles." ("Our correspondent's theory is not so audaciously original as he
     seems to imagine. Has he not looked through the spectacles of the
     people who persistently suggested that the Whitechapel murderer was
     invariably the policeman who found the body? Somebody must find the
     body, if it is to be found at all.--Ed. P. M. P.")

The editor had reason to be pleased that he inserted this letter, for it
drew the following interesting communication from the great detective
himself:

     "THE BIG BOW MYSTERY SOLVED. "Sir--I do not agree with you that your correspondent's theory
     lacks originality. On the contrary, I think it is delightfully
     original. In fact it has given me an idea. What that idea is I do
     not yet propose to say, but if 'One Who Looks Through His Own
     Spectacles' will favor me with his name and address I shall be
     happy to inform him a little before the rest of the world whether
     his germ has borne any fruit. I feel he is a kindred spirit, and
     take this opportunity of saying publicly that I was extremely
     disappointed at the unsatisfactory verdict. The thing was a
     palpable assassination; an open verdict has a tendency to relax the
     exertions of Scotland Yard. I hope I shall not be accused of
     immodesty, or of making personal reflections, when I say that the
     Department has had several notorious failures of late. It is not
     what it used to be. Crime is becoming impertinent. It no longer
     knows its place, so to speak. It throws down the gauntlet where
     once it used to cower in its fastnesses. I repeat, I make these
     remarks solely in the interest of law and order. I do not for one
     moment believe that Arthur Constant killed himself, and if Scotland
     Yard satisfies itself with that explanation, and turns on its other
     side and goes to sleep again, then, sir, one of the foulest and
     most horrible crimes of the century will forever go unpunished. My
     acquaintance with the unhappy victim was but recent; still, I saw
     and knew enough of the man to be certain (and I hope I have seen
     and known enough of other men to judge) that he was a man
     constitutionally incapable of committing an act of violence,
     whether against himself or anybody else. He would not hurt a fly,
     as the saying goes. And a man of that gentle stamp always lacks the
     active energy to lay hands on himself. He was a man to be esteemed
     in no common degree, and I feel proud to be able to say that he
     considered me a friend. I am hardly at the time of life at which a
     man cares to put on his harness again; but, sir, it is impossible
     that I should ever know a day's rest till the perpetrator of this
     foul deed is discovered. I have already put myself in communication
     with the family of the victim, who, I am pleased to say, have every
     confidence in me, and look to me to clear the name of their unhappy
     relative from the semi-imputation of suicide. I shall be pleased if
     anyone who shares my distrust of the authorities, and who has any
     clue whatever to this terrible mystery, or any plausible suggestion
     to offer, if, in brief, any 'One who looks through his own
     spectacles' will communicate with me. If I were asked to indicate
     the direction in which new clues might be most usefully sought, I
     should say, in the first instance, anything is valuable that helps
     us to piece together a complete picture of the manifold activities
     of the man in the East End. He entered one way or another into the
     lives of a good many people; is it true that he nowhere made
     enemies? With the best intentions a man may wound or offend; his
     interference may be resented; he may even excite jealousy. A young
     man like the late Mr. Constant could not have had as much practical
     sagacity as he had goodness. Whose corns did he tread on? The more
     we know of the last few months of his life the more we shall know
     of the manner of his death. Thanking you by anticipation for the
     insertion of this letter in your valuable columns, I am, sir, yours
     truly,

     "George Grodman. "46 Glover Street, Bow." "P. S.--Since writing the above lines I have, by the kindness of
     Miss Brent, been placed in possession of a most valuable letter,
     probably the last letter written by the unhappy gentleman. It is
     dated Monday, 3 December, the very eve of the murder, and was
     addressed to her at Florence, and has now, after some delay,
     followed her back to London where the sad news unexpectedly brought
     her. It is a letter couched, on the whole, in the most hopeful
     spirit, and speaks in detail of his schemes. Of course, there are
     things in it not meant for the ears of the public, but there can be
     no harm in transcribing an important passage:

     "'You seem to have imbibed the idea that the East End is a kind of
     Golgotha, and this despite that the books out of which you probably
     got it are carefully labeled "Fiction." Lamb says somewhere that we
     think of the "Dark Ages" as literally without sunlight, and so I
     fancy people like you, dear, think of the "East End" as a mixture
     of mire, misery and murder. How's that for alliteration? Why,
     within five minutes' walk of me there are the loveliest houses,
     with gardens back and front, inhabited by very fine people and
     furniture. Many of my university friends' mouths would water if
     they knew the income of some of the shop-keepers in the High Road. "'The rich people about here may not be so fashionable as those in
     Kensington and Bayswater, but they are every bit as stupid and
     materialistic. I don't deny, Lucy, I do have my black moments, and
     I do sometimes pine to get away from all this to the lands of sun
     and lotus-eating. But, on the whole, I am too busy even to dream of
     dreaming. My real black moments are when I doubt if I am really
     doing any good. But yet on the whole my conscience or my
     self-conceit tells me that I am. If one cannot do much with the
     mass, there is at least the consolation of doing good to the
     individual. And, after all, is it not enough to have been an
     influence for good over one or two human souls? There are quite
     fine characters hereabout--especially in the women--natures capable
     not only of self-sacrifice, but of delicacy of sentiment. To have
     learnt to know of such, to have been of service to one or two of
     such--is not this ample return? I could not get to St. James' Hall
     to hear your friend's symphony at the Henschel concert. I have been
     reading Mme. Blavatsky's latest book, and getting quite interested
     in occult philosophy. Unfortunately I have to do all my reading in
     bed, and I don't find the book as soothing a soporific as most new
     books. For keeping one awake I find Theosophy as bad as
     toothache....'"

       *       *       *       *       *

     "THE BIG BOW MYSTERY SOLVED. "Sir--I wonder if anyone besides myself has been struck by the
     incredible bad taste of Mr. Grodman's letter in your last issue. That he, a former servant of the Department, should publicly insult
     and run it down can only be charitably explained by the supposition
     that his judgment is failing him in his old age. In view of this
     letter, are the relatives of the deceased justified in entrusting
     him with any private documents? It is, no doubt, very good of him
     to undertake to avenge one whom he seems snobbishly anxious to
     claim as a friend; but, all things considered, should not his
     letter have been headed 'The Big Bow Mystery Shelved?' I enclose my
     card, and am, sir,

     "Your obedient servant,
     "Scotland Yard." George Grodman read this letter with annoyance, and, crumpling up the
paper, murmured scornfully, "Edward Wimp." CHAPTER V.


"Yes, but what will become of the Beautiful?" said Denzil Cantercot. "Hang the Beautiful!" said Peter Crowl, as if he were on the committee
of the Academy. "Give me the True." Denzil did nothing of the sort. He didn't happen to have it about him. [Illustration: Denzil Cantercot stood smoking a cigarette.] Denzil Cantercot stood smoking a cigarette in his landlord's shop, and
imparting an air of distinction and an agreeable aroma to the close
leathery atmosphere. Crowl cobbled away, talking to his tenant without
raising his eyes. He was a small, big-headed, sallow, sad-eyed man, with
a greasy apron. Denzil was wearing a heavy overcoat with a fur collar. He was never seen without it in public during the winter. In private he
removed it and sat in his shirt sleeves. Crowl was a thinker, or thought
he was--which seems to involve original thinking anyway. His hair was
thinning rapidly at the top, as if his brain was struggling to get as
near as possible to the realities of things. He prided himself on having
no fads. Few men are without some foible or hobby; Crowl felt almost
lonely at times in his superiority. He was a Vegetarian, a Secularist, a
Blue Ribbonite, a Republican, and an Anti-Tobacconist. Meat was a fad. Drink was a fad. Religion was a fad. Monarchy was a fad. Tobacco was a
fad. "A plain man like me," Crowl used to say, "can live without fads." "A plain man" was Crowl's catchword. When of a Sunday morning he stood
on Mile-end Waste, which was opposite his shop--and held forth to the
crowd on the evils of kings, priests and mutton chops, the "plain man"
turned up at intervals like the "theme" of a symphonic movement. "I am
only a plain man and I want to know." It was a phrase that sabered the
spider-webs of logical refinement, and held them up scornfully on the
point. When Crowl went for a little recreation in Victoria Park on
Sunday afternoons, it was with this phrase that he invariably routed the
supernaturalists. Crowl knew his Bible better than most ministers, and
always carried a minutely-printed copy in his pocket, dogs-eared to mark
contradictions in the text. The second chapter of Jeremiah says one
thing; the first chapter of Corinthians says another. Two contradictory
statements may both be true, but "I am only a plain man, and I want to
know." Crowl spent a large part of his time in setting "the word against
the word." Cock-fighting affords its votaries no acuter pleasure than
Crowl derived from setting two texts by the ears. Crowl had a
metaphysical genius which sent his Sunday morning disciples frantic with
admiration, and struck the enemy dumb with dismay. He had discovered,
for instance, that the Deity could not move, owing to already filling
all space. He was also the first to invent, for the confusion of the
clerical, the crucial case of a saint dying at the Antipodes
contemporaneously with another in London. Both went skyward to heaven,
yet the two traveled in directly opposite directions. In all eternity
they would never meet. Which, then, got to heaven? Or was there no such
place? "I am only a plain man, and I want to know." Preserve us our open
spaces; they exist to testify to the incurable interest of humanity in
the Unknown and the Misunderstood. Even 'Arry is capable of five
minutes' attention to speculative theology, if 'Arriet isn't in a 'urry. Peter Crowl was not sorry to have a lodger like Denzil Cantercot, who,
though a man of parts and thus worth powder and shot, was so hopelessly
wrong on all subjects under the sun. In only one point did Peter Crowl
agree with Denzil Cantercot--he admired Denzil Cantercot secretly. When
he asked him for the True--which was about twice a day on the
average--he didn't really expect to get it from him. He knew that Denzil
was a poet. "The Beautiful," he went on, "is a thing that only appeals to men like
you. The True is for all men. The majority have the first claim. Till
then you poets must stand aside. The True and the Useful--that's what we
want. The Good of Society is the only test of things. Everything stands
or falls by the Good of Society." "The Good of Society!" echoed Denzil, scornfully. "What's the Good of
Society? The Individual is before all. The mass must be sacrificed to
the Great Man. Otherwise the Great Man will be sacrificed to the mass. Without great men there would be no art. Without art life would be a
blank." "Ah, but we should fill it up with bread and butter," said Peter Crowl. "Yes, it is bread and butter that kills the Beautiful," said Denzil
Cantercot bitterly. "Many of us start by following the butterfly through
the verdant meadows, but we turn aside----"

"To get the grub," chuckled Peter, cobbling away. "Peter, if you make a jest of everything, I'll not waste my time on
you." Denzil's wild eyes flashed angrily. He shook his long hair. Life was
very serious to him. He never wrote comic verse intentionally. There are three reasons why men of genius have long hair. One is, that
they forget it is growing. The second is, that they like it. The third
is, that it comes cheaper; they wear it long for the same reason that
they wear their hats long. Owing to this peculiarity of genius, you may get quite a reputation for
lack of twopence. The economic reason did not apply to Denzil, who could
always get credit with the profession on the strength of his appearance. Therefore, when street Arabs vocally commanded him to get his hair cut,
they were doing no service to barbers. Why does all the world watch over
barbers and conspire to promote their interests? Denzil would have told
you it was not to serve the barbers, but to gratify the crowd's
instinctive resentment of originality. In his palmy days Denzil had been
an editor, but he no more thought of turning his scissors against
himself than of swallowing his paste. The efficacy of hair has changed
since the days of Samson, otherwise Denzil would have been a Hercules
instead of a long, thin, nervous man, looking too brittle and delicate
to be used even for a pipe-cleaner. The narrow oval of his face sloped
to a pointed, untrimmed beard. His linen was reproachable, his dingy
boots were down at heel, and his cocked hat was drab with dust. Such are
the effects of a love for the Beautiful. Peter Crowl was impressed with Denzil's condemnation of flippancy, and
he hastened to turn off the joke. "I'm quite serious," he said. "Butterflies are no good to nothing or
nobody; caterpillars at least save the birds from starving." "Just like your view of things, Peter," said Denzil. "Good morning,
madam." This to Mrs. Crowl, to whom he removed his hat with elaborate
courtesy. Mrs. Crowl grunted and looked at her husband with a note of
interrogation in each eye. For some seconds Crowl stuck to his last,
endeavoring not to see the question. He shifted uneasily on his stool. His wife coughed grimly. He looked up, saw her towering over him, and
helplessly shook his head in a horizontal direction. It was wonderful
how Mrs. Crowl towered over Mr. Crowl, even when he stood up in his
shoes. She measured half an inch less. It was quite an optical illusion. "Mr. Crowl," said Mrs. Crowl, "then I'll tell him." "No, no, my dear, not yet," faltered Peter helplessly; "leave it to me." "I've left it to you long enough. You'll never do nothing. If it was a
question of provin' to a lot of chuckleheads that Jollygee and Genesis,
or some other dead and gone Scripture folk that don't consarn no mortal
soul, used to contradict each other, your tongue 'ud run thirteen to the
dozen. But when it's a matter of takin' the bread out o' the mouths o'
your own children, you ain't got no more to say for yourself than a
lamppost. Here's a man stayin' with you for weeks and weeks--eatin' and
drinkin' the flesh off your bones--without payin' a far----"

"Hush, hush, mother; it's all right," said poor Crowl, red as fire. Denzil looked at her dreamily. "Is it possible you are alluding to me,
Mrs. Crowl?" he said. "Who then should I be alludin' to, Mr. Cantercot? Here's seven weeks
come and gone, and not a blessed 'aypenny have I----"

"My dear Mrs. Crowl," said Denzil, removing his cigarette from his mouth
with a pained air, "why reproach me for your neglect?" "My neglect! I like that!" "I don't," said Denzil, more sharply. "If you had sent me in the bill
you would have had the money long ago. How do you expect me to think of
these details?" "We ain't so grand down here. People pays their way--they don't get no
bills," said Mrs. Crowl, accentuating the word with infinite scorn. Peter hammered away at a nail, as though to drown his spouse's voice. "It's three pounds fourteen and eight-pence, if you're so anxious to
know," Mrs. Crowl resumed. "And there ain't a woman in the Mile End Road
as 'ud a-done it cheaper, with bread at fourpence threefarden a quartern
and landlords clamorin' for rent every Monday morning almost afore the
sun's up and folks draggin' and slidderin' on till their shoes is only
fit to throw after brides, and Christmas comin' and seven-pence a week
for schoolin'!" Peter winced under the last item. He had felt it coming--like Christmas. His wife and he parted company on the question of Free Education. Peter
felt that, having brought nine children into the world, it was only fair
he should pay a penny a week for each of those old enough to bear
educating. His better half argued that, having so many children, they
ought in reason to be exempted. Only people who had few children could
spare the penny. But the one point on which the cobbler-skeptic of the
Mile End Road got his way was this of the fees. It was a question of
conscience, and Mrs. Crowl had never made application for their
remission, though she often slapped her children in vexation instead. They were used to slapping, and when nobody else slapped them they
slapped one another. They were bright, ill-mannered brats, who pestered
their parents and worried their teachers, and were happy as the Road was
long. "Bother the school fees!" Peter retorted, vexed. "Mr. Cantercot's not
responsible for your children." "I should hope not, indeed, Mr. Crowl," Mrs. Crowl said sternly. "I'm
ashamed of you." And with that she flounced out of the shop into the
back parlor. "It's all right," Peter called after her soothingly. "The money'll be
all right, mother." In lower circles it is customary to call your wife your mother; in
somewhat superior circles it is the fashion to speak of her as "the
wife" as you speak of "the Stock Exchange," or "the Thames," without
claiming any peculiar property. Instinctively men are ashamed of being
moral and domesticated. Denzil puffed his cigarette, unembarrassed. Peter bent attentively over
his work, making nervous stabs with his awl. There was a long silence. An organ-grinder played a waltz outside, unregarded; and, failing to
annoy anybody, moved on. Denzil lit another cigarette. The dirty-faced
clock on the shop wall chimed twelve. "What do you think," said Crowl, "of Republics?" "They are low," Denzil replied. "Without a Monarch there is no visible
incarnation of Authority." "What! do you call Queen Victoria visible?" "Peter, do you want to drive me from the house? Leave frivolousness to
women, whose minds are only large enough for domestic difficulties. Republics are low. Plato mercifully kept the poets out of his. Republics
are not congenial soil for poetry." "What nonsense! If England dropped its fad of Monarchy and became a
Republic to-morrow, do you mean to say that----?" "I mean to say that there would be no Poet Laureate to begin with." "Who's fribbling now, you or me, Cantercot? But I don't care a
button-hook about poets, present company always excepted. I'm only a
plain man, and I want to know where's the sense of givin' any one person
authority over everybody else?" "Ah, that's what Tom Mortlake used to say. Wait till you're in power,
Peter, with trade-union money to control, and working men bursting to
give you flying angels and to carry you aloft, like a banner,
huzzahing." "Ah, that's because he's head and shoulders above 'em already," said
Crowl, with a flash in his sad gray eyes. "Still, it don't prove that
I'd talk any different. And I think you're quite wrong about his being
spoiled. Tom's a fine fellow--a man every inch of him, and that's a good
many. I don't deny he has his weaknesses, and there was a time when he
stood in this very shop and denounced that poor dead Constant. 'Crowl,'
said he, 'that man'll do mischief. I don't like these kid-glove
philanthropists mixing themselves up in practical labor disputes they
don't understand.'" Denzil whistled involuntarily. It was a piece of news. "I daresay," continued Crowl, "he's a bit jealous of anybody's
interference with his influence. But in this case the jealousy did wear
off, you see, for the poor fellow and he got quite pals, as everybody
knows. Tom's not the man to hug a prejudice. However, all that don't
prove nothing against Republics. Look at the Czar and the Jews. I'm only
a plain man, but I wouldn't live in Russia not for--not for all the
leather in it! An Englishman, taxed as he is to keep up his Fad of
Monarchy, is at least king in his own castle, whoever bosses it at
Windsor. Excuse me a minute, the missus is callin'." "Excuse _me_ a minute. I'm going, and I want to say before I go--I feel
it is only right you should know at once--that after what has passed
to-day I can never be on the same footing here as in the--shall I say
pleasant?--days of yore." "Oh, no, Cantercot. Don't say that; don't say that!" pleaded the little
cobbler. "Well, shall I say unpleasant, then?" "No, no, Cantercot. Don't misunderstand me. Mother has been very much
put to it lately to rub along. You see she has such a growing family. It
grows--daily. But never mind her. You pay whenever you've got the
money." Denzil shook his head. "It cannot be. You know when I came here first I
rented your top room and boarded myself. Then I learnt to know you. We
talked together. Of the Beautiful. And the Useful. I found you had no
soul. But you were honest, and I liked you. I went so far as to take my
meals with your family. I made myself at home in your back parlor. But
the vase has been shattered (I do not refer to that on the mantelpiece),
and though the scent of the roses may cling to it still, it can be
pieced together--nevermore." He shook his hair sadly and shambled out of
the shop. Crowl would have gone after him, but Mrs. Crowl was still
calling, and ladies must have the precedence in all polite societies. Cantercot went straight--or as straight as his loose gait permitted--to
46 Glover Street, and knocked at the door. Grodman's factotum opened it. She was a pock-marked person, with a brickdust complexion and a
coquettish manner. "Oh, here we are again!" she said vivaciously. "Don't talk like a clown," Cantercot snapped. "Is Mr. Grodman in?" 