



Produced by D. Alexander, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                              The Master Mummer

                           By E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

           Author of "Anna, the Adventuress," "A Prince of Sinners,"
                             "The Betrayal," Etc. WITH FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS

_A. L. BURT COMPANY_
_Publishers New York_

_Copyright_, 1904,
BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY. _All rights reserved_




[Illustration: "Let the boy have his chance," said Allan.] The Master Mummer




Book I




CHAPTER I


Sheets of virgin manuscript paper littered my desk, the smoke of much
uselessly consumed tobacco hung about the room in a little cloud. Many a
time I had dipped my pen in the ink, only to find myself a few minutes
later scrawling ridiculous little figures upon the margin of my
blotting-pad. It was not at all an auspicious start for one who sought
immortality. There came a growl presently from the other side of the room, where
Mabane, attired in a disreputable smock, with a short black pipe in the
corner of his mouth, was industriously defacing a small canvas. Mabane
was tall and fair and lean, with a mass of refractory hair which was the
despair of his barber; a Scotchman with keen blue eyes, and humorous
mouth amply redeeming his face from the plainness which would otherwise
have been its lot. He also was in search of immortality. "Make a start for Heaven's sake, Arnold," he implored. "To look at you
is an incitement to laziness. The world's full of things to write about. Make a choice and have done with it. Write something, even if you have
to tear it up afterwards." I turned round in my chair and regarded Mabane reproachfully. "Get on with your pot-boiler, and leave me alone, Allan," I said. "You
do not understand my difficulties in the least. It is simply a matter of
selection. My brain is full of ideas--brimming over. I want to be sure
that I am choosing the best." There came to me from across the room a grunt of contempt. "Pot-boiler indeed! What about short stories at ten guineas a time, must
begin in the middle, scented and padded to order, Anthony Hopeish, with
the sugar of Austin Dobson and the pepper of Kipling shaken on _ad
lib._? Man alive, do you know what pot-boilers are? It's a perfect
conservatory you're living in. Got any tobacco, Arnold?" I jerked my pouch across the room, and it was caught with a deft little
backward swing of the hand. Allan Mabane was an M.C.C. man, and a
favourite point with his captain. "You've got me on the hip, Allan," I answered, rising suddenly from my
chair and walking restlessly up and down the large bare room. "The devil
himself might have put those words into your mouth. They are
pot-boilers, every one of them, and I am sick of it. I want to do
something altogether different. I am sure that I can, but I have got
into the way of writing those other things, and I can't get out of it. That is why I am sitting here like an owl." Mabane refilled his pipe and smoked contentedly. "I know exactly how you're feeling, old chap," he said sympathetically. "I get a dash of the same thing sometimes--generally in the springtime. It begins with a sort of wistfulness, a sense of expansion follows, you
go about all the time with your head in the clouds. You want to collect
all the beautiful things in life and express them. Oh, I know all about
it. It generally means a girl. Where were you last night?" I shrugged my shoulders. "Where I shall be to-night, to-morrow night--where I was a year ago. That is the trouble of it all. One is always in the same place." He shook his head. "It is a very bad attack," he said. "Your generalities may be all right,
but they are not convincing." "I have not spoken a word to a woman, except to Mrs. Burdett, for a week
or more," I declared. Mabane resumed his work. Such a discussion, his gesture seemed to
indicate, was not worth continuing. But I continued, following out my
train of thought, though I spoke as much to myself as to my friend. "You are right about my stories," I admitted. "I have painted
rose-coloured pictures of an imaginary life, and publishers have bought
them, and the public, I suppose, have read them. I have dressed up
puppets of wood and stone, and set them moving like mechanical
dolls--over-gilded, artificial, vulgar. And all the time the real thing
knocks at our doors." Mabane stepped back from his canvas to examine critically the effect of
an unexpected dash of colour. "The public, my dear Greatson," he said abstractedly, "do not want the
real thing--from you. Every man to his _metier_. Yours is to sing of
blue skies and west winds, of hay-scented meadows and Watteau-like
revellers in a paradise as artificial as a Dutch garden. Take my advice,
and keep your muse chained. The other worlds are for the other writers." I was annoyed with Mabane. There was just sufficient truth in his words
to make them sound brutal. I answered him with some heat. "Not if I starve for it, Allan? The whole cycle of life goes humming
around us, hour by hour. It is here, there, everywhere. I will bring a
little of it into my work, or I will write no more." Mabane shook his head. He was busy again upon his canvas. "It is always the humourist," he murmured, "who is ambitious to write a
tragedy--and _vice versa_. The only sane man is he who is conscious of
his limitations." "On the contrary," I answered quickly, "the man who admits them is a
fool. I have made up my mind. I will dress no more dolls in fine
clothes, and set them strutting across a rose-garlanded stage. I will
create, or I will leave alone. I will write of men and women, or not at
all." "It will affect your income," Mabane said. "It will cost you money in
postage stamps, and your manuscripts will be declined with thanks." His gentle cynicism left me unmoved. I had almost forgotten his
presence. I was standing over by the window, looking out across a
wilderness of housetops. My own thoughts for the moment were sufficient. I spoke, it is true, but I spoke to myself. "A beginning," I murmured. "That is all one wants. It seems so hard, and
yet--it ought to be so easy. If one could but lift the roofs--could but
see for a moment underneath." "I can save you the trouble," Mabane remarked cheerfully, strolling over
to my side. "Where are you looking? Chertsey Street, eh? Well, in all
probability mamma is cooking the dinner, Mary is scrubbing the floor,
Miss Flora is dusting the drawing-room, and Miss Louisa is practising
her scales. You have got a maggot in your brain, Greatson. Life such as
you are thinking of is the most commonplace thing in the world. The
middle-classes haven't the capacity for passion--even the tragedy of
existence never troubles them. Don't try to stir up the muddy waters,
Arnold. Write a pretty story about a Princess and her lovers, and draw
your cheque." "There are times, Allan," I remarked thoughtfully, "when you are an
intolerable nuisance." Mabane shrugged his shoulders and returned to his work. Apparently he
had reached a point in it which required his undivided attention, for he
relapsed almost at once into silence. Following his example, I too
returned to my desk and took up my pen. As a rule my work came to me
easily. Even now there were shadowy ideas, well within my mental
grasp--ideas, however, which I was in the humour to repel rather than to
invite. For I knew very well whither they would lead me--back to the
creation of those lighter and more fanciful figures flitting always
across the canvas of a painted world. A certain facility for this sort
of thing had brought me a reputation which I was already growing to
hate. More than ever I was determined not to yield. Mabane's words had
come to me with a subtle note of mockery underlying their undoubted
common-sense. I thrust the memory of them on one side. Certain gifts I
knew that I possessed. I had a ready pen and a facile invention. Something had stirred in me a late-awakened but irresistible desire to
apply them to a different purpose than ever before. As I sat there the
creations of my fancy flitted before me one by one--delicate, perhaps,
and graceful, thoughtfully conceived, adequately completed. Yet I knew
very well that they were like ripples upon the water, creatures without
lasting forms or shape, images passing as easily as they had come into
the mists of oblivion. The human touch, the transforming fire of life
was wholly wanting. These April creations of my brain--carnival figures,
laughing and weeping with equal facility, lacked always and altogether
the blood and muscle of human creatures. The mishaps of their lives
struck never a tragic note; always the thrill and stir of actual
existence were wanting. I would have no more of them. I felt myself
capable of other things. I would wait until other things came. The door was pushed open, and Arthur smiled in upon us. This third
member of our bachelor household was younger than either Mabane or
myself--a smooth-faced, handsome boy, resplendent to-day in frock-coat
and silk hat. "Hullo!" he exclaimed. "Hard at work, both of you!" Mabane laid down his brush and surveyed the newcomer critically. "Arthur," he declared with slow emphasis, "you do us credit--you do
indeed. I hope that you will show yourself to our worthy landlady, and
that you will linger upon the doorstep as long as possible. This sort of
thing is good for our waning credit. I am no judge, for I never
possessed such a garment, but there is something about the skirts of
your frock-coat which appeals to me. There is indeed, Arthur. And then
your tie--the cunning arrangement of it----"

"Oh, rats!" the boy exclaimed, laughing. "Give me a couple of
cigarettes, there's a good chap, and do we feed at home to-night?" Mabane produced the cigarettes and turned back to his work. "We do!" he admitted with a sigh. "Always on Tuesdays, you know. By-the-bye, are you going to the works in that costume?" "Not likely! It's my day at the depot, worse luck," Arthur answered,
pausing to strike a match. "What's up with Arnold?" "Got the blues, because his muse won't work," Mabane said. "He wants to
strike out in a new line--something blood-curdling, you
know--Tolstoi-like, or Hall Caineish--he doesn't care which. He wants to
do what nobody else ever will--take himself seriously. I put it down in
charity to dyspepsia." "Mabane is an ass!" I grunted. "Be off, Arthur, there's a good chap, and
don't listen to him. He hasn't the least idea what he is talking about." Arthur, however, happened to be in no hurry. He tilted his hat on the
back of his head, and leaned upon the table. "I have always noticed," he remarked affably, "that under Allan's most
asinine speeches there usually lurks a substratum of truth. Are you
really going to write a serious novel, Arnold?" I lit a cigarette and leaned back in my chair resignedly. Arthur was a
most impenetrable person, and if he meant to stay, I knew very well that
it was hopeless to attempt to hurry him. "I had some idea of it," I admitted. "By-the-bye, Arthur, you are a
person with a deep insight into life. Can't you give me a few hints? I
haven't even made a start." Arthur considered the matter in all seriousness. "It is a bit difficult for you, I daresay," he remarked. "You stop
indoors so much, and when you do go out you mope off into the country by
yourself. You want to knock about the restaurants and places to get
ideas. That's what Gorman always does. You see you get all your
characters from life in them, and they seem so much more natural." "And who," I asked, "is Mr. Gorman? I do not recognize the name." "Pal of mine," Arthur answered easily. "I don't bring him here because
he's a bit loud for you chaps. Writes stories for no end of papers. _Illustrated Bits_ and the _Cigarette Journal_ print anything he cares
to send. I thought perhaps you'd know the name." Mabane went off into a peal of laughter behind his canvas. The boy
remained imperturbable. "Of course, I'm not comparing his work with Arnold's," he declared. "Arnold's stuff is no end better, of course. But, after all, the chap's
got common-sense. If they want me to draw a motor I go and sit down in
front of it. If Arnold wants to write of real things, real men and
women, you know, he ought to go out and look for them. If he sits here
and just imagines them, how can he be sure that they are the real thing? See what I mean?" There was a short silence. Arthur was swinging his long legs backwards
and forwards, and whistling softly to himself. I looked at him for a
moment curiously. The words of an ancient proverb flitted through my
brain. "Arthur," I declared solemnly, laying down my pen, "you are a prophet in
disguise, the prophet sent to lift the curtain which is before my eyes. Which way shall I go to find these real men and real women, to look upon
these tragic happenings? For Heaven's sake direct me. Where, for
instance, does Mr. Gorman go?" Arthur swung himself off, laughing. "Gorman goes everywhere," he answered. "If I were you I should try one
of the big railway stations. So long!" I rose to my feet, and taking down my hat commenced to brush it. Mabane
looked up from his work. "Where are you off to, Arnold?" he asked. Some curious instinct or power of divination might indeed have given me
a passing glimpse of the things which lay beyond, through the portals of
that day, for I answered him seriously enough--even gravely. "The prophet has spoken," I said. "I must obey! I shall start with
Charing Cross." CHAPTER II


Why the man should have spoken to me at all I could not tell. Yet it is
certain that I heard his simple and courteous inquiry with a thrill of
pleasure, not unmixed with excitement. From the first moment of my
arrival upon the platform I had singled him out, the only interesting
figure in a crowd of nonentities. Perhaps I had lingered a little too
closely by his side, had manifested more curiosity in him than was
altogether seemly. At any rate, he spoke to me. "Do you know if the Continental train is punctual?" he asked. "I have no idea," I answered. "This guard would tell us, perhaps." "Signalled in, sir," the man declared. "Two minutes late only." My new acquaintance thanked me and lit a cigarette. He seemed in no
hurry to depart, and I was equally anxious to engage him in
conversation. For although he was dressed with the trim and quiet
precision of the foreigner or man of affairs, there was something about
his beardless face, his broadly humorous mouth, and easy, nonchalant
bearing which suggested the person who juggled always with the ball of
life. "Marvellous!" he murmured, looking after the guard. "Two minutes late
from Paris--and perhaps beyond. It is a wonderful service. Now, if I had
come to meet any one, and had a pressing appointment immediately
afterwards, this train would have been an hour late. As it is--ah, well,
one is foolish to grumble," he added, with a little shrug of the
shoulders. "You, like me, then," I remarked, "are a loiterer." He flashed a keen glance upon me. "I see that I have met," he said slowly, "with someone of similar tastes
to my own. I will confess at once that you are right. For myself I feel
that there is nothing more interesting in this great city of yours than
to watch the people coming and going from it. All your railway stations
fascinate me, especially those which are the connecting links with other
countries. Perhaps it is because I am an idle man, and must needs find
amusement somewhere." "Yet," I objected, "for a single face or personality which is
suggestive, one sees a thousand of the type which only irritates--the
great rank and file of the commonplace. I wonder, after all, whether the
game is worth the candle." "One in a thousand," he repeated thoughtfully. "Yet think what that one
may mean--a walking drama, a tragedy, a comedy, an epitome of life or
death. There is more to be read in the face of that one than in the
three hundred pages of the novel over which we yawn ourselves to sleep. Here is the train! Now let us watch the people together--that is, if you
really mean that you have no friends to look out for." "I really mean it," I assured him. "I am here out of the idlest
curiosity. I am by profession a scribbler, and I am in search of an
idea." Once more he regarded me curiously. "Your name is Greatson, is it not--Arnold Greatson? You were pointed out
to me once at the Vagabonds' Club, and I never forget a face. Here they
come! Look! Look!" The train had come to a standstill. People were streaming out upon the
platform. My companion laid his fingers upon my arm. He talked rapidly
but lightly. "You see them, my young friend," he exclaimed. "Those are returning
tourists from Switzerland; the thin, sharp-featured girl there, with a
plaid skirt and a satchel, is an American. Heavens! how she talks! She
has lost a trunk. The whole system will be turned upside down until she
has found it or been compensated. The two young men with her are silent. They are wise. Alone she will prevail. You see the man of commerce; he
is off already. He has been to France, perhaps to Belgium also, to buy
silks and laces. And the stout old gentleman? See how happy he looks to
be back again where English is spoken, and he can pay his way in
half-crowns and shillings. You see the milliner's head-woman, dressed
with obtrusive smartness, though everything seems a little awry. She has
been over to Paris for the fashions; in a few days her firm will send
out a little circular, and Hampstead or Balham will be much impressed. And--what do you make of those two, my young friend?" It seemed to me that my companion's tone was changed, that his whole
appearance was different. I was suddenly conscious of an irresistible
conviction. I did not believe any longer that he was, like me, an idle
loiterer here. I felt that his presence had a purpose, and that it was
connected in some measure with the two people to whom my attention was
so suddenly drawn. They were, in that somewhat heterogeneous crowd,
sufficiently noticeable. The man, although he assumed the jauntiness of
youth, was past middle-age, and his mottled cheeks, his thin, watery
eyes, and thick red neck were the unmistakeable hall-marks of years of
self-indulgence. He was well dressed and groomed, and his demeanour
towards his companion was one of deferential good humour. She, however,
was a person of a very different order. She was a girl apparently
between fifteen and sixteen, her figure as yet undeveloped, her dresses
a little too short. Her face was small and white, her mouth had a most
pathetic droop, and in her eyes--wonderful, deep blue eyes--there was a
curious look of shrinking fear, beneath which flashed every now and then
a gleam of positive terror. Her dark hair was arranged in a thick
straight fringe upon her forehead, and in a long plait behind, after the
schoolgirl fashion. Notwithstanding the _gaucherie_ of her years and her
apparent unhappiness, she carried herself with a certain dignity and
grace of movement which were wonderfully impressive. I watched her
admiringly. "They are rather a puzzle," I admitted. "I suppose they might very well
be father and daughter. It is certain that she is fresh from some
convent boarding-school. I don't like the way she looks at the man, do
you? It is as though she were terrified to death. I wonder if he is her
father?" My companion did not answer me. He was straining forward as though
anxious to hear the instructions which the man was giving to a porter
about the luggage; my presence seemed to be a thing which he had wholly
forgotten. The girl stood for a moment alone. More than ever one seemed
to perceive in her eyes the nameless fear of the hunted animal. She
looked around her furtively, yet with a strange, half-veiled wildness in
her dilated eyes. I should scarcely have been surprised to have seen her
make a sudden dash for freedom. Presently, however, the man, having
identified all his luggage, turned towards her. "That's all right," he declared cheerfully. "Now I think that I shall
take you straight away for lunch somewhere, and then we must go to the
shops. Are you hungry, Isobel?" "I--I do not know," she answered, so tremulously that the words scarcely
reached us, though we were standing only a few feet away. "We will soon find out," he said. "Hansom, there! Cafe Grand!" The cab drove off, and I realized then how completely for the last few
moments I had forgotten my companion. I turned to look for him, and
found him standing close to my side. He was apparently absorbed in
thought, and seemed to have lost all interest in our surroundings. His
hands were thrust deep in his overcoat pockets, and his eyes were fixed
upon the ground. The stream of people from the train had melted away
now, and we were almost alone upon the platform. I hesitated for a
moment, and then walked slowly off. I did not wish to seem discourteous
to the man with whom I had exchanged a few remarks more intimate than
those which usually pass between strangers, but he had distinctly the
air of one wishing to be alone, and I was unwilling to seem intrusive. I
had barely taken a dozen steps, however, before I was overtaken. My
companion of a few minutes before was again by my side. All traces of
his recent preoccupation seemed to have vanished. He was smoking a fresh
cigarette, and his bright, deep-set eyes were lit with gentle mirth. "Well, Mr. Novelist," he exclaimed, "have you succeeded? Is your languid
muse stirred? Have you seen a face, a look, a gesture--anything to prick
your imagination?" I shrugged my shoulders. "I have seen one thing," I answered, "which it is not easy to forget. I
have seen fear, and very pathetic it was." "You mean----?" "In the face of that child, or rather girl, with that coarse-looking
brute of a man." The light seemed to die out from my companion's face. Once more he
became stern and thoughtful. "Yes," he agreed; "I too saw that. If one were looking for tragedy, one
might perhaps find it there." We stood now together on the pavement outside the station. My companion
glanced at his watch. "Come," he said; "I have a fancy that you and I might exchange a few
ideas. I am a lonely man, and to-day I am not in the humour for
solitude. Do me the favour to lunch with me!" I did not hesitate for a moment. It was exactly the sort of invitation
which I had coveted. "I shall be delighted," I answered. "I myself," my companion continued, "have no gift for writing. My
talents, such as they are, lie in a different direction. But I have been
in many countries, and adventures have come to me of various sorts. I
may be able even to start you on your way--if, indeed, the author of
_The Lost Princess_ is ever short of an idea." I smiled. "I can assure you," I said, "that my pilgrimage this morning has no
other object than to find one. I begin to fear that I have written too
much lately. At any rate, the well of my inspiration, if I may use so
grandiloquent a term, has run dry." He put up his stick and hailed a hansom. "After all," he said, "it is possible--yes, it is possible that you may
succeed. Adventures wait for us everywhere, if only we go about in a
proper frame of mind. We will lunch, I think, at the Cafe Grand." I followed my prospective host into the cab. Was it altogether a
coincidence, I wondered, that we were bound for the same restaurant
whither the man and the girl had preceded us a few minutes before? CHAPTER III


Mr. Grooten, as my new acquaintance called himself, belied neither his
appearance nor his modest reference to himself. He proved at once that
he knew how to order a satisfactory luncheon, going through the _menu_
with the quiet deliberation of a connoisseur, neither seeking nor
accepting any advice from the dark-visaged waiter who stood by his side,
and finally writing out his few carefully chosen dishes with a special
postscript as to the coffee, which, by-the-bye, we were never to taste. He then leaned over the table and began to talk. Apparently my host had been in every country of the world, and mixed
with people of note in each. His anecdotes were always pungent, personal
without being egotistical, and savoured always with a certain dry and
perfectly natural humour. I found myself both interested and fascinated
by his constant flow of reminiscences, and yet at times my attention
wandered. For within a few yards of us were seated the man and the
child. Everything that was noticeable in their demeanour towards one another at
the station was even more apparent here. A bottle of champagne stood
upon the table. The man had ordered such a luncheon that the head-waiter
was seldom far from his side, and the manager in person had come to pay
his respects. He himself was apparently doing full justice to it. His
cheeks were flushed, his eyes moist, and his little bursts of laughter
as he persevered in his attentions to his companion grew louder and more
frequent. But opposite to him, the child's face was unchanged. Her glass
was full of wine, but she seemed never to touch it. Her long white
fingers played with her bread, but she seemed to eat little or nothing. Her face was pallid and drawn; there was terror--absolute, undiluted
terror--in her unnaturally large eyes. Often when the man spoke to her
she shivered. Her eyes seemed constantly trying to escape his gaze,
wandering round the room, the terror of a hunted animal in their soft,
luminous depths. Once they rested upon mine--I was seated in the corner
facing her--and it seemed to me that there was appeal--desperate,
frenzied appeal--in that long, tense look which thrilled all my pulses
with passionate sympathy. Yet she held herself all the while stiff and
erect. There was a certain sustaining pride in her close, firm-set
mouth. There was never any sign of tears, though more than once her lips
parted for a moment in a pitiful quiver. The table at which we were sitting was just inside the door, in the
left-hand corner. The man and the girl were upon the opposite side, and
a few yards further in the room. My host, with his face to the door,
could see neither of them, therefore, without turning round, and owing
to our table being pushed far into the corner, only his back was visible
to the people in the restaurant. I, sitting facing him, had an excellent
view of the girl and her companion, and I was all the while a witness of
the silent drama being played out between the two. There came a time
when I felt that I could stand it no longer. I leaned over our small
table, and interrupted my companion in the middle of a story. "Forgive me," I said, "but I wish you could see that child's face. There
is something wrong, I am sure. She is terrified to death. Look, that
brute is trying to force her to drink her wine. I really can't sit and
watch it any longer." The man who was my host, and who had called himself Mr. Grooten, nodded
his head slightly. I knew at once, however, that he was in close
sympathy with me. "I have been watching them," he said. "There is a mirror over your head;
I have seen everything. It is a hideous-looking affair, but what can one
do?" "I know what I am going to do, at any rate," I said, laying my serviette
deliberately upon the table. "I don't care what happens, but I am going
to speak to the child." Mr. Grooten raised his eyebrows. Beyond this faint expression of
surprise his face betrayed neither approval nor disapproval. "What will you gain?" he asked. "Probably nothing," I answered. "And yet I shall try all the same. I
dare not go away with the memory of that child's face haunting me. I
must make an effort, even though it seems ridiculous. I can't help it." My companion smiled softly. "As you will, my impetuous young friend," he said. "This promises to be
interesting. I will await your return." I did not hesitate any longer. I rose to my feet, and crossed the space
which lay between the two tables. As I drew nearer to her I watched the
child's face. At first a flash of desperate hope seemed suddenly to
illumine it; then a fear more abject even than before took its place as
she glanced at her companion. She watched me come, reading without a
doubt the purpose in my mind with a sort of fascinated wonder. Her eyes
were still fastened upon mine when at last I paused before her. I leaned
over the table, keeping my shoulder turned upon the man. "You will forgive me," I said to her in a low tone, "but I believe that
you are in trouble. Can I help you? Don't be afraid to tell me if I
can." "You--you are very kind, sir," she began, breathlessly; "I----"

Her companion intervened. Astonishment and anger combined to render his
voice unsteady. "Eh? What's this? Who the devil are you, sir, and what do you mean by
speaking to my ward?" I disregarded his interruption altogether. I still addressed myself only
to the child, and I spoke as encouragingly as I could. "Don't be afraid to tell me," I said. "Think that I am your brother. I
want to help you if I can." "Oh, if you only could!" she moaned. Her companion seized me by the arm and forced me to turn round. His face
was red almost to suffocation, and two thick blue veins stood out upon
his forehead in ugly fashion. His voice was scarcely articulate by
reason of his attempt to keep it low. "Of all the infernal impertinence! What do you mean by it, sir? Who are
you? How dare you force yourself upon strangers in this fashion?" "I am quite aware that I am doing an unusual thing," I answered, "and I
perhaps deserve all that you can say to me. At the same time, I am here
to have my question answered. You have a child with you who is
apparently terrified to death. I insist upon hearing from her own lips
whether she is in need of friends." White and mute, she looked from one to the other. It was the man who
answered. "If this were not a public place," he said, still struggling with his
anger, "I'd punish you as you deserve, you impudent young cub. This
young lady is my ward, and I have just brought her from a convent, where
she has lived since she was three years old. She is strange and shy, of
course, and I was perhaps wrong to bring her to a public place. I did
it, however, out of kindness. I wanted her to enjoy herself, but I
perhaps did not appreciate her sensitiveness and the fact that only a
few days ago she parted with the friends with whom she has lived all her
life. Now, sir," he added, with a sneer upon his coarse lips, "I have
been compelled to answer your questions to avoid a disturbance in a
public place; but I promise you that if you do not make yourself scarce
in thirty seconds I will send for the manager." I looked once more at the child, from whose white, set face every gleam
of hope seemed to have fled. "I can do nothing for you, then?" I asked. Her eyes met mine helplessly. She shook her head. She did not speak at
all. "Is it true--what he has told me?" I asked. She murmured an assent so faint, that though I was bending over her, it
scarcely did more than reach my ears. I could do no more. I turned away
and resumed my seat. Grooten smiled at me. "Well, Sir Knight Errant," he said lightly; "so you could not free the
maiden?" "I was made to feel and look like a fool, of course," I answered, "but I
don't mind about that. To tell you the truth, I am not satisfied now. The man says that he is her guardian, and that he has just brought her
from a convent, where she has lived all her life. He vouchsafed to
explain things to me to avoid a row, but he was desperately angry. She
has never been out of the convent since she was three years old, and she
is very nervous and shy. That was his story, and he told it plausibly
enough. I could not get anything out of her, except an admission that
what he said was the truth." Mr. Grooten nodded thoughtfully. "After all," he said, "she is only a child, fourteen or fifteen at the
most, I should suppose. I have paid the bill, and, as you see, I have my
coat on. Are you ready?" "Directly I have finished my coffee," I answered. "It looks too good to
leave." "Finish it, by all means," he answered. "I am in no particular hurry. By-the-bye, I forget whether I showed you this." He drew a small shining weapon, with rather a long barrel, from his
pocket, but though he invited me to inspect it, he retained it in his
own hand. "I bought it in New York a few months ago," he remarked; "it is the
latest weapon of destruction invented." "Is it a revolver?" I asked, a little puzzled by its shape. "Not exactly," he answered, fingering it carelessly; "it is in reality a
sort of air-gun, with a wonderful compression, and a most ingenious
silencer; quite as deadly, they say, as any firearm ever invented. It
ejects a cylindrically-shaped bullet, tapered down almost to the
fineness of a needle. Now," he added, with a faint smile and a rapid
glance round the room, "if only one dared--" he turned in his chair, and
I saw the thing steal out below his cuff, "one could free the child
quite easily--quite easily." It was all over in a moment--a wonderful, tense moment, during which I
sat frozen to my chair, stricken dumb and motionless with the tragedy
which it seemed that I alone had witnessed. For there had been a little
puff of sound, so slight that no other ears had noticed it. The seat in
front of me was empty, and the man on my right had fallen forwards, his
hand pressed to his side, his face curiously livid, patchy with streaks
of dark colour, his eyes bulbous. Waiters still hurried to and fro, the
hum of conversation was uninterrupted. And then suddenly it came--a cry
of breathless horror, of mortal unexpected agony--a cry, it seemed, of
death. The waiters stopped in their places to gaze breathlessly at the
spot from which the cry had come, a silver dish fell clattering from the
fingers of one, and its contents rolled unnoticed about the floor. The
murmur of voices, the rise and fall of laughter and speech, ceased as
though an unseen finger had been pressed upon the lips of everyone in
the room. Men rose in their places, women craned their necks. For a
second or two the whole place was like a tableau of arrested motion. Then there was a rush towards the table across which the man had fallen,
a doubled-up heap. A few feet away, with only that narrow margin of
table-cloth between them, the girl sat and stared at him, still white
and panic-stricken, yet with a curious change in her face from which all
the dumb terror which had first attracted my attention seemed to have
passed away. CHAPTER IV


The manager, who was very flurried, closed the door of the little room
into which the wounded man had been carried. "Can you tell me his name, or shall we look for his card-case?" he
asked. I glanced towards the child. She was by far the most composed of the
three. Only she remained with her back turned steadily upon the sofa. "His name is Delahaye," she said; "Major Sir William Delahaye, I think
they called him." "And where does he live--in London? Tell me his address. I will send a
cab there at once!" "I do not know his address," the child answered. "I do not know where he
lives." The manager stared at her. "You were with him, were you not?" he asked. "Yes." "Then surely you must know something more about him than just his name?" "He called himself my guardian. I believe that when I was very young he
took me to the convent where I have been ever since. Two days ago he
came to fetch me away." "What is your name?" "Isobel de Sorrens!" "You are not related to him, then?" She shuddered a little. "I hope not," she said simply. "Well, where was he taking you to?" the manager asked impatiently. "Surely there must be someone I can send to." "I believe that he has a house in London," the child said. "I really do
not know anything more. You could send to Madame Richard at the Convent
St. Argueil. I suppose she knows all about him. She told me that I was
to consider him my guardian." The manager turned to me. I was an occasional customer, and he knew who
I was. "Can you tell me anything about him, Mr. Greatson? The doctor will be
here in a moment, but I feel that I ought to be sending for some of his
friends. I am afraid that he is very ill."

"You were not in the room at the time it happened?" I remarked. The manager shook his head. "No, I was in the office." "Have you sent for the police?" I asked. "Police, no!" he exclaimed. "What have the police to do with it? It was
an ordinary fit, surely." I felt that I had held my peace long enough. "It was not a fit at all," I said gravely. "He was shot with a sort of
air-gun by a man sitting at my table. I think that you ought to send for
the police at once. The man's name was Grooten, but I know nothing else
about him." The manager was for a moment speechless. The child looked at me eagerly. "It was the little old gentleman who was sitting with you who did it,"
she exclaimed. "I saw him at Charing Cross." "Yes, it was he!" I answered. The child turned away. "Perhaps after all, then," she murmured to herself, "I may have friends
in the world." The manager, whose name was Huber, was inclined to be incredulous. "An air-gun would have made as much noise as a revolver," he said. "Are
you sure of what you say, Mr. Greatson?" "There is no doubt at all about it," I answered, "and you ought to
inform the police at once. This man--Grooten, he called himself--pulled
the pistol out of his pocket, and was pretending to show it to me when
he fired the shot. He told me that it was a new invention which he had
bought in America, and which was quite noiseless." The manager hurried from the room. The child and I were alone, except
for the man on the couch. Every now and then he groaned--a sound I could
not hear without a shiver. The child, however, was unmoved. She fixed
her dark eyes on me. "Do you think that he will get away?" she asked eagerly. "You mean the man who shot Major Delahaye?" "Yes." "I think that it is very likely. He has a good start, and I expect that
he had made his arrangements." "I hope he does," she murmured passionately. "I wish that I could help
him." "You have no idea who he was?" I asked. "I do not believe that Grooten
was his real name." She shook her head. "I have never seen him before in my life," she said. "If I did know I
should not tell anyone." The doctor came at last. In reality it was barely five minutes since he
had been sent for, but time dragged itself along slowly in that little
room. Directly afterwards Huber, the manager, returned, followed by a
sergeant of the police. We all waited for the doctor's examination. I
fetched a chair for the child, and she thanked me with a wan little
smile. Always she sat with her back to the sofa. There was something
terribly suggestive in her utter lack of sympathy with the wounded man. The doctor finished his examination at last. He came towards us. "The wound is a very curious one," he said, "and I am afraid that the
bullet will be difficult to extract, but it is not in itself serious. It
is really only a flesh wound, but the man is suffering from severe
shock, and I don't like the action of his heart. He can be removed quite
safely. If you like I will telephone for an ambulance and take him to
the hospital. Do you know anything about this affair, sergeant?" "Very little as yet, sir," the man answered. "I want this gentleman's
description of the person who showed him the pistol. The commissionaire
saw him leave, I understand, and one of the waiters saw something in his
hand. Was he a friend of yours, sir?" "I only know his name," I answered. "He called himself Mr. Grooten, and
I judged him to be a foreigner, though he spoke perfect English. He
seemed to be about fifty years old, clean-shaven, and of under medium
height." "Too vague," the sergeant remarked. "Had he any peculiarity of feature
or expression, anything which would help towards identification?" "None that I can remember," I answered. "How was he dressed?" "Quietly. I could not remember anything that he wore." "Did he give you any idea of his intention? Did he speak of Major
Delahaye at all as though he knew him?" I shook my head. "We simply both remarked," I said slowly, "that this--young lady seemed
to be very frightened of her companion, and I do not think that we
formed a favourable impression of him. He gave me not the slightest
intimation, however, of his intention to interfere." "It could not have been an accident, I suppose?" Mr. Huber suggested. "I might have thought so," I answered, "if he had not immediately left
the place. He disappeared so quickly that I did not even see him go." "You sat by accident at the same table?" the sergeant asked. "No, we came together," I answered. "We met at Charing Cross, and he
spoke to me. He knew my name, and reminded me that we had once met at
the 'Vagabonds' Club.'" "Did you remember him?" "I cannot say that I did," I answered. "And afterwards?" "We talked together for some time, and when we left the station he asked
me to lunch here." "Did he arrive by train, or was he meeting anyone at Charing Cross?" the
sergeant asked. "Neither, so far as I could see," I answered. "He seemed to be simply
loitering. I ought to tell you, though, that we saw Major Delahaye and
this young lady arrive by the Continental train, and he seemed to be
interested in them." The sergeant turned to Isobel. "Did you know him?" he asked. "No," she answered. "I did not notice him at the station at all. I saw
that he was sitting at the same table downstairs as this gentleman, but
I am quite sure that I have never seen him before in my life." The sergeant put away his pocket-book. "I am very sorry to trouble you," he said, "but I think it would be
better for you all to come to Bow Street and see the superintendent." "I am quite willing to do so," I answered, "though I can tell him no
more than I have told you." The child moved suddenly towards me. Her thin, shabbily gloved fingers
gripped my arm with almost painful force. Her eyes were full of
passionate appeal. "I may go with you," she murmured. "You will not leave me alone?" "The young lady will be required also," the sergeant remarked. "We will go together, of course," I said gently. "Come!" CHAPTER V


We crossed the road from the police-station, and found ourselves in one
of the narrow streets fringing Covent Garden. The air was fragrant here
with the perfume of white and purple lilac, great baskets full of which
were piled up in the gutter. The girl half closed her eyes. "Delicious!" she murmured. "This reminds me of St. Argueil! You have
flowers too, then, in London?" I bought her a handful, which she sniffed and held to her face with
delight. "Ah!" she said a little sadly. "I had forgotten that there were any
beautiful things left in the world. Thank you so much, Mr. Arnold." "At your age," I said cheerfully, "you will soon find out that the
world--even London--is a treasure-house of beautiful things." She looked down the narrow, untidy street, strewn with the refuse from
the market waggons and trucks which blocked the way, making all but
pedestrian traffic an impossibility--at the piles of empty baskets in
the gutter, and the slatternly crowd of loiterers. Then she looked up at
me with a faint smile. "London--is not all like this, then?" she remarked. I shook my head. "This is a back street, almost a slum," I said. "I daresay you have
lived in the country always, and just at first it does not seem possible
that there should be anything beautiful about a great city. When you get
a little older I think that you will see things differently. The beauty
of a great city thronged with men and women is a more subtle thing than
the mere joy of meadows and hills and country lanes--but it exists all
the same. And now," I continued, stopping short upon the pavement, "I
must take you to your friends. Tell me where they live. You have the
address, perhaps." "What friends?" she asked me, with wide-open eyes. "You told the superintendent of police that you had friends in London,"
I reminded her. Then she smiled at me--a very dazzling smile, which showed all her white
teeth, and which seemed somehow to become reflected in her dark blue
eyes. "But I meant you!" she exclaimed. "I thought that you knew that! There
is no one else. You are my friend, I know very well, for you came and
spoke kindly to me when I was terrified--terrified to death." The shadow of gravity rested only for a moment upon her face. She
laughed gaily at my consternation. "Then where am I to take you?" I asked. "Stupid," she murmured; "I am going with you, of course. Why--why--you
don't mind, do you?" she asked, with a sudden catch in her throat. I felt like a brute, and I hastened to make what amends I could. I
smiled at her reassuringly. "Mind! Of course I don't mind," I declared. "Only, you see, there are
three of us--all men--and we live together. I was afraid----"

"I shall not mind that at all," she interrupted cheerfully. "If they are
nice like you, I think that it will be delightful. There were only girls
at the convent, you know, and the sisters, and a few masters who came to
teach us things, but they were not allowed to speak to us except to give
out the lessons, and they were very stupid. I do not think that I shall
be any trouble to you at all. I will try not to be." I looked at her--a little helplessly. After all, though she was tall for
her years, she was only a child. Her dress was of an awkward length, her
long straight fringe and plaited hair the coiffure of the schoolroom. The most surprising thing of all in connection with her was that she
showed no signs of the tragedy which had so recently been played out
around her. Her eyes had lost their nameless fear; there was even colour
in her cheeks. "Come along, then!" I said. "We will turn into the Strand and take a
hansom." She walked buoyantly along by my side, as tall within an inch or so as
myself, and with a certain elegance in her gait a little hard to
reconcile with her years. All the while she looked eagerly about her,
her eyes shining with curiosity. "We passed through Paris at night," she said, with a little reminiscent
shudder, as though every thought connected with that journey were a
torture, "and I have never really been in a great city before. I hope
you meant what you said," she added, looking up at me with a quick
smile, "and that there are parts of London more beautiful than this." "Many," I assured her. "You shall see the parks. The rhododendrons will
be out soon, and I think that you will find them beautiful, though, of
course, the town can never be like the country. Here's a hansom with a
good horse. Jump in!" *       *       *       *       *

I think that our arrival at Number 4, Earl's Crescent, created quite as
much sensation as I had anticipated. When I opened the door of the
large, barely-furnished room, which we called our workshop, Arthur
sprang from the table on which he had been lounging, and Mabane, who was
still working, dropped his brush in sheer amazement. I turned towards
the girl. "These are my friends, Isobel, of whom I have been telling you," I said. "This is Mr. Arthur Fielding, who is the ornamental member of the
establishment, and that is Mr. Allan Mabane, who paints very bad
pictures, but who contrives to make other people think that they are
worth buying. Allan, this young lady, Miss Isobel de Sorrens, and I have
had a little adventure together. I will explain all about it later on." They both advanced with extended hands. The girl, as though suddenly
conscious of her position, gave a hand to each, and looked at them
almost piteously. "You will not mind my coming," she begged, with a tremulous little note
of appeal in her tone. "I do not seem to have any friends, and Mr.
Arnold has been so kind to me. If I may stay here for a little while I
will try--oh, I am sure, that I will not be in anyone's way!" The pathos of her breathless little speech was almost irresistible. The
child, as she stood there in the centre of the room, looking eagerly
from one to the other, conquered easily. I do not know if either of the
other two were conscious of the new note of life which she seemed to
bring with her into our shabby, smoke-smelling room, but to me it came
home, even in those first few moments, with wonderful poignancy. An
alien note it was, but a wonderfully sweet one. We three men had drifted
away from the whole world of our womenkind. She seemed to bring us back
instantly into touch with some of the few better and rarer memories
round which the selfishness of life is always building a thicker crust. For one thing, at that moment I was deeply grateful--that I knew my
friends. My task was made a sinecure. "My dear young lady," Mabane exclaimed, with unmistakeable earnestness,
"you are heartily welcome. We are delighted to see you here!" "More than welcome," Arthur declared. "We are all one here, you know,
Miss de Sorrens; and if you are Arnold's friend, you must be ours." For the first time tears stood in her eyes. She brushed them proudly
away. "You are very, very kind," she said. "I cannot tell you how grateful I
am to you both." Arthur rushed for our one easy-chair, and insisted upon installing her
in it. Mabane lit a stove and left the room swinging a kettle. I drew a
little sigh of relief, and threw my hat into a corner. Apparently she
had conquered my friends as easily as she had conquered me. "Arthur," I said, "please entertain Miss de Sorrens for a few moments,
will you. I must go and interview Mrs. Burdett." "I'll do my best, Arnold," he assured me. "Mrs. Burdett's in the
kitchen, I think. She came in just before you." Mrs. Burdett was our housekeeper and sole domestic. She was a
hard-featured but kindly old woman, with a caustic tongue and a soft
heart. She heard my story unmoved, betraying neither enthusiasm or
disapproval. When I had finished, she simply set her cap straight and
rubbed her hands upon her apron. "I'd like to see the child, as you call her, Mr. Arnold," she said. "You
young gentlemen are so easy deceived, and it's an unusual thing that
you're proposing, not to say inconvenient." So I took Mrs. Burdett back with me to the studio. As we opened the door
the music of the girl's strange little foreign laugh was ringing through
the room. Arthur was mounted upon his hobby, talking of the delights of
motoring, and she was listening with sparkling eyes. They stopped at
once as we entered. "This is Mrs. Burdett, Isobel," I said, "who looks after us here, and
who is going to take charge of you. She will show you your room. I'm
sorry that you will find it so tiny, but you can see that we are a
little cramped here!" Isobel rose at once. "You should have seen our cells at St. Argueil," she exclaimed, smiling. "Some of us who were tall could scarcely stand upright. May I come with
you, Mrs. Burdett?" Mrs. Burdett's tone and answer relieved me of one more anxiety. The door
closed upon them. We three men were alone. "Is this," Mabane asked curiously, "a practical joke, or a part of your
plot? What does it all mean? Where on earth did you come across the
child? Who is she?" I took a cigarette from my case and lit it. "The responsibility for the whole affair," I declared, "remains with
Arthur." The boy whistled softly. He looked at me with wide-open eyes. "Come," he declared, "I like that. Why, I have never seen the girl
before in my life, or anyone like her. Where do I come in, I should like
to know?" "It was you," I said, "who started me off to Charing Cross." "You mean to say that you picked her up there?" Mabane exclaimed. "I will tell you the whole story," I answered. "She comes with the halo
of tragedy about her. Listen!" Then I told them of the things which had happened to me during the last
few hours. CHAPTER VI


I certainly could not complain of any lack of interest on the part of my
auditors. They listened to every word of my story with rapt attention. When I had finished they were both silent for several moments. Mabane
eyed me curiously. I think that at first he scarcely knew whether to
believe me altogether serious. "The man who was with the girl," Arthur asked at last--"this Major
Delahaye, or whatever his name was--is he dead?" "He was alive two hours ago," I answered. "Will he recover?" "I believe that there is just a bare chance--no more," I answered. "He
had a weak heart, and the shock was almost enough to kill him." "And your friend--the man who shot him--where is he?" Mabane asked. "Is
he in custody?" I shook my head. "He disappeared," I answered, "as though by magic. You see, we were
sitting at the table next the door, and he had every opportunity for
slipping out unnoticed." "It was at the Cafe Grand, you said, wasn't it?" Arthur asked. I nodded. "How about the commissionaire, then?" "He saw the man come out, but he took no particular notice of him," I
answered. "He crossed the street at an ordinary walking pace, and he was
out of sight before the commotion inside began." "It seems to me," Mabane remarked, "that you must have found yourself in
rather an awkward position." "I did," I answered grimly. "Of course my story sounded a bit thin, and
the police made me go to the station with them. As luck would have it,
however, I knew the inspector, and I managed to convince him that I was
telling the truth, or I doubt whether they would have let me go. I
suppose," I added, a little doubtfully, "that you fellows must think me
a perfect idiot for bringing the child here, but upon my word I don't
know what else I could have done. I simply couldn't leave her there, or
in the streets. I'm awfully sorry--"

"Don't be an ass," Arthur interrupted energetically. "Of course you
couldn't do anything but bring her here. You acted like a sensible chap
for once." "Have you questioned her," Mabane asked, "about her friends? If she has
none in London, she must have some somewhere!" "I have questioned her," I answered, "but not very successfully. She
appears to know nothing about her relations, or even her parentage. She
has been at the convent ever since she can remember, and she has seen no
one outside it except this man who took her there and came to fetch her
away." "And what relation is he?" Allan asked. "None! He called himself simply her guardian." Arthur walked across the room for his pipe, and commenced to fill it. "Well," he said, "you are like the man in the Scriptures, who found what
he went out for to see. You've got your adventure, at any rate. All
owing to my advice, too. Hullo!" We all turned round. The door of the room was suddenly opened and
closed. My host of a few hours ago stood upon the threshold, smiling
suavely upon us. He wore a low black hat, and a coat somewhat thicker
than the season of the year seemed to demand. Every article of attire
was different, but his face seemed to defy disguise. I should have known
Mr. Grooten anywhere. His unexpected presence seemed to deprive me almost of my wits. I simply
gaped at him like the others. "Great heavens!" I exclaimed. "You here!" He stood quite still for a moment, listening. Then he glanced sharply
around the room. He looked at Mabane, and he looked at Arthur. Finally
he addressed me. "I fancy that I am a fairly obvious apparition," he remarked. "Where is
the child?" "She is here," I answered, "in another room with our housekeeper just
now. But----"

"I have only a few seconds to spare," Mr. Grooten interrupted
ruthlessly. "Listen to me. You have chosen to interfere in this concern,
and you must take your part in it now. You have the child, and you must
keep her for a time. You must not let her go, on any account. Unfortunately, the man who sold me that pistol was a liar. Delahaye is
not dead. It is possible even that he may recover. Will you swear to
keep the child from him?" I hesitated. It seemed to me that Grooten was taking a great deal for
granted. "You must remember," I said, "that I have absolutely no legal hold upon
her. If Delahaye is her guardian it will be quite easy for him to take
her away." "He is not her legal guardian," Grooten said sharply. "He has no just
claim upon her at all." "Neither have I," I reminded him. "You have possession," Grooten exclaimed. "I tell you that neither
Delahaye, if he lives, nor any other person, will appeal to the law to
force you to give the child up. This is the truth. I see you still
hesitate. Listen! This also is truth. The child is in danger from
Delahaye--hideous, unmentionable danger." I never thought of doubting his word. Truth blazed out from his keen
grey eyes; his words carried conviction with them. "I will keep the child," I promised him. "But tell me who you are, and
what you have to do with her." "No matter," he answered swiftly. "I lay this thing upon you, a charge
upon your honour. Guard the child. If Delahaye recovers there will be
trouble. You must brave it out. You are an Englishman; you are one of a
stubborn, honourable race. Do my bidding in this matter, and you shall
learn what gratitude can mean." Once more he listened for a moment intently. Then he continued. "I am followed by the police," he said. "They may be here at any moment. You can tell them of my visit if it is necessary. My escape is provided
for." "But surely you will tell me something else about the child," I
exclaimed. "Tell me at least----"

He held out his hand. "You are safer to know nothing," he said quickly. "Be faithful to what
you have promised, and you will never regret it." With almost incredible swiftness he disappeared. We all three looked at
one another, speechless. Then from outside came the sound of light
footsteps, and a laugh as from the throat of a singing bird. The door
was thrown open, and Isobel entered. "Such a funny little man has just gone out!" she exclaimed. "He had a
handkerchief tied round his face as though he had been fighting. What
lazy people!" she added, looking around. "I expected to find tea ready. Will you please tell me some more about motor-cars, Mr. Arthur?" She sat on a stool in our midst, and chattered while we fed her with
cakes, and screamed with laughter at Mabane's toast. The tragedy of a
few hours ago seemed to have passed already from her mind. She was all
charm and irresponsibility. The gaunt, bare room, which for years had
mocked all our efforts at decoration, seemed suddenly a beautiful place. Easily, and with the effortless grace of her fifteen years, she laughed
her way into our hearts. CHAPTER VII


"Arnold!" I waved my left hand. "Don't disturb me for a few minutes, Allan, there's a good chap," I
begged. "I'm hard at it." "Found your plot, then, eh?" "I've got a start, anyhow! Give me half an hour. I only want to set the
thing going." Mabane grunted, and took up his brush. For once I was thankful that we
were alone. At last I saw my way. After weeks of ineffective scribbling
a glimpse of the real thing had come to me. The stiffness had gone from my brain and fingers. My pen flew over the
paper. The joy of creation sang once more in my heart, tingled in all my
pulses. We worked together and in silence for an hour or more. Then,
with a little sigh of satisfaction, I leaned back in my chair. "The story goes, then?" Mabane remarked. "Yes, it goes," I assented, my eyes fixed absently upon the loose sheets
of manuscript strewn all over my desk. Already I was finding it hard to
tear my thoughts away from it. There was a short silence. Then Mabane, who had been filling his pipe,
came over to my side. "You heard from the convent this morning, Arnold?" "Yes! The letter is here. Read it!" Mabane shook his head. "I can't read French," he said. "They want her back again," I told him, thoughtfully. "The woman appears
to be honest enough. She admits that they have no absolute claim--they
do not even know her parentage. They have been paid, she says, regularly
and well for the child's education, and if she is now without a home
they would like her to go back to them. She thinks it possible that
Major Delahaye's relatives, or the people for whom he acted, might
continue the payments, but they are willing to take their risk of that. The long and short of it is, that they want her back again." "As a pupil still?" Mabane asked. "They would train her for a teacher. In that case she would have to
serve a sort of novitiate. She would practically become a nun." Mabane withdrew his pipe from his mouth, and looked thoughtfully into
the bowl of it. "I never had a sister," he said, "and I really know nothing whatever
about children. But does it occur to you, Arnold, that this--young lady
seems particularly adapted for a convent?" "I believe," I said firmly, "that it would be misery for her." Mabane walked over to his canvas and came back again. "What about Delahaye?" he asked. "He is still unconscious at the hospital," I answered. Mabane hesitated. "I do not wish to seem intrusive, Arnold," he said, "but I can't help
remembering that a certain lady with whom you were very friendly once
married a Delahaye!" I nodded. "I should have told you, in any case," I said. "This is the man--Major
Sir William Delahaye, whom Eileen Marigold married." "Then surely you recognized him in the restaurant?" "I never met him," I answered. "This marriage was arranged very quickly,
as you know, and I was abroad when it took place. I called on Lady
Delahaye twice, but I did not meet her husband on either occasion." Mabane fingered the loose sheets of my manuscript idly. "Your story, Arnold," he said, "is having a tragic birth. Will Delahaye
really die, do you think?" "The doctors are not very hopeful," I told him. "The wound itself is not
mortal, but the shock seems to have affected him seriously. He is not a
young man, and he has lived hard all his days." "If he dies," Mabane said thoughtfully, "your friend Grooten, I think
you said he called himself, will have to disappear altogether. In that
case I suppose we--shall be compelled to send the child back to the
convent?" "Unless----"

"Unless what?" "Unless we provide for her ourselves," I answered boldly. Mabane smoked furiously for a few moments. His hands were thrust deep
down in his trousers pockets. He looked fixedly out of the window. "Arnold," he said abruptly, "do you believe in presentiments?" "It depends whether they affect me favourably or the reverse," I
answered carelessly. "You Scotchmen are all so superstitious." "You may call it superstition," Mabane continued. "Everything of the
sort which an ignorant man cannot understand he calls superstition. But
if you like, I will tell you something which is surely going to happen. I will tell you what I have seen." I leaned forward in my chair, and looked curiously into Allan's face. His hard, somewhat commonplace features seemed touched for the moment by
some transfiguring fire. His keen, blue-grey eyes were as soft and
luminous as a girl's. He had actually the appearance of a man who sees a
little way beyond the border. Even then I could not take him seriously. "Speak, Sir Prophet!" I exclaimed, with a little laugh. "Let my eyes
also be touched with fire. Let me see what you see." Mabane showed no sign of annoyance. He looked at me composedly. "Do not be a fool, Arnold," he said. 