



Produced by An Anonymous Project Gutenberg Volunteer





THE GREEN MUMMY

By Fergus Hume




CONTENTS



CHAPTER



    I    THE LOVERS

   II    PROFESSOR BRADDOCK

  III    A MYSTERIOUS TOMB

   IV    THE UNEXPECTED

    V    MYSTERY

   VI    THE INQUEST

  VII    THE CAPTAIN OF "THE DIVER"

 VIII    THE BARONET

   IX    MRS. JASHER'S LUCK

    X    THE DON AND HIS DAUGHTER

   XI    THE MANUSCRIPT

  XII    A DISCOVERY

 XIII    MORE MYSTERY

  XIV    THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS

   XV    AN ACCUSATION

  XVI    THE MANUSCRIPT AGAIN

 XVII    CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE

XVIII RECOGNITION

  XIX    NEARER THE TRUTH

   XX    THE LETTER

  XXI    A STORY OF THE PAST

 XXII    A WEDDING PRESENT

XXIII JUST IN TIME

 XXIV    A CONFESSION

  XXV    THE MILLS OF GOD

 XXVI    THE APPOINTMENT

XXVII BY THE RIVER





THE GREEN MUMMY




CHAPTER I. THE LOVERS


"I am very angry," pouted the maid. "In heaven's name, why?" questioned the bachelor. "You have, so to speak, bought me." "Impossible: your price is prohibitive." "Indeed, when a thousand pounds--"

"You are worth fifty and a hundred times as much. Pooh!" "That interjection doesn't answer my question." "I don't think it is one which needs answering," said the young man
lightly; "there are more important things to talk about than pounds,
shillings, and sordid pence." "Oh, indeed! Such as--"

"Love, on a day such as this is. Look at the sky, blue as your eyes; at
the sunshine, golden as your hair." "Warm as your affection, you should say." "Affection! So cold a word, when I love you." "To the extent of one thousand pounds." "Lucy, you are a--woman. That money did not buy your love, but the
consent of your step-father to our marriage. Had I not humored his whim,
he would have insisted upon your marrying Random." Lucy pouted again and in scorn. "As if I ever would," said she. "Well, I don't know. Random is a soldier and a baronet; handsome and
agreeable, with a certain amount of talent. What objection can you find
to such a match?" "One insuperable objection; he isn't you, Archie--darling." "H'm, the adjective appears to be an afterthought," grumbled the
bachelor; then, when she merely laughed teasingly after the manner of
women, he added moodily:

"No, by Jove, Random isn't me, by any manner of means. I am but a poor
artist without fame or position, struggling on three hundred a year for
a grudging recognition." "Quite enough for one, you greedy creature." "And for two?" he inquired softly. "More than enough." "Oh, nonsense, nonsense, nonsense!" "What! when I am engaged to you? Actions speak much louder than remarks,
Mr. Archibald Hope. I love you more than I do money." "Angel! angel!" "You said that I was a woman just now. What do, you mean?" "This," and he kissed her willing lips in the lane, which was empty save
for blackbirds and beetles. "Is any explanation a clear one?" "Not to an angel, who requires adoration, but to a woman who--Let us
walk on, Archie, or we shall be late for dinner." The young man smiled and frowned and sighed and laughed in the space of
thirty seconds--something of a feat in the way of emotional gymnastics. The freakish feminine nature perplexed him as it had perplexed Adam,
and he could not understand this rapid change from poetry to prose. How
could it be otherwise, when he was but five-and-twenty, and engaged
for the first time? Threescore years and ten is all too short a time to
learn what woman really is, and every student leaves this world with the
conviction that of the thousand sides which the female of man presents
to the male of woman, not one reveals the being he desires to know. There is always a deep below a deep; a veil behind a veil, a sphere
within a sphere. "It's most remarkable," said the puzzled man in this instance. "What is?" asked the enigma promptly. To avoid an argument which he could not sustain, Archie switched his on
to the weather. "This day in September; one could well believe that it is still the
month of roses." "What! With those wilted hedges and falling leaves and reaped fields and
golden haystacks, and--and--"

She glanced around for further illustrations in the way of
contradiction. "I can see all those things, dear, and the misplaced day also!" "Misplaced?" "July day slipped into September. It comes into the landscape of this
autumn month, as does love into the hearts of an elderly couple who feel
too late the supreme passion." Lucy's eyes swept the prospect, and the spring-like sunshine,
revealing all too clearly the wrinkles of aging Nature, assisted her
comprehension. "I understand. Yet youth has its wisdom." "And old age its experience. The law of compensation, my dearest. But I
don't see," he added reflectively, "what your remark and my answer have
to do with the view," whereat Lucy declared that his wits wandered. Within the last five minutes they had emerged from a sunken lane where
the hedges were white with dust and dry with heat to a vast open space,
apparently at the World's-End. Here the saltings spread raggedly towards
the stately stream of the Thames, intersected by dykes and ditches,
by earthen ramparts, crooked fences, sod walls, and irregular lines of
stunted trees following the water-courses. The marshes were shaggy with
reeds and rushes, and brown with coarse, fading herbage, although here
and there gleamed emerald-hued patches of water-soaked soil, fit for
fairy-rings. Beyond a moderately high embankment of turf and timber, the
lovers could see the broad river, sweeping eastward to the Nore, with
homeward-bound and outward-faring ships afloat on its golden tide. Across the gleaming waters, from where they lipped their banks to the
foot of low domestic Kentish hills, stretched alluvial lands, sparsely
timbered, and in the clear sunshine clusters of houses, great and small,
factories with tall, smoky chimneys, clumps of trees and rigid railway
lines could be discerned. The landscape was not beautiful, in spite of
the sun's profuse gildings, but to the lovers it appeared a Paradise. Cupid, lord of gods and men, had bestowed on them the usual rose-colored
spectacles which form an important part of his stock-in-trade, and they
looked abroad on a fairy world. Was not SHE there: was not HE there:
could Romeo or Juliet desire more? From their feet ran the slim, straight causeway, which was the
King's highway of the district--a trim, prim line of white above the
picturesque disorder of the marshes. It skirted the low-lying fields at
the foot of the uplands and slipped through an iron gate to end in
the far distance at the gigantic portal of The Fort. This was a
squat, ungainly pile of rugged gray stone, symmetrically built, but
aggressively ugly in its very regularity, since it insulted the graceful
curves of Nature everywhere discernible. It stood nakedly amidst the
bare, bleak meadows glittering with pools of still water, with not even
the leaf of a creeper to soften its menacing walls, although above them
appeared the full-foliaged tops of trees planted in the barrack-yard. It
looked as though the grim walls belted a secret orchard. What with
the frowning battlements, the very few windows diminutive and closely
barred, the sullen entrance and the absence of any gracious greenery,
Gartley Fort resembled the Castle of Giant Despair. On the hither side,
but invisible to the lovers, great cannons scowled on the river they
protected, and, when they spoke, received answer from smaller guns
across the stream. There less extensive forts were concealed amidst
trees and masked by turf embankments, to watch and guard the golden
argosies of London commerce. Lucy, always impressionable, shivered with her hand in that of Archie's,
as she stared at the landscape, melancholy even in the brilliant
sunshine. "I should hate to live in Gartley Fort," said she abruptly. "One might
as well be in jail." "If you marry Random you will have to live there, or on a baggage wagon. He is R.G.A. captain, remember, and has to go where glory calls him,
like a good soldier." "Glory can call until glory is hoarse for me," retorted the girl
candidly. "I prefer an artist's studio to a camp." "Why?" asked Hope, laughing at her vehemence. "The reason is obvious. I love the artist." "And if you loved the soldier?" "I should mount the baggage wagon and make him Bovril when he was
wounded. But for you, dear, I shall cook and sew and bake and--"

"Stop! stop! I want a wife, not a housekeeper." "Every sensible man wants the two in one." "But you should be a queen, darling." "Not with my own consent, Archie: the work is much too hard. Existence
on six pounds a week with you will be more amusing. We can take a
cottage, you know, and live, the simple life in Gartley village, until
you become the P.R.A., and I can be Lady Hope, to walk in silk attire." "You shall be Queen of the Earth, darling, and walk alone." "How dull! I would much rather walk with you. And that reminds me that
dinner is waiting. Let us take the short cut home through the village. On the way you can tell me exactly how you bought me from my step-father
for one thousand pounds." Archie Hope frowned at the incurable obstinacy of the sex. "I didn't buy
you, dearest: how many times do you wish me to deny a sale which never
took place? I merely obtained your step-father's consent to our marriage
in the near future." "As if he had anything to do with my marriage, being only my
step-father, and having, in my eyes, no authority. In what way did you
get his consent--his unnecessary consent," she repeated with emphasis. Of course it was waste of breath to argue with a woman who had made up
her mind. The two began to walk towards the village along the causeway,
and Hope cleared his throat to explain--patiently as to a child. "You know that your step-father--Professor Braddock--is crazy on the
subject of mummies?" Lucy nodded in her pretty wilful way. "He is an Egyptologist." "Quite so, but less famous and rich than he should be, considering his
knowledge of dry-as-dust antiquities. Well, then, to make a long story
short, he told me that he greatly desired to examine into the difference
between the Egyptians and the Peruvians, with regard to the embalming of
the dead." "I always thought that he was too fond of Egypt to bother about any
other country," said Lucy sapiently. "My dear, it isn't the country he cares about, but the civilization of
the past. The Incas embalmed their dead, as did the Egyptians, and
in some way the Professor heard of a Royal Mummy, swathed in green
bandages--so he described it to me." "It should be called an Irish mummy," said Lucy flippantly. "Well?" "This mummy is in possession of a man at Malta, and Professor Braddock,
hearing that it was for sale for one thousand pounds--"

"Oh!" interrupted the girl vivaciously, "so this was why father sent
Sidney Bolton away six weeks ago?" "Yes. As you know, Bolton is your step-father's assistant, and is as
crazy as the Professor on the subject of Egypt. I asked the Professor if
he would allow me to marry you--"

"Quite unnecessary," interpolated Lucy briskly. Archie passed over the remark to evade an argument. "When I asked him, he said that he wished you to marry Random, who is
rich. I pointed out that you loved me and not Random, and that Random
was on a yachting cruise, while I was on the spot. He then said that he
could not wait for the return of Random, and would give me a chance." "What did he mean by that?" "Well, it seems that he was in a hurry to get this Green Mummy from
Malta, as he feared lest some other person should snap it up. This was
two months ago, remember, and Professor Braddock wanted the cash at
once. Had Random been here he could have supplied it, but as Random was
away he told me that if I handed over one thousand pounds to purchase
the mummy, that he would permit our engagement now, and our marriage in
six months. I saw my chance and took it, for your step-father has always
been an obstacle in our path, Lucy, dear. In a week Professor Braddock
had the money, as I sold out some of my investments to get it. He then
sent Bolton to Malta in a tramp steamer for the sake of cheapness, and
now expects him back with the Green Mummy." "Has Sidney bought it?" "Yes. He got it for nine hundred pounds, the Professor told me, and is
bringing it back in The Diver--that's the same tramp steamer in which
he went to Malta. So that's the whole story, and you can see there is
no question of you being bought. The thousand pounds went to get your
father's consent." "He is not my father," snapped Lucy, finding nothing else to say. "You call him so." "That is only from habit. I can't call him Mr. Braddock, or Professor
Braddock, when I live with him, so `father' is the sole mode of address
left to me. And after all," she added, taking her lover's arm, "I
like the Professor; he is very kind and good, although extremely
absent-minded. And I am glad he has consented, for he worried me a lot
to marry Sir Frank Random. I am glad you bought me." "But I didn't," cried the exasperated lover. "I think you did, and you shouldn't have diminished your income by
buying what you could have had for nothing." Archie shrugged his shoulders. It was vain to combat her fixed idea. "I have still three hundred a year left. And you were worth buying." "You have no right to talk of me as though I had been bought." The young man gasped. "But you said--"

"Oh, what does it matter what I said. I am going to marry you on three
hundred a year, so there it is. I suppose when Bolton returns, my father
will be glad to see the back of me, and then will go to Egypt with
Sidney to explore this secret tomb he is always talking about." "That expedition will require more than a thousand pounds," said Archie
dryly. "The Professor explained the obstacles to me. However, his doings
have nothing to do with us, darling. Let Professor Braddock fumble
amongst the dead if he likes. We live!" "Apart," sighed Lucy. "Only for the next six months; then we can get our cottage and live on
love, my dearest." "Plus three hundred a year," said the girl sensibly then she added, "Oh,
poor Frank Random!" "Lucy," cried her lover indignantly. "Well, I was only pitying him. He's a nice man, and you can't expect him
to be pleased at our marriage." "Perhaps," said Hope in an icy tone, "you would like him to be the
bridegroom. If so, there is still time." "Silly boy!" She took his arm. "As I have been bought, you know that I
can't run away from my purchaser." "You denied being bought just now. It seems to me, Lucy, that I am to
marry a weather-cock." "That is only an impolite name for a woman, dear. You have no sense of
humor, Frank, or you would call me an April lady." "Because you change every five minutes. H'm! It's puzzling." "Is it? Perhaps you would like me to resemble Widow Anne, who is always
funereal. Here she is, looking like Niobe." They were strolling through Gartley village by this time, and the
cottagers came to their doors and front gates to look at the handsome
young couple. Everyone knew of the engagement, and approved of the same,
although some hinted that Lucy Kendal would have been wiser to marry
the soldier-baronet. Amongst these was Widow Anne, who really was Mrs.
Bolton, the mother of Sidney, a dismal female invariably arrayed in
rusty, stuffy, aggressive mourning, although her husband had been dead
for over twenty years. Because of this same mourning, and because she
was always talking of the dead, she was called "Widow Anne," and looked
on the appellation as a compliment to her fidelity. At the present
moment she stood at the gate of her tiny garden, mopping her red eyes
with a dingy handkerchief. "Ah, young love, young love, my lady," she groaned, when the couple
passed, for she always gave Lucy a title as though she really and truly
had become the wife of Sir Frank, "but who knows how long it may last?" "As long as we do," retorted Lucy, annoyed by this prophetic speech. Widow Anne groaned with relish. "So me and Aaron, as is dead and gone,
thought, my lady. But in six months he was knocking the head off me." "The man who would lay his hand on a woman save in the way of--"

"Oh, Archie, what nonsense, you talk!" cried Miss Kendal pettishly. "Ah!" sighed the woman of experience, "I called it nonsense too, my
lady, afore Aaron, who now lies with the worms, laid me out with a
flat-iron. Men's fit for jails only, as I allays says." "A nice opinion you have of our sex," remarked Archie dryly. "I have, sir. I could tell you things as would make your head waggle
with horror on there shoulders of yours." "What about your son Sidney? Is he also wicked?" "He would be if he had the strength, which he hasn't," exclaimed the
widow with uncomplimentary fervor. "He's Aaron's son, and Aaron hadn't
much to learn from them as is where he's gone too," and she looked
downward significantly. "Sidney is a decent young fellow," said Lucy sharply. "How dare you
miscall your own flesh and blood, Widow Anne? My father thinks a great
deal of Sidney, else he would not have sent him to Malta. Do try and be
cheerful, there's a good soul. Sidney will tell you plenty to make you
laugh, when he comes home." "If he ever does come home," sighed the old woman. "What do you mean by that?" "Oh, it's all very well asking questions as can't be answered nohow, my
lady, but I be all of a mubble-fubble, that I be." "What is a mubble-fubble?" asked Hope, staring. "It's a queer-like feeling of death and sorrow and tears of blood and
not lifting your head for groans," said Widow Anne incoherently, "and
there's meanings in mubble-fumbles, as we're told in Scripture. Not but
what the Perfesser's been a kind gentleman to Sid in taking him
from going round with the laundry cart, and eddicating him to watch
camphorated corpses: not as what I'd like to keep an eye on them things
myself. But there's no more watching for my boy Sid, as I dreamed." "What did you dream?" asked Lucy curiously. Widow Anne threw up two gnarled hands, wrinkled with age and laundry
work, screwing up her face meanwhile. "I dreamed of battle and murder and sudden death, my lady, with Sid in
his cold grave playing on a harp, angel-like. Yes!" she folded her rusty
shawl tightly round her spare form and nodded, "there was Sid, looking
beautiful in his coffin, and cut into a hash, as you might say, with--"

"Ugh! ugh!" shuddered Lucy, and Archie strove to draw her away. "With murder written all over his poor face," pursued the widow. "And
I woke up screeching with cramp in my legs and pains in my lungs, and
beatings in my heart, and stiffness in my--"

"Oh, hang it, shut up!" shouted Archie, seeing that Lucy was growing
pale at this ghoulish recital, "don't be fool, woman. Professor Braddock
says that Bolton'll be back in three days with the mummy he has been
sent to fetch from Malta. You have been having nightmare! Don't you see
how you are frightening Miss Kendal?" "'The Witch' of Endor, sir--"

"Deuce take the Witch of Endor and you also. There's a shilling. Go and
drink yourself into a more cheery frame of mind." Widow Anne bit the shilling with one of her two remaining teeth, and
dropped a curtsey. "You're a good, kind gentleman," she smirked, cheered at the idea of
unlimited gin. "And when my boy Sid do come home a corpse, I hope you'll
come to the funeral, sir." "What a raven!" said Lucy, as Widow Anne toddled away in the direction
of the one public-house in Gartley village. "I don't wonder that the late Mr. Bolton laid her out with a flat-iron. To slay such a woman would be meritorious." "I wonder how she came to be the mother of Sidney," said Miss Kendal
reflectively, as they resumed their walk, "he's such a clever, smart,
and handsome young man." "I think Bolton owes everything to the Professor's teaching and example,
Lucy," replied her lover. "He was an uncouth lad, I understand, when
your step-father took him into the house six years ago. Now he is quite
presentable. I shouldn't wonder if he married Mrs. Jasher." "H'm! I rather think Mrs. Jasher admires the Professor." "Oh, he'll never marry her. If she were a mummy there might be a chance,
of course, but as a human being the Professor will never look at her." "I don't know so much about that, Archie. Mrs. Jasher is attractive." Hope laughed. "In a mutton-dressed-as-lamb way, no doubt." "And she has money. My father is poor and so--"

"You make up a match at once, as every woman will do. Well, let us get
back to the Pyramids, and see how the flirtation is progressing." Lucy walked on for a few steps in silence. "Do you believe in Mrs.
Bolton's dream, Archie?" "No! I believe she eats heavy suppers. Bolton will return quite safe; he
is a clever fellow, not easily taken advantage of. Don't bother any more
about Widow Anne and her dismal prophecies." "I'll try not to," replied Lucy dutifully. "All the same, I wish she had
not told me her dream," and she shivered. CHAPTER II. PROFESSOR BRADDOCK


There was only one really palatial mansion in Gartley, and that was the
ancient Georgian house known as the Pyramids. Lucy's step-father had
given the place this eccentric name on taking up his abode there some
ten years previously. Before that time the dwelling had been occupied by
the Lord of the Manor and his family. But now the old squire was dead,
and his impecunious children were scattered to the four quarters of the
globe in search of money with which to rebuild their ruined fortunes. As
the village was somewhat isolated and rather unhealthily situated in a
marshy country, the huge, roomy old Grange had not been easy to let,
and had proved quite impossible to sell. Under these disastrous
circumstances, Professor Braddock--who described himself humorously as
a scientific pauper--had obtained the tenancy at a ridiculously low
rental, much to his satisfaction. Many people would have paid money to avoid exile in these damp waste
lands, which, as it were, fringed civilization, but their loneliness and
desolation suited the Professor exactly. He required ample room for his
Egyptian collection, with plenty of time to decipher hieroglyphics and
study perished dynasties of the Nile Valley. The world of the present
day did not interest Braddock in the least. He lived almost continuously
on that portion of the mental plane which had to do with the far-distant
past, and only concerned himself with physical existence, when it
consisted of mummies and mystic beetles, sepulchral ornaments,
pictured documents, hawk-headed deities and suchlike things of almost
inconceivable antiquity. He rarely walked abroad and was invariably
late for meals, save when he missed any particular one altogether, which
happened frequently. Absent-minded in conversation, untidy in dress,
unpractical in business, dreamy in manner, Professor Braddock lived
solely for archaeology. That such a man should have taken to himself a
wife was mystery. Yet he had been married fifteen years before to a widow, who possessed
a limited income and one small child. It was the opportunity of
securing the use of a steady income which had decoyed Braddock into the
matrimonial snare of Mrs. Kendal. To put it plainly, he had married the
agreeable widow for her money, although he could scarcely be called a
fortune-hunter. Like Eugene Aram, he desired cash to assist learning,
and as that scholar had committed murder to secure what he wanted, so
did the Professor marry to obtain his ends. These were to have someone
to manage the house, and to be set free from the necessity of earning
his bread, so that he might indulge in pursuits more pleasurable than
money-making. Mrs. Kendal was a placid, phlegmatic lady, who liked
rather than loved the Professor, and who desired him more as a companion
than as a husband. With Braddock she did not arrange a romantic marriage
so much as enter into a congenial partnership. She wanted a man in the
house, and he desired freedom from pecuniary embarrassment. On these
lines the prosaic bargain was struck, and Mrs. Kendal became the
Professor's wife with entirely successful results. She gave her
husband a home, and her child a father, who became fond of Lucy, and
who--considering he was merely an amateur parent--acted admirably. But this sensible partnership lasted only for five years. Mrs. Braddock
died of a chill on the liver and left her five hundred a year to the
Professor for life, with remainder to Lucy, then a small girl of ten. It
was at this critical moment that Braddock became a practical man for
the first and last time in his dreamy life. He buried his wife with
unfeigned regret--for he had been sincerely attached to her in his
absent-minded way--and sent Lucy to a Hampstead boarding school. After
an interview with his late wife's lawyer to see that the income was
safe, he sought for a house in the country, and quickly discovered
Gartley Grange, which no one would take because of its isolation. Within
three months from the burial of Mrs. Braddock, the widower had removed
himself and his collection to Gartley, and had renamed his new abode
the Pyramids. Here he dwelt quietly and enjoyably--from his dry-as-dust
point of view--for ten years, and here Lucy Kendal had come when her
education was completed. The arrival of a marriageable young lady made
no difference in the Professor's habits, and he hailed her thankfully as
the successor to her mother in managing the small establishment. It is
to be feared that Braddock was somewhat selfish in his views, but the
fixed idea of archaeological research made him egotistical. The mansion was three-story, flat-roofed, extremely ugly and
unexpectedly comfortable. Built of mellow red brick with dingy white
stone facings, it stood a few yards back from the roadway which ran from
Gartley Fort through the village, and, at the precise point where the
Pyramids was situated, curved abruptly through woodlands to terminate a
mile away, at Jessum, the local station of the Thames Railway Line. An
iron railing, embedded in moldering stone work, divided the narrow front
garden from the road, and on either side of the door--which could be
reached by five shallow steps--grew two small yew trees, smartly clipped
and trimmed into cones of dull green. These yews possessed some magical
significance, which Professor Braddock would occasionally explain to
chance visitors interested in occult matters; for, amongst other things
Egyptian, the archaeologist searched into the magic of the Sons of
Khem, and insisted that there was more truth than superstition in their
enchantments. Braddock used all the vast rooms of the ground floor to house his
collection of antiquities, which he had acquired through many laborious
years. He dwelt entirely in this museum, as his bedroom adjoined
his study, and he frequently devoured his hurried meals amongst the
brilliantly tinted mummy cases. The embalmed dead populated his world,
and only now and then, when Lucy insisted, did he ascend to the first
floor, which was her particular abode. Here was the drawing-room,
the dining-room and Lucy's boudoir; here also were sundry bedrooms,
furnished and unfurnished, in one of which Miss Kendal slept, while
the others remained vacant for chance visitors, principally from
the scientific world. The third story was devoted to the cook, her
husband--who acted as gardener--and to the house parlor maid, a
composite domestic, who worked from morning until night in keeping
the great house clean. During the day these servants attended to their
business in a comfortable basement, where the cook ruled supreme. At the
back of the mansion stretched a fairly large kitchen garden, to which
the cook's husband devoted his attention. This was the entire domain
belonging to the tenant, as, of course, the Professor did not rent
the arable acres and comfortable farms which had belonged to the
dispossessed family. Everything in the house went smoothly, as Lucy was a methodical young
person, who went by the clock and the almanac. Braddock little knew how
much of his undeniable comfort he owed to her fostering care; for,
prior to her return from school, he had been robbed right and left by
unscrupulous domestics. When his step-daughter arrived he simply handed
over the keys and the housekeeping money--a fixed sum--and gave her
strict instructions not to bother him. Miss Kendal faithfully observed
this injunction, as she enjoyed being undisputed mistress, and knew
that, so long as her step-father had his meals, his bed, his bath
and his clothes, he required nothing save the constant society of his
beloved mummies, of which no one wished to deprive him. These he dusted
and cleansed and rearranged himself. Not even Lucy dared to invade the
museum, and the mere mention of spring cleaning drove the Professor into
displaying frantic rage, in which he used bad language. On returning from her walk with Archie, the girl had lured her
step-father into assuming a rusty dress suit, which had done service for
many years, and had coaxed him into a promise to be present at dinner. Mrs. Jasher, the lively widow of the district, was coming, and Braddock
approved of a woman who looked up to him as the one wise man in the
world. Even science is susceptible to judicious flattery, and Mrs.
Jasher was never backward in putting her admiration into words. Female gossip declared that the widow wished to become the second Mrs.
Braddock, but if this was really the case, she had but small chance of
gaining her end. The Professor had once sacrificed his liberty to secure
a competence, and, having acquired five hundred a year, was not inclined
for a second matrimonial venture. Had the widow been a dollar heiress
with a million at her back he would not have troubled to place a ring
on her finger. And certainly Mrs. Jasher had little to gain from such a
dreary marriage, beyond a collection of rubbish--as she said--and a
dull country house situated in a district inhabited solely by peasants
belonging to Saxon times. Archie Hope left Lucy at the door of the Pyramids and repaired to his
village lodgings, for the purpose of assuming evening dress. Lucy, being
her own housekeeper, assisted the overworked parlor maid to lay and
decorate the table before receiving the guests. Thus Mrs. Jasher found
no one in the drawing-room to welcome her, and, taking the privilege of
old friendship, descended to beard Braddock in his den. The Professor
raised his eyes from a newly bought scarabeus to behold a stout little
lady smiling on him from the doorway. He did not appear to be grateful
for the interruption, but Mrs. Jasher was not at all dismayed, being
a man-hunter by profession. Besides, she saw that Braddock was in the
clouds as usual, and would have received the King himself in the same
absent-minded manner. "Pouf! what an abominal smell!" exclaimed the widow, holding a
flimsy lace handkerchief to her nose. "Kind of camphor-sandal-wood
charnel-house smell. I wonder you are not asphyxiated. Pouf! Ugh! Bur-r-r

The Professor stared at her with cold, fishy eyes. "Did you speak?" "Oh, dear me, yes, and you don't even ask me to take a chair. If I were
a nasty stuffy mummy, now, you would be embracing me by, this time. Don't you know that I have come to dinner, you silly man?" and she
tapped him playfully with her closed fan. "I have had dinner," said Braddock, egotistic as usual. "No, you have not." Mrs. Jasher spoke positively, and pointed to a
small tray of untouched food on the side table. "You have not even had
luncheon. You must live on air, like a chameleon--or on love, perhaps,"
she ended in a significantly tender tone. But she might as well have spoken to the granite image of Horus in the
corner. Braddock merely rubbed his chin and stared harder than ever at
the glittering visitor. "Dear me!" he said innocently. "I must have forgotten to eat. Lamplight!" he looked round vaguely. "Of course, I remember lighting the
lamps. Time has gone by very rapidly. I am really hungry." He paused to
make sure, then repeated his remark in a more positive manner. "Yes, I
am very hungry, Mrs. Jasher." He looked at her as though she had just
entered. "Of course, Mrs. Jasher. Do you wish to see me about anything
particular?" The widow frowned at his inattention, and then laughed. It was
impossible to be angry with this dreamer. "I have come to dinner, Professor. Do try and wake up; you are half
asleep and half starved, too, I expect." "I certainly feel unaccountably hungry," admitted Braddock cautiously. "Unaccountably, when you have eaten nothing since breakfast. You weird
man, I believe you are a mummy yourself." But the Professor had again returned to examine the scarabeus, this time
with a powerful magnifying glass. "It certainly belongs to the twentieth dynasty," he murmured, wrinkling
his brows. Mrs. Jasher stamped and flirted her fan pettishly. The creature's soul,
she decided, was certainly not in his body, and until it came back he
would continue to ignore her. With the annoyance of a woman who is
not getting her own way, she leaned back in Braddock's one comfortable
chair--which she had unerringly selected--and examined him intently. Perhaps the gossips were correct, and she was trying to imagine what
kind of a husband he would make. But whatever might be her thoughts, she
eyed Braddock as earnestly as Braddock eyed the scarabeus. Outwardly the Professor did not appear like the savant he was reported
to be. He was small of stature, plump of body, rosy as a little Cupid,
and extraordinarily youthful, considering his fifty-odd years of
scientific wear and tear. With a smooth, clean-shaven face, plentiful
white hair like spun silk, and neat feet and hands, he did not look his
age. The dreamy look in his small blue eyes was rather belied by the
hardness of his thin-lipped mouth, and by the pugnacious push of his
jaw. The eyes and the dome-like forehead hinted that brain without much
originality; but the lower part of this contradictory countenance might
have belonged to a prize-fighter. Nevertheless, Braddock's plumpness did
away to a considerable extent with his aggressive look. It was certainly
latent, but only came to the surface when he fought with a brother
savant over some tomb-dweller from Thebes. In the soft lamplight he
looked like a fighting cherub, and it was a pity--in the interests of
art--that the hairless pink and white face did not surmount a pair of
wings rather than a rusty and ill-fitting dress suit. "He's nane sa dafty as he looks," thought Mrs. Jasher, who was Scotch,
although she claimed to be cosmopolitan. "With his mummies he is all
right, but outside those he might be difficult to manage. And these
things," she glanced round the shadowy room, crowded with the dead
and their earthly belongings. "I don't think I would care to marry the
British Museum. Too much like hard work, and I am not so young as I
was." The near mirror--a polished silver one, which had belonged, ages ago, to
some coquette of Memphis--denied this uncomplimentary thought, for Mrs.
Jasher did not look a day over thirty, although her birth certificate
set her down as forty-five. In the lamplight she might have passed for
even younger, so carefully had she preserved what remained to her of
youth. She assuredly was somewhat stout, and never had been so tall
as she desired to be. But the lines of her plump figure were still
discernible in the cunningly cut gown, and she carried her little self
with such mighty dignity that people overlooked the mortifying height of
a trifle over five feet. Her features were small and neat, but her large
blue eyes were so noticeable and melting that those on whom she turned
them ignored the lack of boldness in chin and nose. Her hair was brown
and arranged in the latest fashion, while her complexion was so fresh
and pink that, if she did paint--as jealous women averred--she must
have been quite an artist with the hare's foot and the rouge pot and the
necessary powder puff. Mrs. Jasher's clothes repaid the thought she expended upon them, and
she was artistic in this as in other things. Dressed in a crocus-yellow
gown, with short sleeves to reveal her beautiful arms, and cut low to
display her splendid bust, she looked perfectly dressed. A woman would
have declared the wide-netted black lace with which the dress was draped
to be cheap, and would have hinted that the widow wore too many jewels
in her hair, on her corsage, round her arms, and ridiculously gaudy
rings on her fingers. This might have been true, for Mrs. Jasher
sparkled like the Milky Way at every movement; but the gleam of gold
and the flash of gems seemed to suit her opulent beauty. Her slightest
movement wafted around her a strange Chinese perfume, which she
obtained--so she said--from a friend of her late husband's who was in
the British Embassy at Pekin. No one possessed this especial perfume but
Mrs. Jasher, and anyone who had previously met her, meeting her in the
darkness, could have guessed at her identity. With a smile to show
her white teeth, with her golden-hued dress and glittering jewels, the
pretty widow glowed in that glimmering room like a tropical bird. The Professor raised his dreamy eyes and laid the beetle on one side,
when his brain fully grasped that this charming vision was waiting to
be entertained. She was better to look upon even than the beloved
scarabeus, and he advanced to shake hands as though she had just entered
the room. Mrs. Jasher--knowing his ways--rose to extend her hand, and
the two small, stout figures looked absurdly like a pair of chubby
Dresden ornaments which had stepped from the mantelshelf. "Dear lady, I am glad to see you. You have--you have"--the Professor
reflected, and then came back with a rush to the present century--"you
have come to dinner, if I mistake not." "Lucy asked me a week ago," she replied tartly, for no woman likes to be
neglected for a mere beetle, however ancient. "Then you will certainly get a good dinner," said Braddock, waving his
plump white hands. "Lucy is an excellent housekeeper. I have no fault
to find with her--no fault at all. But she is obstinate--oh, very
obstinate, as her mother was. Do you know, dear lady, that in a papyrus
scroll which I lately acquired I found the recipe for a genuine Egyptian
dish, which Amenemha--the last Pharaoh of the eleventh dynasty, you
know--might have eaten, and probably did eat. I desired Lucy to serve it
to-night, but she refused, much to my annoyance. The ingredients, which
had to do with roasted gazelle, were oil and coriander seed and--if my
memory serves me--asafoetida." "Ugh!" Mrs. Jasher's handkerchief went again to her mouth. "Say no
more, Professor; your dish sounds horrid. I don't wish to eat it, and be
turned into a mummy before my time." "You would make a really beautiful mummy," said Braddock, paying what
he conceived was a compliment; "and, should you die, I shall certainly
attend to your embalming, if you prefer that to cremation." "You dreadful man!" cried the widow, turning pale and shrinking. "Why, I
really believe that you would like to see me packed away in one of those
disgusting coffins." "Disgusting!" cried the outraged Professor, striking one of the
brilliantly tinted cases. "Can you call so beautiful a specimen of
sepulchral art disgusting? Look at the colors, at the regularity of
the hieroglyphics--why, the history of the dead is set out in this
magnificent series of pictures." He adjusted his pince-nez and began
to read, "The Osirian, Scemiophis that is a female name, Mrs.
Jasher--who--"

"I don't want to have my history written on my coffin," interrupted the
widow hysterically, for this funereal talk frightened her. "It would
take much more space than a mummy case upon which to write it. My life
has been volcanic, I can tell you. By the way," she added hurriedly,
seeing that Braddock was on the eve of resuming the reading, "tell me
about your Inca mummy. Has it arrived?" The Professor immediately followed the false trail. "Not yet," he said
briskly, rubbing his smooth hands, "but in three days I expect The Diver
will be at Pierside, and Sidney will bring the mummy on here. I shall
unpack it at once and learn exactly how the ancient Peruvians embalmed
their dead. Doubtless they learned the art from--"

"The Egyptians," ventured Mrs. Jasher rashly. Braddock glared. "Nothing of the sort, dear lady," he snorted angrily. "Absurd, ridiculous! I am inclined to believe that Egypt was merely a
colony of that vast island of Atlantis mentioned by Plato. There--if
my theory is correct--civilization begun, and the kings of
Atlantis--doubtless the gods of historical tribes--governed the whole
world, including that portion which we now term South America." "Do you mean to say that there were Yankees in those days?" inquired
Mrs. Jasher frivolously. The Professor tucked his hands under his shabby coattails and strode
up and down the room warming his rage, which was provoked by such
ignorance. "Good heavens, madam, where have you lived?" he exclaimed
explosively--"are you a fool, or merely an ignorant woman? I am talking
of prehistoric times, thousands of years ago, when you were probably a
stray atom embedded in the slime." "Oh, you horrid creature!" cried Mrs. Jasher indignantly, and was about
to give Braddock her opinion, if only to show him that she could hold
her own, when the door opened. "How are you, Mrs. Jasher?" said Lucy, advancing. "Here am I and here is Archie. Dinner is ready. And you--"

"I am very hungry," said Mrs. Jasher. "I have been called an atom of the
slime," then she laughed and took possession of young Hope. Lucy wrinkled her brow; she did not approve of the widow's man-annexing
instinct. CHAPTER III. A MYSTERIOUS TOMB


One member of the Braddock household was not included in the general
staff, being a mere appendage of the Professor himself. This was a
dwarfish, misshapen Kanaka, a pigmy in height, but a giant in breadth,
with short, thick legs, and long, powerful arms. He had a large head,
and a somewhat handsome face, with melancholy black eyes and a fine set
of white teeth. Like most Polynesians, his skin was of a pale bronze and
elaborately tattooed, even the cheeks and chin being scored with curves
and straight lines of mystical import. But the most noticeable thing
about him was his huge mop of frizzled hair, which, by some process,
known only to himself, he usually dyed a vivid yellow. The flaring locks
streaming from his head made him resemble a Peruvian image of the sun,
and it was this peculiar coiffure which had procured for him the odd
name of Cockatoo. The fact that this grotesque creature invariably wore
a white drill suit, emphasized still more the suggestion of his likeness
to an Australian parrot. Cockatoo had come from the Solomon Islands in his teens to the colony
of Queensland, to work on the plantations, and there the Professor had
picked him up as his body servant. When Braddock returned to marry Mrs.
Kendal, the boy had refused to leave him, although it was represented
to the young savage that he was somewhat too barbaric for sober England. Finally, the Professor had consented to bring him over seas, and had
never regretted doing so, for Cockatoo, finding his scientific master a
true friend, worshipped him as a visible god. Having been captured when
young by Pacific black-birders, he talked excellent English, and from
contact with the necessary restraints of civilization was, on the whole,
extremely well behaved. Occasionally, when teased by the villagers and
his fellow-servants, he would break into childish rages, which bordered
on the dangerous. But a word from Braddock always quieted him, and when
penitent he would crawl like a whipped dog to the feet of his divinity. For the most part he lived entirely in the museum, looking after the
collection and guarding it from harm. Lucy--who had a horror of the
creature's uncanny looks--objected to Cockatoo waiting at the table,
and it was only on rare occasions that he was permitted to assist the
harassed parlormaid. On this night the Kanaka acted excellently as a
butler, and crept softly round the table, attending to the needs of the
diners. He was an admirable servant, deft and handy, but his blue-lined
face and squat figure together with the obtrusively golden halo, rather
worried Mrs. Jasher. And, indeed, in spite of custom, Lucy also felt
uncomfortable when this gnome hovered at her elbow. It looked as though
one of the fantastical idols from the museum below had come to haunt the
living. "I do not like that Golliwog," breathed Mrs. Jasher to her host, when
Cockatoo was at the sideboard. "He gives me the creeps." "Imagination, my dear lady, pure imagination. Why should we not have a
picturesque animal to wait upon us?" "He would wait picturesquely enough at a cannibal feast," suggested
Archie, with a laugh. "Don't!" murmured Lucy, with a shiver. "I shall not be able to eat my
dinner if you talk so." "Odd that Hope should say what he has said," observed Braddock
confidently to the widow. "Cockatoo comes from a cannibal island, and
doubtless has seen the consumption of human flesh. No, no, my dear lady,
do not look so alarmed. I don't think he has eaten any, as he was taken
to Queensland long before he could participate in such banquets. He is a
very decent animal." "A very dangerous one, I fancy," retorted Mrs. Jasher, who looked pale. "Only when he loses his temper, and I'm always able to suppress that
when it is at its worst. You are not eating your meat, my dear lady." "Can you wonder at it, and you talk of cannibals?" "Let us change the conversation to cereals," suggested Hope, whose
appetite was of the best--"wheat, for instance. In this queer little
village I notice the houses are divided by a field of wheat. It seems
wrong somehow for corn to be bunched up with houses." "That's old Farmer Jenkins," said Lucy vivaciously; "he owns three or
four acres near the public-house and will not allow them to be built
over, although he has been offered a lot of money. I noticed myself,
Archie, the oddity of finding a cornfield surrounded by cottages. It's
like Alice in Wonderland." "But fancy any one offering money for land here," observed Hope, toying
with his claret glass, which had just been refilled, by the attentive
Cockatoo, "at the Back-of-Beyond, as it were. I shouldn't care to live
here--the neighborhood is so desolate." "All the same you do live here!" interposed Mrs. Jasher smartly, and
with a roguish glance at Lucy. Archie caught the glance and saw the blush on Miss Kendal's face. "You have answered your question yourself, Mrs. Jasher," he--said,
smiling. "I have the inducement you hint at to remain here, and
certainly, as a landscape painter, I admire the marshes and sunsets. As
an artist and an engaged man I stop in Gartley, otherwise I should clear
out. But I fail to see why a lady of your attractions should--"

"I may have a sentimental reason also," interrupted the widow, with a
sly glance at the absent-minded Professor, who was drawing hieroglyphics
on the table-cloth with a fork; "also, my cottage is cheap and very
comfortable. The late Mr. Jasher did not leave me sufficient money to
live in London. He was a consul in China, you know, and consuls are
never very well paid. I will come in for a large income, however." "Indeed," said Lucy politely, and wondering why Mrs. Jasher was so
communicative. "Soon I hope." "It may be very soon. My brother, you know--a merchant in Pekin. He
has come home to die, and is unmarried. When he does die, I shall go to
London. But," added the widow, meditatively and glancing again at the
Professor, "I shall be sorry to leave dear Gartley. Still, the memory
of happy hours spent in this house will always remain with me. Ah me! ah
me!" and she put her handkerchief to her eyes. Lucy telegraphed to Archie that the widow was a humbug, and Archie
telegraphed back that he quite agreed with her. But the Professor, whom
the momentary silence had brought back to the present century, looked up
and asked Lucy if the dinner was finished. "I have to do some work this evening," said the Professor. "Oh, father, when you said that you would take a holiday," said Lucy
reproachfully. "I am doing so now. Look at the precious minutes I am wasting in
eating, my dear. Life is short and much remains to be done in the way
of Egyptian exploration. There is the sepulchre of Queen Tahoser. If I
could only enter that," and he sighed, while helping himself to cream. "Why don't you?" asked Mrs. Jasher, who was beginning to give up her
pursuit of Braddock, for it was no use wooing a man whose interests
centered entirely in Egyptian tombs. "I have yet to discover it," said the Professor simply; then, warming to
the congenial theme, he glanced around and delivered a short historical
lecture. "Tahoser was the chief wife and queen of a famous Pharaoh--the
Pharaoh of the Exodus, in fact." "The one who was drowned in the Red Sea?" asked Archie idly. "Why, yes--but that happened later. Before pursuing the Hebrews,--if
the Mosaic account is to be believed,--this Pharaoh marched far into
the interior of Africa,--the Libya of the ancients,--and conquered the
natives of Upper Ethiopia. Being deeply in love with his queen, he
took her with him on this expedition, and she died before the Pharaoh
returned to Memphis. From records which I discovered in the museum of
Cairo, I have reason to believe that the Pharaoh buried her with much
pomp in Ethiopia, sacrificing, I believe, many prisoners at her gorgeous
funeral rites. From the wealth of that Pharaoh--for wealthy he must have
been on account of his numerous victories--and from the love he bore
this princess, I am confident--confident," added Braddock, striking the
table vehemently, "that when discovered, her tomb will be filled with
riches, and may also contain documents of incalculable value." "And you wish to get the money?" asked Mrs. Jasher, who was rather
bored. The Professor rose fiercely. "Money! I care nothing for money. I desire
to obtain the funeral jewelry and golden masks, the precious images of
the gods, so as to place them in the British Museum. And the scrolls
of papyrus buried with the mummy of Tahoser may contain an account
of Ethiopian civilization, about which we know nothing. Oh, that
tomb,--that tomb!" Braddock began to walk the room, quite forgetting
that he had not finished his dinner. "I know the mountains whose
entrails were pierced to form the sepulchre. Were I able to go to
Africa, I am certain that I should discover the tomb. Ah, with what
glory would my name be covered, were I so fortunate!" "Why don't you go to Africa, sir, and try?" asked Hope. "Fool!" cried the Professor politely. "To fit out an expedition would
take some five thousand pounds, if not more. I would have to penetrate
through a hostile country to reach the chain of mountains I speak of,
where I know this precious tomb is to be found. I need supplies, an
escort, guns, camels, and all the rest of it. A leader must be obtained
to manage the fighting men necessary to pass through this dangerous
zone. It is no easy task to find the tomb of Tahoser. And yet if I
could--if I could only get the money," and he walked up and down with
his head bent on his breast. Mrs. Jasher was used to Braddock's vagaries by this time, and merely
continued to fan herself placidly. "I wish I could help you with the expedition," she said quietly. "I
should like to have some of that lovely Egyptian jewelry myself. But
I am quite a pauper, until my brother dies, poor man. Then--" She
hesitated. "What then?" asked Braddock, wheeling. "I shall aid you with pleasure." "It's a bargain!" Braddock stretched out his hand. "A bargain," said Mrs. Jasher, accepting the grasp somewhat nervously,
for she had not expected to be taken so readily at her word. A glance at
Lucy revealed her nervousness. "Do sit down, father, and finish your dinner," said that young lady. "I
am sure you will have more than enough to do when the mummy arrives." "Mummy--what mummy?" murmured Braddock, again beginning to eat. "The Inca mummy." "Of course. The mummy of Inca Caxas, which Sidney is bringing from
Malta. When I strip that corpse of its green bandages I shall find--"

"Find what?" asked Archie, seeing that the Professor hesitated. Braddock cast a swift look at his questioner. "I shall find the peculiar mode of Peruvian embalming," he replied
abruptly, and somehow the way in which he spoke gave Hope the impression
that the answer was an excuse. But before he could formulate the thought
that Braddock was concealing something, Mrs. Jasher spoke frivolously. "I hope your mummy has jewels," she said. "It has not," replied Braddock sharply. "So far as I know, the Inca race
never buried their dead with jewels." "But I have read in Prescott's History that they did," said Hope. "Prescott! Prescott!" cried the Professor contemptuously, "a most
unreliable authority. However, I'll promise you one thing, Hope, that if
there are any jewels, or jewelry, you shall have the lot." "Give me some, Mr. Hope," cried the widow. "I cannot," laughed Archie; "the green mummy belongs to the Professor." "I cannot accept such a gift, Hope. Owing to circumstances I have been
obliged to borrow the money from you; otherwise the mummy would have
been acquired by some one else. But when I find the tomb of Queen
Tahoser, I shall repay the loan." "You have repaid it already," said Hope, looking at Lucy. Braddock's eyes followed his gaze and his brows contracted. "Humph!" he
muttered, "I don't know if I am right in consenting to Lucy's marriage
with a pauper." "Oh, father!" cried the girl, "Archie is not a pauper." "I have enough for Lucy and me to live on," said Hope, although his face
had flushed, "and, had I been a pauper I could not have given you that
thousand pounds." "You will be repaid--you will be repaid," said Braddock, waving his hand
to dismiss the subject. "And now," he rose with a yawn, "if this tedious
feast is at an end, I shall again seek my work." Without a word of apology to the disgusted Mrs. Jasher, he trotted to
the door, and there paused. "By the way, Lucy," he said, turning, "I had a letter to-day from
Random. He returns in his yacht to Pierside in two or three days. In
fact, his arrival will coincide with that of The Diver." "I don't see what his arrival has to do with me," said Lucy tartly. "Oh, nothing at all--nothing at all," said Braddock airily, "only I
thought--that is, but never mind, never mind. Cockatoo, come down with
me. Good night! Good night!" and he disappeared. "Well," said Mrs. Jasher, drawing along breath, "for rudeness and
selfishness, commend me to a scientist. We might be all mud, for what
notice he takes of us." "Never mind," said Miss Kendal, rising, "come to the drawing-room and
have some music. Archie, will you stop here?" "No. I don't care to sit over my wine alone," said that young gentleman,
rising. "I shall accompany you and Mrs. Jasher. And Lucy," he stopped
her at the door, through which the widow had already passed, "what did
your father mean by his hints concerning Random?" "I think he regrets giving his consent to my marriage with you," she
whispered back. "Did you not hear him talk about that tomb? He desires
to get money for the expedition." "From Random? What rubbish! Sooner than that--if our marriage is stopped
by the beastly business--I'll sell out and--"

"You'll do nothing of the sort," interrupted the girl imperiously; "we
must live if we marry. You have given my father enough." "But if Random lends money for this expedition?" "He does so at his own risk. I am not going to marry Sir Frank because
of my step-father's requirements. He has no rights over me, and, whether
he consents or not, I marry you." "My darling!" and Archie kissed her before they followed Mrs. Jasher
into the drawing-room. All the same, he foresaw trouble. CHAPTER IV. THE UNEXPECTED


For the next two or three days, Archie felt decidedly, worried over
his projected marriage with Lucy. Certainly he had--to put it
bluntly--purchased Braddock's consent, and that gentleman could scarcely
draw back from his plighted word, which had cost the lover so much. Nevertheless, Hope did not entirely, trust the Professor, as, from the
few words which he had let drop at the dinner party, it was plain that
he hankered after money with which to fit out the expedition in search
of the mysterious tomb to which he had alluded. Archie knew, as did the
Professor, that he could not supply the necessary five thousand pounds
without practically ruining himself, and already he had crippled his
resources in paying over the price of the green mummy. He had fondly
believed that Braddock would have been satisfied with the relic of
Peruvian humanity; but it seemed that the Professor, having got what he
wanted, now clamored for what was at present beyond his reach. The mummy
was his property, but he desired the contents of Queen Tahoser's tomb
also. This particular moon, which he cried for, was a very expensive
article, and Hope did not see how he could gain it. Unless--and here came in the cause of Archie's worry--unless the five
thousand pounds was borrowed from Sir Frank Random, the Professor would
have to content himself with the Maltese mummy. But from what the young
man had seen of Braddock's longing for the especial sepulchre, which
he desired to loot, he believed that the scientist would not readily
surrender his whim. Random could easily lend or give the money, since he
was extremely rich, and extremely generous, but it was improbable that
he would aid Braddock without a quid pro quo. As the sole desire of the
baronet's heart was to make Lucy his wife, it could easily be guessed
that he would only assist the Professor to realize his ambition on
condition that the savant used his influence with his step-daughter. That meant the breaking of the engagement with Hope and the marriage
of the girl to the soldier. Of course such a state of things would make
Lucy unhappy; but Braddock cared very little for that. To gratify his
craze for Egyptian research, he would be willing to sacrifice a dozen
girls like Lucy. Undoubtedly Lucy would refuse to be passed along from one man to another
like a bale of goods, and Archie knew that, so far as in her lay, she
would keep to her engagement, especially as she denied Braddock's right
to dispose of her hand. All the same, the Professor, in spite of
his cherubical looks, could make himself extremely disagreeable, and
undoubtedly would do so if thwarted. The sole course that remained,
should Braddock begin operations to break the present engagement, would
be to marry Lucy at once. Archie would willingly have done so, but
pecuniary difficulties stood in the way. He had never told any one of
these, not even the girl he loved, but they existed all the same. For
many years he had been assisting needy relatives, and thus had hampered
himself, in spite of his income. By sheer force of will, so as to force
Braddock into giving him Lucy, he had contrived to secure the necessary
thousand pounds, without confusing the arrangements he had made to pay
off certain debts connected with his domestic philanthropy; but this
brought him to the end of his resources. In six months he hoped to
be free to have his income entirely to himself, and then--small as it
was--he could support a wife. But until the half year elapsed he could
see no chance of marrying Lucy with any degree of comfort, and meanwhile
she would be exposed to the persecutions of the Professor. Perhaps
persecutions is too harsh a word, as Braddock was kind enough to the
girl. Nevertheless, he was pertinacious in gaining his aims where his
pet hobby was concerned, and undoubtedly, could he see any chance of
obtaining the money from Random by selling his step-daughter, he
would do so. Assuredly it was dishonorable to act in this way, but the
Professor was a scientific Jesuit, and deemed that the end justified the
means, when any glory to himself and gain to the British Museum was in
question. "But I may be doing him an injustice," said Archie, when he was
explaining his fears to Miss Kendal on the third day after the dinner
party. "After all, the Professor is a gentleman, and will probably hold
to the bargain which he has made." "I don't care whether he does or not," cried Lucy, who had a fine color
and a certain amount of fire in her eyes. "I am not going to be bought
and sold to forward these nasty scientific schemes. My father can say
what he likes and do what he likes, but I marry you--to-morrow if you
like." "That's just it," said Archie, flushing, "we can't marry." "Why?" she asked, much astonished. Hope looked at the ground and drew patterns with his cane-point in the
sand. They were seated in the hot sunshine--for the Indian summer still
continued--under a moldering brick wall, which ran around the most
delightful of kitchen gardens. This was situated at the back of the
Pyramids, and contained a multiplicity of pot herbs and fruit trees and
vegetables. It resembled the Fairy Garden in Madame D'Alnoy's story
of The White Cat, and in the autumn yielded a plentiful crop of
fine-flavored fruit. But now the trees were bare and the garden looked
somewhat forlorn for lack of greenery. But in spite of the lateness of
the season, Lucy often brought a book to read under the glowing wall,
and there ripened like a peach in the warm sunshine. On this occasion
she brought Archie into the old-world garden, as he had hinted at
confidences. And the time had come to speak plainly, as Hope began to
think that he had not treated Lucy quite fairly in hiding from her his
momentarily embarrassed position. "Why can't we marry at once?" asked Lucy, seeing that her lover held his
peace and looked confused. Hope did not reply directly. "I had better release you from your
engagement," he said haltingly. "Oh!" Lucy's nostrils dilated and she threw back her head scornfully. "And the other woman's name?" "There is no other woman. I love you and you only. But--money." "What about money? You have your income!" "Oh yes--that is sure, small as it is. But I have incurred debts on
behalf of an uncle and his family. These have embarrassed me for the
moment, and so I cannot see my way to marrying you for at least six
months, Lucy." He caught her hand. "I feel ashamed of myself that I
did not tell you of this before. But I feared to lose you. Yet, on
reflection, I see that it is dishonorable to keep you in the dark, and
if you think that I have behaved badly--"

"Well, I do in a way," she interrupted quickly, "as your silence was
quite unnecessary. Don't treat me as a doll, my dear. I wish to share
your troubles as well as your joys. Come, tell me all about it." "You are not angry?" "Yes, I am--at your thinking I loved you so little as to be biased
against our marriage because of money troubles. Pooh!" she flicked away
a speck of dust from his coat, "I don't care that for such things." "You are an angel," he cried ardently. "I am a very practical girl just now," she retorted. "Go on, confess!" Archie, thus encouraged, did so, and it was a very mild confession that
she heard, involving a great deal of unnecessary sacrifice in helping
a pauper uncle. Hope strove to belittle his good deeds as much as
possible, but Lucy saw plainly the good heart that had dictated the
giving up of his small income for some years. When in possession of all
the facts, she threw her arms around his neck and kissed him. "You are a silly old boy," she whispered. "As if what you tell me could
make any difference to me!" "But we can't be married for six months, dearest." "Of course not. Do you believe that I as a woman can gather together my
trousseau under six months? No, my dear. We must not marry in haste to
repent at leisure. In another half year you will enjoy your own income,
and then we can marry." "But meanwhile," said Archie, after kissing her, "the Professor will
bother you to marry Random." "Oh no. He has sold me to you for one thousand pounds. There! There, do
not say a single word. I am only teasing you. Let us say that my father
has consented to my marriage with you, and cannot withdraw his word. Not
that I care if he does. I am my own mistress." "Lucy!" --he took her hands again and looked into her eyes--"Braddock
is a scientific lunatic, and would do anything to forward his aims
with regard to this very expensive tomb, which he has set his heart on
discovering. As I can't lend or give the money, he is sure to apply to
Random, and Random--"

"Will want to marry me," cried Lucy, rising. "No, my dear, not at all. Sir Frank is a gentleman, and when he learns that I am engaged to you,
he will simply become a dear friend. There, don't worry any more about
the matter. You ought to have told me of your troubles before, but as
I have forgiven you, there is no more to be said. In six months I
shall become Mrs. Hope, and meanwhile I can hold my own against any
inconvenience that my father may cause me." "But--" He rose and began to remonstrate, anxious to abase himself still
further before this angel of a maiden. She placed her hand over his mouth. "Not another word, or I shall box
your ears, sir--that is, I shall exercise the privilege of a wife before
I become one. And now," she slipped her arm within his, "let us go in
and see the arrival of the precious mummy." "Oh, it has arrived then." "Not here exactly. My father expects it at three o'clock." "It is now a quarter to," said Archie, consulting his watch. "As I have
been to London all yesterday I did not know that The Diver had arrived
at Pierside, How is Bolton?" Lucy wrinkled her brows. "I am rather worried over Sidney," she said in
an anxious voice, "and so is my father. He had not appeared." "What do you mean by that?" "Well," she looked at the ground in a pondering manner, "my father got
a letter from Sidney yesterday afternoon, saying that the ship with the
mummy and himself on board had arrived about four o'clock. The letter
was sent on by special messenger and came at six." "Then it arrived in the evening and not in the afternoon?" "How particular you are!" said Miss Kendal, with a shrug. "Well, then,
Sidney said that he could not bring the mummy to this place last night
as it was so late. He intended--so he told my father in the letter--to
remove the case containing the mummy ashore to an inn near the wharf at
Pierside, and there would remain the night so as to take care of it." "That's all right," said Hope, puzzled. "Where's your difficulty?" "A note came from the landlord of the inn this morning, saying that by
direction of Mr. Bolton--that is Sidney, you know--he was sending the
mummy in its case to Gartley on a lorry, and that it would arrive at
three o'clock this afternoon." "Well?" asked Hope, still puzzled. "Well?" she rejoined impatiently. "Can't you see show strange it is
that Sidney should let the mummy out of his sight, after guarding it so
carefully not only from Malta to England, but all the night in Pierside
at that hotel? Why doesn't he bring the mummy here himself, and come on
with the lorry?" "There is no explanation--no letter from Sidney Bolton?" "None. He wrote yesterday, as I stated, saying that he would keep the
case in the hotel, and send it on this morning." "Did he use the word `send,' or the word `bring'?" "He said 'send.'" "Then that shows he did not intend to bring it himself." "But why should he not do so?" "I daresay he will explain when he appears." "I am very sorry for him when he does appear," said Lucy seriously, "for
my father is furious. Why, this precious mummy, for which so much has
been paid, might have been lost." "Pooh! Who would steal a thing like that?" "A thing like that is worth nearly one thousand pounds," said Lucy in a
dry tone, "and if anyone got wind of it, stealing would be easy, since
Sidney, as appears likely, has sent on the case unguarded." "Well, let us go in and see if Sidney arrives with the case." They passed out of the garden and sauntered round to the front of the
house. There, standing in the roadway, they beheld a ponderous lorry
with a rough-looking driver standing at the horses' heads. The front
door of the house was open, so the mummy case had apparently arrived
before its time, and had been taken to Braddock's museum while they were
chatting in the kitchen garden. "Did Mr. Bolton come with the case?" asked Lucy, leaning over the
railings and addressing the driver. "No one came, miss, except myself and my two mates, who have taken the
case indoor." The driver jerked a coarse thumb over his shoulder. "Was Mr. Bolton at the hotel, where the case remained for the night?" "No, miss--that is, I dunno who Mr. Bolton is. The landlord of the
Sailor's Rest told me and my mates to take the case to this here house,
and we done it. That's all I know, miss." "Strange," murmured Lucy, walking to the front door. "What do you think,
Archie? Isn't it strange?" Hope nodded. "But I daresay Bolton will explain his absence," said he,
following her. "He will arrive in time to open the mummy case along with
the Professor." "I hope so," said Miss Kendal, who looked much perplexed. "I can't
understand Sidney abandoning the case, when it might so easily have
been stolen. Come in and see my father, Archie," and she passed into the
house, followed by the young man, whose curiosity was now aroused. As
they entered the door, the two men who had taken in the case blundered
out and shortly drove away on the lorry towards Jessum railway station. In the museum they found Braddock purple with rage and swearing
vigorously. He was staring at a large packing case, which had been set
up on end against the wall, while beside him crouched Cockatoo, holding
chisels and hammers and wedges necessary to open the treasure trove. "So the precious mummy has arrived, father," said Lucy, who saw that the
Professor was furious. "Are you not pleased?" "Pleased! pleased!" shouted the angry man of science. "How can I be
pleased when I see how badly the case has been treated? See how it
has been bruised and battered and shaken! I'll have an action against
Captain Hervey of The Diver if my mummy has been injured. Sidney should
have taken better care of so precious an object." "What does he say?" asked Archie, glancing round the museum to see if
the delinquent had arrived. "Say!" shouted Braddock again, and snatching a chisel from Cockatoo. "Oh, what can he say when he is not here?" "Not here?" said Lucy, more and more surprised at the unaccountable
absence of Braddock's assistant. "Where is he, then?" "I don't know. I wish I did; I'd have him arrested for neglecting to
watch over this case. As it is, when he comes back I'll dismiss him from
my employment. He can go back to his infernal laundry work along with
his old witch of a mother." "But why hasn't Bolton come back, sir?" asked Hope sharply. Braddock struck a furious blow at the head of the chisel which he had
inserted into the case. "I want to know that. He brought the case to the Sailor's Rest, and
should have come on with it this morning. Instead of doing so, he tells
the landlord--a most unreliable man--to send it on. And my precious
mummy--the mummy that has cost nine hundred pounds," cried Braddock,
working furiously, and battering the chisel as though it were Bolton's
head, "is left to be stolen by any scientific thief that comes along." While the Professor, assisted by Cockatoo, loosened the lid of the
packing case, a mild voice was heard at the door. Lucy turned, as did
Archie, to see Widow Anne curtseying on the threshold of the door. Braddock himself took no notice of her entrance, being occupied with his
task, and even while doing it swore scientifically under his breath. He was furious against Bolton for neglect of duty, and Hope rather
sympathized with him. It was a serious matter to have left a valuable
object like the green mummy to the rough care of laborers. "I beg your pardon, my lady," whimpered Widow Anne, who looked more lean
and rusty and dismal than ever; "but has my Sid come? I saw the cart and
the coffin. Where's my boy?" "Coffin! coffin!" bellowed Braddock angrily between thunder blows. "What
do you mean by calling this case a coffin?" "Well, it do hold one of them camphorated corps, sir," said Mrs. Bolton
with another curtsey. "My boy Sid told me as much, afore he went to them
furren parts." "Have you seen him since he returned?" questioned Lucy, while Braddock
and Cockatoo strained at the lid, now nearly off. "Why, I ain't set eyes on him," moaned the widow dismally, "and summat
tells me as I never will." "Don't talk rubbish, woman," said Archie tartly, for he did not wish
Lucy to be upset again by this ancient ghoul. "Woman indeed, sir. I'd have you know,--oh!" the widow jumped and
quavered as the lid of the packing case fell on the floor with a bang. "Oh lor, sir, the start you did give me!" But Braddock had no eyes for her, and no ears for anyone. He pulled
lustily at the straw packing, and soon the floor was littered with
rubbish. But no green case appeared, and no mummy. Suddenly Widow Anne
shrieked again. "There's my Sid--dead--oh, my son, dead! dead!" She spoke truly. The body of Sidney Bolton was before them. CHAPTER V. MYSTERY


After that one cry of agony from Widow Anne, there was silence for
quite one minute. The terrible contents of the packing case startled
and terrified all present. Faint and white, Lucy clung to the arm of
her lover to keep herself from sinking to the ground, as Mrs. Bolton had
done. Archie stared at the grotesque rigidity of the body, as though he
had been changed into stone, while Professor Braddock stared likewise,
scarcely able to credit the evidence of his eyes. Only the Kanaka was
unmoved and squatted on his hams, indifferently surveying the living
and the dead. As a savage he could not be expected to have the nerves of
civilized man. Braddock, who had dropped chisel and hammer in the first movement of
surprise, was the quickest to recover his powers of speech. The sole
question he asked, revealed the marvelous egotism of a scientist,
nominated by one idea. "Where is the mummy of Inca Caxas?" he murmured
with a bewildered air. Widow Anne, groveling on the floor, pulled her gray locks into wild
confusion, and uttered a cry of mingled rage and grief. "He asks that? he asks that?" she cried, stammering and choking, "when he has murdered
my poor boy Sid." "What's that?" demanded Braddock sharply, and recovering from a
veritable stupor, which the disappearance of the mummy and the sight of
his dead assistant had thrown him into. "Kill your son: how could I
kill your son? What advantage would it have been to me had I killed your
son?" "God knows! God knows!" sobbed the old woman, "but you--"

"Mrs. Bolton, you are raving," said Hope hastily, and strove to raise
her from the floor. "Let Miss Kendal take you away. And you go, Lucy:
this sight is too terrible for your eyes." Lucy, inarticulate with nervous fear, nodded and tottered towards the
door of the museum; but Widow Anne refused to be lifted to her feet. "My boy is dead," she wailed; "my boy Sid is a corp as I saw him in my
dream. In the coffin, too, cut to pieces--"

"Rubbish! rubbish!" interrupted Braddock, peering into the depths of the
packing case. "I can see no wound." Mrs. Bolton leaped to her feet with an agility surprising in so aged a
woman. "Let me find the wound," she screamed, throwing herself forward. Hope caught her back and forced her towards the door. "No! The body must
not be disturbed until the police see it," he said firmly. "The police--ah, yes, the police," remarked Braddock quickly, "we must
send for the police to Pierside and tell them my mummy has been stolen." "That my boy has been murdered," screeched Widow Anne, waving her skinny
arms, and striving to break from Archie. "You wicked old devil to kill
my darling Sid. If he hadn't gone to them furren parts he wouldn't be a
corp now. But I'll have the lawr: you'll be hanged, you--you--"

Braddock lost his patience under this torrent of unjust accusations and
rushed towards Mrs. Bolton, dragging Cockatoo by the arm. In less time
than it takes to tell, he had swept both Archie and the widow out into
the hall, where Lucy was trembling, and Cockatoo, by his master's order,
was locking the door. "Not a thing shall be touched until the police come. Hope, you are, a
witness that I have not meddled with the dead: you were present when
I opened the packing case: you have seen that a useless body has been
substituted for a valuable mummy. And yet this old witch dares--dares--"
Braddock stamped and grew incoherent from sheer rage. Archie soothed him, leaving go of Widow Anne's arm to do so. "Hush! hush!" said the young man quietly, "the poor woman does not know what
she is saying. I'll go for the police and--"

"No," interrupted the Professor sharply; "Cockatoo can go for the
inspector of Pierside. I shall call in the village constable. Meanwhile you keep the key of the museum," he dropped it into Hope's
breast-pocket, "so that you and the police may be sure the body has
not been touched. Widow Anne, go home," he turned angrily on the old
creature, who was now trembling after her burst of rage, "and don't dare
to come here again until you ask pardon for what you have said." "I want to be near my poor boy's corp," wailed Widow Anne, "and I'm very
sorry, Perfesser. I didn't mean to--"

"But you have, you witch. Go away!" and he stamped. But by this time Lucy had recovered her self-possession, which had been
sorely shaken by the sight of the dead. "Leave her to me," she observed,
taking Mrs. Bolton's arm, and leading her towards the stairs. "I shall
take her to my room and give her some brandy. Father, you must make some
allowance for her natural grief, and--"

Braddock stamped again. "Take her away! take her away!" he cried
testily, "and keep her out of my sight. Is it not enough to have lost
an invaluable assistant, and a costly mummy of infinite historical
and archaeological value, without my being accused of--of--oh!" The
Professor choked with rage and shook his hand in the air. Seeing that he was unable to speak, Lucy seized the opportunity of the
lull in the storm, and hurried the old woman, sobbing and moaning, up
the stairs. By this time the shrieks of Mrs. Bolton, and the wordy
wrath of Braddock, had drawn the cook and her husband, along with the
housemaid, from the basement to the ground floor. The sight of their
surprised faces only added to their master's anger, and he advanced
furiously. "Go downstairs again: go down, I tell you!" "But if there's anything wrong, sir," ventured the gardener timidly. "Everything is wrong. My mummy has been lost: Mr. Bolton has been
murdered. The police are coming, and--and--" He choked again. But the servants waited to hear no more. The mere mention of the words
"murder" and "police" sent them, pale-faced and startled, down to the
basement, where they huddled like a flock of sheep. Braddock looked
around for Hope, but found that he had opened the front door, and had
vanished. But he was too distracted to think why Archie had gone, and
there was much to do in putting things straight. Beckoning to Cockatoo,
he stalked into a side room, and scribbled a pencil note to the
inspector of police at Pierside, telling him of what had happened, and
asking him to come at once to the Pyramids with his underlings. This
communication he dispatched by Cockatoo, who flew to get his bicycle. In a short time he was riding at top speed to Brefort, which was on this
side of the river; facing Pierside. There he could ferry across to the
town and deliver his terrible message. Having done all that he could until the police came, Braddock walked out
of the front door and into the roadway to see if Archie was in sight. He
could not see the young man, but, as luck would have it, and by one of
those coincidences which are much more common than is suspected, he saw
the Gartley doctor walking briskly past. "Hi!" shouted the Professor, who was purple in the face and perspiring
profusely. "Hi, there, Dr. Robinson! I want you. Come! come! hurry, man,
hurry!" he ended in a testy rage, and the doctor, knowing Braddock's
eccentricities, advanced with a smile. He was a slim, dark, young
medical practitioner with an amiable countenance, which argued of no
mighty intelligence. "Well, Professor," he remarked quietly, "do you want me to attend you
for apoplexy? Take your time, my dear sir--take your time." He patted
the scientist on the shoulder to soothe his clamorous rage. "You are
already purple in the face. Don't let your blood rush to your head." "Robinson, you're a--a--a fool!" shouted Braddock, glaring at the suave
looks of the doctor. "I am in perfect health, damn you, sir." "Then Miss Kendal--?" "She is quite well also. But Bolton--?" "Oh!" Robinson looked interested. "Has he returned with your mummy?" "Mummy," bellowed Braddock, stamping like an insane Cupid--"the mummy
hasn't arrived." "Really, Professor, you surprise me," said the doctor mildly. "I'll surprise you more," growled Braddock, dragging Robinson into the
garden and up the steps. "Gently! gently! my dear sir," said the doctor, who really began to
think that much learning had made the Professor mad. "Didn't Bolton--?" "Bolton is dead, you fool." "Dead!" The doctor nearly tumbled backward down the steps. "Murdered. At least I think he is murdered. At all events he arrived
here to-day in the packing case, which should have contained my green
mummy. Come in and examine the body at once. No," Braddock pushed back
the doctor just as fiercely as he had dragged him forward, "wait until
the constable comes. I want him to see the body first, and to observe
that nothing has been touched. 