



Produced by Cindy Horton, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.) THE

                            FILM OF FEAR



                                BY

                         ARNOLD FREDERICKS



                            AUTHOR OF

                     THE IVORY SNUFF BOX, ETC. WITH FRONTISPIECE BY

                            WILL FOSTER




                              NEW YORK

                          GROSSET & DUNLAP

                             PUBLISHERS

                        COPYRIGHT, 1917, BY

                        W. J. WATT & COMPANY




THE FILM OF FEAR




PART I




CHAPTER I


Ruth Morton finished her cup of coffee, brushed a microscopic crumb from
her embroidered silk kimono, pushed back her loosely arranged brown
hair, and resumed the task of opening her mail. It was in truth a task, and one that consumed an inordinate amount of
her valuable time. And her time was extremely valuable. Computed upon
the basis of her weekly salary of one thousand dollars, it figured out
just $142.85 per day, or very nearly $6 per hour, or 10 cents per
minute, for each minute and hour of the twenty-four. As a motion picture
star, she had the satisfaction of knowing that she was paid a slightly
larger salary than had been, until recently, received by the President
of the United States. The opening of the huge batch of letters that greeted her daily across
her dainty breakfast table was very much of a duty. It was not that she
felt any keen interest in the numberless notes from admirers, both male
and female, from Portland, Me., to Los Angeles, Cal., to say nothing of
South Bend, Opeloosa and Kicking Horse between. These might readily have
been consigned to the depths of the wastebasket unopened, unread. But
there was always the chance that, intermingled with this mass of
adulation, there might be a real letter, from a real friend, or a
business communication of importance from some picture company possibly,
prepared to offer her two thousand dollars per week, instead of one
thousand, at the expiration of her present contract. So the mail had to
be carefully opened, at least, even if the bulk of it was tossed aside
unread. Her mother usually assisted her in this daily task, but to-day Mrs.
Morton, oppressed by a slight attack of indigestion, slept late, and
Ruth proceeded with the operation alone. She was a singularly attractive girl, combining a wholesome and quite
unassumed innocence with a certain measure of sophistication, gained by
daily contact with the free and easy life of the studios. Her brown eyes
were large and wondering, as though she still found it difficult to
realize that within four years she had stepped from comparative poverty
to the possession of an income which a duke or a prince might readily
have envied. Her features, pleasing, regular, somewhat large, gave to
her that particular type of beauty which lends itself best to the
eccentricities of the camera. Her figure, graceful, well modeled, with
the soft roundness of youth, enabled her to wear with becoming grace
almost any costume, from the simple frock of the school girl to the
costly gowns of the woman of fashion. Add to this a keen intelligence
and a delightful vivacity of manner, and the reason for Ruth Morton's
popularity among motion picture "fans" from coast to coast was at once
apparent. She sat in the handsomely appointed dining-room of the apartment on
Fifty-seventh Street which she and her mother had occupied for the past
two years. The room, paneled in dull ivory, provided a perfect setting
for the girl's unusual beauty. In her kimono of Nile green and gold, she
presented a figure of such compelling charm that Nora, her maid, as she
removed the empty coffee-cup, sighed to herself, if not with envy, at
least with regret, that the good God had not made _her_ along lines that
would insure an income of over fifty thousand dollars a year. Ruth sliced open half a dozen more letters with her ivory paper knife
and prepared to drop them into the waste basket. One was from a
manufacturer of cold cream, soliciting a testimonial. Two others were
from ungrammatical school girls, asking her how they should proceed, in
order to become motion picture stars. Another was an advertisement of a
new automobile. The fifth requested an autographed picture of herself. She swept the five over the edge of the table with a sigh of relief. How
stupid of all these people, she thought, to take up their time, and her
own, so uselessly. The sixth letter, from its external appearance, might readily have been
of no greater interest than the other five, and yet, something
intangible about it caused her to pause for a moment before inserting
the point of the knife beneath the flap of the envelope. It was a large
envelope, square, formal-looking. The address upon it was typewritten. Unlike the majority of the other letters, forwarded from the studio, it
bore the street and number of the apartment house in which she lived. The envelope was postmarked New York, and was sealed with a splotch of
black sealing wax, which, however, contained the imprint of no monogram
or seal, but was crossed both vertically and horizontally by a series of
fine parallel lines, dividing its surface into minute squares. Ruth observed these several peculiarities of the letter she was about to
open, with growing interest. The usual run of her correspondence was so
dull and uninteresting that anything out of the ordinary was apt to
attract her attention. Slipping the ivory blade of the paper knife
quickly beneath the flap of the envelope, she cut it open. The letter within, written on the same heavy paper as that composing the
envelope, contained but three typewritten lines. It was not these,
however, that instantly attracted Ruth's attention, but the signature
appended to them. This signature did not consist of a name, but of an
astonishing seal, imprinted upon a bit of the same black sealing wax
with which the envelope had been fastened. And the device, as Ruth bent
over it to make out its clearcut but rather fine lines, filled her with
a sudden and overwhelming dismay. It was a grinning death's head, about half an inch in width, with
eye-sockets staring vacantly, and grisly mouth gaping in a wide and
horrible smile, made the more horrible by the two rows of protruding
teeth. The girl almost dropped the letter, as full realization of the
significance of the design swept over her. Hastily she recovered herself, and with trembling fingers raised the
letter from her lap. The three typewritten lines upon the sheet were, if
anything, more horrifying than the device beneath them. "Your beauty has
made you rich and famous," the letter read. "Without it you could do
nothing. Within thirty days it shall be destroyed, and you will be
hideous." For a long time Ruth sat gazing at the words before her. In spite of
their ghastly significance she could with difficulty bring herself to
believe that she had an enemy in the world sufficiently ruthless,
sufficiently envious of her beauty and her success, to be capable of
either threatening her in this brutal way, or of carrying such a threat
into execution. So far as she knew, there was not a single person of all
her acquaintance who wished her ill. Her own nature was too sweet, too
sympathetic, too free from malice and bitterness, to conceive for a
moment that the very charms which had brought her fame, success, might
also be the means of bringing her envy and hatred in like proportion. She cast about in her mind for some possible, some reasonable
explanation of the matter, but try as she would, she was unable to think
of anyone with whom she had ever come in contact, capable of threatening
her in this terrible way. She had about decided that the whole thing
must be some stupidly conceived practical joke, when she saw her mother
cross the hall and come into the room. Mrs. Harriet Morton was a woman of fifty, handsome and youthful in spite
of her gray hair, her years. That she had once been extremely
good-looking could have been told at a glance; anyone seeing mother and
daughter together experienced no difficulty in determining the source of
Ruth Morton's charms. "Well, dear," said the older woman, with a pleasant smile. "Haven't you
finished your letters yet?" She glanced toward the clock on the mantel. "You'll have to leave for the studio in half an hour." Ruth nodded,
gazing at her mother rather uneasily. "You'll have to open the rest of them, mother," she said, indicating the
pile of letters. "I--I'm tired." Mrs. Morton came up to her daughter and passed her hand over the girl's
glossy hair. "What's wrong, Ruth? You look as though something had frightened you." Then her eyes fell upon the letter lying in the girl's lap, and she
paused suddenly. Ruth handed her mother the sheet of paper. "I--I just got this," she said, simply. Mrs. Morton took the letter quickly from her daughter's hand and
proceeded to read it. A look of apprehension crept into her eyes, but
she did her best to appear unconcerned. "Some crank," she said, after she had mastered the sudden fear that
swept over her. "I shouldn't pay any attention to it, if I were you, my
dear. There are a lot of people in the world that have nothing better to
do, than play silly jokes like that." "Then you don't think it amounts to anything?" Ruth asked, somewhat
relieved. "Certainly not. Just a stupid plan to frighten you. Pay no attention to
it. No"--she folded the letter as the girl put out her hand--"I'll take
charge of this. Now you'd better hurry and get ready. The car will be
waiting for you at nine, and Mr. Edwards expects to start that new
picture to-day, doesn't he?" "Yes." The girl rose. "It's a beautiful part. I'm the daughter of an old
music teacher, who dies in Brooklyn, and leaves me in poverty. And later
on, it turns out he was the heir to the throne of Moravia, and I'm a
princess. Lots of adventures, and spies, and all that. Ralph Turner is
the lover. He's awfully good-looking, don't you think?" Mrs. Morton assented in rather a preoccupied way, as her daughter left
the room. She was still thinking of the brutal threat which the girl had
just received, and of the possible dangers to which she might as a
result be exposed. Mrs. Morton by no means felt the matter to be a joke,
in spite of the assurances she had given Ruth. The tone of the letter,
the evident care which had been taken to prevent the identity of the
writer from becoming known, filled her with the gravest alarm. As she sat pondering the matter, Nora came into the room, with Ruth's
dust coat and parasol in her hands. Mrs. Morton beckoned to the girl,
then spoke to her in a low voice. "Nora," she said, "Miss Ruth received a letter this morning, from
somebody who is envious of her beauty and success. I pretended to make
light of the matter, but there may be something back of it. I want you
to watch her carefully while you are away from the house. Be on your
guard every moment of the time. Don't let anyone come near her. They
might try to throw acid, or something of the sort. I shan't feel safe
until she is home again." The maid's face lit up with a significant smile. From her manner it was
clear that she fairly worshiped her young mistress. "I'll not let anyone do her any harm, Mrs. Morton," she said, earnestly. "You may be sure of that." "And don't let her know," Mrs. Morton added hastily, in a low voice, as
she saw Ruth come to the door, "that I am at all worried. She must not
have a threat like that on her mind." The maid nodded, then turned toward the door where Ruth stood. "Well, mother, good-by," the latter exclaimed with a laugh. "You can
open all the rest of the letters, and if you come across any more like
that last one, please keep them. I think I'll begin a collection." Mrs. Morton forced herself to join in the girl's laughter. "There won't be any more, dear," she said, kissing the girl fondly. "Don't bother your head about such things. They're not worth it. And
come home as soon as you get through." "All right, mother. We're going to the theater to-night, aren't we? Don't forget to get the tickets." With a smile she left the room, and a
few moments later Mrs. Morton heard the rumble of the descending
elevator. She sat in silence for a long time, thinking, a great fear clutching at
her heart. Her life, she reflected, had held, until recently, but little
of happiness. The long, weary days of poverty, when her husband,
incapacitated by a paralytic stroke, had seen his savings slowly dwindle
away; the death of her son, and then that of Mr. Morton himself passed
before her mental vision. Only Ruth had been left to her, and in the
girl's happiness and success lay Mrs. Morton's whole life and being. Now, that things had at last taken a turn, and the future seemed clear
and assured ahead of her, was some dreadful tragedy to change all her
joy to sorrow? She turned to the pile of still unopened letters with a
sigh, afraid, almost to proceed with the task of reading them. Yet, an
hour later, when they had all been disposed of without further threats
against Ruth having been discovered, she breathed more easily. Perhaps,
after all, the horrible letter was merely a silly joke. She took it out
and examined it again with the greatest care, but no clue to the
identity of the writer rewarded her scrutiny. The message remained
clear, terrible, full of sinister meaning. "_Within thirty days it shall
be destroyed, and you will be hideous!_" The grinning death's head seal
stared up at her, fascinatingly horrible. Mrs. Morton quickly placed the
letter in her bosom. Rising, she left the room, and proceeded to that occupied by Ruth. It
pleased her, notwithstanding the servants, to take care of it herself. Mrs. Morton was passionately devoted to her beautiful daughter. In her,
the sun rose and set. She glanced about the daintily furnished room with a smile. The
appointments were simple, almost girlish, in spite of their owner's
large salary. Mrs. Morton began to set the room to rights. She had
finished making the bed, and had gone over to the dressing table to
arrange the articles upon it, when a square of white upon the floor
attracted her attention. It lay upon the rug in front of the dressing table, and appeared to be a
letter of some sort. Supposing it to be something that the girl had dropped in the hurry of
leaving, Mrs. Morton stooped and picked it up. Then a queer feeling of
dismay came over her. The large square white envelope, the typewritten
address, bore a singular and disquieting resemblance to the one in which
the threatening letter had been received so short a time before. With trembling hands, Mrs. Morton tore the envelope open and removed the
folded sheet of paper within. When her eyes fell upon the contents of
the latter, she shuddered, and stood white with fear. There was a message in typewritten characters upon the sheet, and Mrs.
Morton read it with a groan of despair. "_Only twenty-nine days more!_" the message said. "We shall not fail." Below the words grinned the frightful death's head seal. CHAPTER II


Mrs. Harriet Morton was a courageous woman, but when she read the second
threat against her daughter, she was filled with instant indignation and
horror. The thing was so appallingly mysterious, so utterly without
reasonable explanation. Ruth had left the room but a few moments before. Certainly the letter
was not upon the floor then. The maid, Nora, had gone with her. That
removed her from any suspicion, even had such a thought been reasonable
or possible, and Mrs. Morton felt it was not. The only other person in
the apartment was Mary, their old cook, a negro from the south, who had
been a faithful and patient member of the Morton household for over ten
years. That she could have had a hand in placing this mysterious message
in Ruth's bedroom seemed incredible, not to be entertained for a moment. And yet, there was the message, appallingly simple, direct, threatening. "_Only twenty-nine days more!_" Mrs. Morton shuddered. She glanced about the room. How had the letter come there? Certainly not
by means of the door. Yet it seemed equally out of the question that it
could have been brought in through one of the windows. There were two in the room, one facing to the front, and opening upon a
court, the other in the rear, overlooking the yards of the houses on the
next street. She went to the front window, which was raised only a few
inches, and gazed out. Below her stretched the wide court, flanked on one hand by the side of
the apartment building, on the other by the blank wall of an adjoining
house. The latter was some ten feet from where she stood, and _there
were no windows in it_! She turned to the window at the other side of
the room. Here a fire escape led down to an alley at the rear of the building. Could it have been in this way that the letter had been delivered? The
thing seemed impossible. Not only was the window closed, but she knew
that the ladders did not reach all the way to the ground, the last
section being pulled up, to be dropped only in case of fire. With a
mystified look she returned to the center of the room. The letter grinned at her from the dresser, on which she had left it. Ruth must never hear of the matter, she knew. Taking it up, she placed
it in the bosom of her dress along with the one which had arrived
earlier in the day. Then she sat down to decide what she had best do
next. To trifle with so dangerous a situation was no longer to be thought of. One message, the first, might have been a foolish joke. The second
proved that the danger threatening her daughter was real, imminent. At first she thought of placing the matter in the hands of the postal
authorities, but would they, she wondered, concern themselves with
threats delivered in other ways than by mail? This second message had
not come through any such channels. In desperation she put on her hat,
placed the two letters in her handbag and set out to seek the advice of
one of her oldest and best friends. Her purpose took her to a private banking house in Broad Street, upon
the wide entrance doors of which was inscribed the name John Stapleton &
Co. She asked to see Mr. Stapleton. John Stapleton was a man of wealth
and influence in the financial world, and Mrs. Morton's husband had at
one time been one of his most trusted employees. Now that Ruth had
become to some extent a capitalist, it was to Mr. Stapleton that the
care of her savings had been entrusted. Mrs. Morton felt the utmost
confidence in both his sincerity and his judgment. Mr. Stapleton received her almost at once, in his simply yet richly
furnished private office, and rising from his huge flat-topped rosewood
desk, welcomed her warmly, and asked what he could do for her. Mrs. Morton felt confused. Her mission seemed, after all, a strange one
with which to come to a leader of finance. "I--I am in great trouble, Mr. Stapleton," she began. "Yes?" He took her hand in his and led her to a chair. "Tell me all
about it." Mrs. Morton explained the circumstances surrounding the receiving of the
two letters in detail, and then handed the documents to Mr. Stapleton. "Do you think I had better place the matter in the hands of the postal
authorities?" she said. Mr. Stapleton examined the two letters carefully
then he shook his head. "No. At least not at present. It seems to me that your daughter may be
in grave danger, and under those circumstances, I think your wisest
course would be to employ a private detective, an investigator of
matters of this character, not only to ferret out those who are
responsible for these threats, but to take steps to protect your
daughter from harm." "You think, then, that she is really in danger?" Mrs. Morton gasped. "I do not wish to alarm you, but I very much fear that she is." "But I don't know any private detectives," Mrs. Morton began. Stapleton looked up from the letter. "When I spoke," he said, "I had a certain man in mind. He is not a
detective, in the usual sense of the word. You can find plenty of those,
of course, but, while they are useful enough in the detection of
criminals of the ordinary sort, they would probably have very little
success in an affair such as this. The man I had in mind is a brilliant
criminal investigator, one whose services I have more than once been
obliged to make use of in matters of a personal nature. Some two years
ago, for instance, my child was kidnapped, in Paris, and held for
ransom. The entire police force of the French capital seemed powerless
to discover his whereabouts. At last I called in Richard Duvall, and
within a few days my boy was returned to me, and the criminals who had
abducted him placed under arrest. It was a marvellous, a brilliant piece
of work. I am not likely to forget very soon the mystery of the changing
lights." He paused, and Mrs. Morton spoke up eagerly. "Give me Mr. Duvall's address," she said, "and I will see him at once." "That," Mr. Stapleton smiled, "is, of course, the great difficulty. Duvall, who is married, lives with his wife on their farm near
Washington. They both have plenty of money, and he has practically
retired from professional work." "Then of what use is it to suggest his name?" asked Mrs. Morton,
quickly. "He had already retired," Stapleton rejoined, "at the time of my boy's
kidnapping, but I prevailed on him to take up the case. His retirement
merely means that he is not in the active practice of his profession. But exceptional cases, cases which by reason of their novelty interest
him, he may be persuaded to undertake. I fancy this matter of your
daughter's would prove attractive to him. It is unusual--bizarre. I
strongly advise you to see him." "To do that, I must go to Washington?" "Yes. I will give you a letter which will insure you an interview, and,
I hope, enlist his services in your behalf." He pressed a button on his
desk, summoning a stenographer. "I sincerely hope that you will be
successful." Mrs. Morton sat in silence while the letter of introduction to Richard
Duvall was being written. Then she rose to go. "I will leave for Washington this afternoon," she announced. "I feel
that there is no time to waste." "You are quite right. And be sure to tell Mr. Duvall that you are a
close personal friend of mine, and that anything he can do for you I
shall appreciate to the utmost." Mrs. Morton went back to the apartment, and made her preparations to
start. She determined to take a train leaving at half past three, and as
Ruth would not return from the studio until later, she called her up on
the telephone, and told her of her sudden determination. "It is a matter of business, dear," she explained. "I will be back
to-morrow. Good-by." The girl's cheerful voice reassured her. At least
nothing had happened up to now, to give cause for alarm. It was only when Mrs. Morton was about to leave for the train that her
nerves were once more subjected to a severe shock. The telephone bell rang, and she went to answer it, thinking that Ruth
might for some reason have called her up. Over the wire came a thin, queer voice. "Beauty is only skin deep," it said. "A breath may destroy it." After
that, silence. Mrs. Morton made a frantic effort to learn the number of the station
from which she had been called, but without success. In a rather
depressed state of mind, she made her way to the train. It was half past eight at night when she arrived in Washington, and she
at once called up Richard Duvall on the telephone. To her disappointment, she learned that he was out, and was not expected
back until late. There was nothing to do but wait until morning. She
retired to her room, full of hope that the following day would bring an
end to her fears. Immediately after breakfast she called again, and this time was more
successful. Duvall himself answered the telephone. "I am Mrs. Morton, from New York," she said, eagerly. "I would like to
come out and see you." "What do you wish to see me about?" the detective inquired. "It is a personal matter. I will explain when I arrive. I prefer not to
do so over the telephone. I have a letter to you from Mr. Stapleton." "Mr. John Stapleton, the banker?" "Yes." "Come, then, by all means, at any hour that suits you. Mr. Stapleton is
one of my best friends." Mrs. Morton hung up the receiver, after assuring him that she would
start at once. Then she went out and engaging an automobile, set out for
Duvall's place. CHAPTER III


Richard Duvall and his wife, Grace, lingered rather later than usual
over their breakfast that morning. It was a warm and brilliant day in May, and the blossoming beauty of the
spring filled them both with a delightful sense of well-being. Duvall, however, seemed a trifle restless, and Grace observed it. "What's the matter, Richard?" she asked. "Oh, nothing." Her husband picked up the morning paper. "They are still
looking for the woman in that Marsden case, I see," he remarked. "Do you know, my dear," Grace said, "I sometimes think that you made a
mistake in coming down here to the country to live. Your heart is really
in New York, and every time there is a murder case, or a bank robbery,
or a kidnapping up there, you are restless as a hen on a hot griddle
until the mystery is solved. Why don't you take up your professional
work again?" Duvall laid down his paper and regarded his wife with a
look of surprise. "Because, Grace," he said, "you especially asked me, after that affair
of the missing suffragette, to finally give up my detective work and
content myself with a quiet existence here on the farm. You said, on
account of the boy, that I ought not to take such risks." "Well--suppose I did. You agreed with me, didn't you?" "Yes--I guess so." Duvall once more picked up the newspaper. "But,
naturally, I can't help feeling a certain interest in any striking and
novel case that I may read about." "And I haven't a doubt," laughed Grace, "that you wish that you were
back in harness again a dozen times a day. Come now--'fess up. Don't
you?" "Sometimes," granted her husband, with a smile. "You know I loved my
work. It always seemed to take me out of the dull routine of existence,
and give me a new feeling of interest. I shouldn't mind if I had a novel
and interesting case to work on right now." "Would you take one, if it were offered to you?" asked Grace quickly. "No--I guess not. I haven't forgotten my promise." "Well--I've decided to release you from that, Richard. I really think
you need a little mental exercise and diversion. All play and no work,
you know----" She began to arrange the dogwood blossoms she had gathered
before breakfast, in a big vase on the table. Duvall laughed. "I'm getting along very well," he said. "Don't forget I'm expecting to
have that corner lot planted in potatoes to-day." He rose, and coming
over to his wife, playfully pinched her cheek. "What's the matter,
dear?" he asked. "Are you pining for a little trip to New York yourself? We don't need a murder mystery to make that possible, you know." Grace shook her head. As she did so, the telephone bell in the hall
began to ring. "That may be your murder mystery now," she said, with a
laugh. "More likely the Clarks asking us over to dinner this evening," he
returned, as he made his way into the hall. Grace continued to arrange her flowers. Presently Duvall re-entered the
room. There was a curious smile upon his face. "Well," Grace remarked,
glancing up. "Which was it? The murder case, or the Clarks?" "Neither. A mysterious woman, this time, saying that she must see me at
once. I told her to come on out." "Ah! This _is_ serious," his wife laughed. "A mysterious woman! I
suppose I ought to be jealous. Didn't she say what she wanted with you?" "No. But we'll know soon enough. She'll be here at half past nine. Suppose we go and take a look at those Airedale pups." Together they
crossed the veranda and made their way toward the barn. Richard Duvall had changed but little since the days when he had served
on the staff of Monsieur Lefevre, the Prefect of Police of Paris, and
had taken part in the stirring adventures of the Million Francs, the
Ivory Snuff Box and the Changing Lights. The same delightful spirit of
_camaraderie_ existed between his wife, Grace, and himself, a spirit
which had enabled them, together, to solve some of the most exciting
mysteries in the annals of the French detective service. It had been
nearly two years, now, since the affair of the Mysterious Goddess, the
last case in which Duvall had been concerned, and he was beginning to
feel that he would welcome with outstretched arms a chance to make use
once more of his exceptional talents as an investigator of crime. Hence
he had received Mrs. Morton's telephone call with more than ordinary
interest. The latter had told him nothing of her reasons for interviewing him,
contenting herself with the bare statement that she had a letter to him
from Mr. Stapleton. This, however, had been enough to set Duvall's
nerves to tingling and to cause him to conclude that the mysterious
woman who desired to interview him in such a hurry came on no ordinary
business. Hence he waited with some impatience for the arrival of half
past nine. A few moments after the half hour, a large automobile swept up the
drive, and Duvall, with a nod to his wife, went back to the house to
receive his guest. She was waiting in the library when he entered. "I am Mrs. Morton, of New York," his caller began, handing him Mr.
Stapleton's letter. Duvall read it, but it told him little. "Mr. Stapleton informs me," he said, looking at his visitor, "that you
are in some difficulty or other, and asks that, if I can possibly do so,
I try to help you out of it. Did he not also say that I have for some
time past given up the active practice of my profession?" Mrs. Morton nodded, then bent eagerly forward. "Yes, Mr. Duvall. He told me that. But he also said that, when you heard
the circumstances, you might be persuaded to assist me. I am in very
deep trouble, and I fear that there is not a moment to be lost." "What is the nature of your difficulty, madam?" Duvall asked. "It--it concerns my daughter. I am the mother of Ruth Morton." She made
this announcement as though she fully expected Duvall to realize its
significance at once, but the latter's face remained quite blank. "Yes?" he replied, vaguely. "And who is Ruth Morton?" Mrs. Morton looked at him in pained surprise. The thought that anyone
could possibly be ignorant of her daughter's fame and success seemed
unbelievable to her. Was not Ruth's name a household word among moving
picture "fans" from coast to coast? "Why--Ruth Morton--the motion
picture star," she replied. "Surely you must have heard of her." Duvall smiled, but shook his head. "I never go to motion pictures," he said. "But that is of no importance. What has happened to your daughter?" "Nothing. At least I hope not--yet. It is what _may_ happen to her that
frightens me so." She took the two threatening letters from her handbag
and gave them to the detective. "These came yesterday," she said,
simply. Duvall took the letters, and proceeded to read them with the utmost
care. When he looked up, his eyes were sparkling with interest. "The first letter, I observe," he said, "was mailed night before last,
at half-past six, at the general post office. How was the other letter
delivered?" "I do not know. I found it, yesterday forenoon, upon the floor in my
daughter's bedroom, an hour or more after she had left the house. She
has not seen it. I kept all news of it from her, as I did not wish her
to be frightened." "That was wise, of course," Duvall said. "But how could the letter
possibly have been placed where you found it, without your knowledge? Who, beside yourself, was in the apartment at the time?" "No one but an old negro cook, who has been with me for years. I am
quite certain that she had nothing to do with it." "And the maid of whom you speak?" "She had left my daughter's room, and come into the dining room, where I
was sitting, before Ruth left the bedroom. They went out together. The
note could not have been in the bedroom then, or my daughter would
certainly have seen it. The thing seems almost uncanny." Duvall began to stroke his chin, a habit with him when he was more than
usually perplexed. Presently he spoke. "One thing I have learned, Mrs. Morton, after many years spent in
detective work. There is no circumstance, however mystifying it may at
first appear, which is not susceptible of some reasonable and often very
commonplace explanation. You find this letter on the floor in your
daughter's bedroom. It was placed there, either by someone within the
apartment, or by someone from without. Now you tell me that it could not
have been placed from within. Then I can only say that someone must have
entered the room, or at least managed to place the letter in the room,
from outside." "That may be true, Mr. Duvall," remarked Mrs. Morton, quietly, "but when
you consider that our apartment is on the fourth floor, that one of the
windows of the room was closed, and the other only open a few inches,
and that the blank wall of the opposite house is at least ten feet away,
I fail to see how what you suggest is possible." Her words filled Duvall with surprise. If what his caller said was true,
the case might have elements which would make it more than usually
interesting. "Has your daughter any enemy, who might envy her her success, and wish
to deprive her of it?" he asked. "None, that I know of. But since these two letters came, I feel
convinced that someone, whom, I cannot imagine, _does_ feel that way
toward her, and that on account of it she is in the gravest danger. Don't you think so, Mr. Duvall?" "I think it highly probable. And what, Mrs. Morton, would you like to
have me do in the matter?" "Why--come to New York, take up the case, and find out who these
wretches are, so that they may be prevented from doing my daughter any
harm. There is no time to lose. They may carry out their threats at any
moment. You will observe that in the first letter they said that her
beauty would be destroyed '_within thirty days_.' One of those days has
already passed. To-day is the second. At most, we have but twenty-eight
days left in which to find out who is responsible for this outrage. Investigation may consume a great deal of time. I hope that you will
consent to come to New York and take charge of the matter at once. I am
returning this afternoon, as soon as I can get a train. Can you not
return with me? As for the matter of expense, I place no limit upon it. There is nothing I would not sacrifice, to save my daughter from the
fate they have threatened. Think what it would mean, Mr. Duvall. A
young, beautiful, innocent girl, scarcely more than a child, to go
through life with her beauty taken from her, made hideous by some
fiendish device, blinded and scarred by acid, her features
crushed--gashed by some sudden blow. Can you imagine anything more
terrible?" Duvall thought for moment of his own lovely child, now almost three
years old, and shuddered. Bank burglaries, thefts of jewels, seemed
relatively of small importance compared with such a situation as this. His feelings of chivalry rose. He felt a strong desire to help this
young girl. "Here is her picture," Mrs. Morton continued, taking a photograph from
her handbag and extending it to Duvall. The latter gazed at the charming features of the young actress, and
nodded. "She is lovely--exquisite," he murmured. "I don't wonder you feel as you
do. I did not intend to take up any detective work at this time, but I
have decided to assist you in this matter in any way that I can." "Oh--thank you, Mr. Duvall." There were tears in Mrs. Morton's anxious
eyes. "I can never repay you for your kindness--never. But if you can
save Ruth from these scoundrels, I will gladly spend----"

"Never mind about that, Mrs. Morton," Duvall observed, with a friendly
smile. "It is scarcely a question of money with me. If I had not felt a
keen interest in your daughter's welfare, I should not have agreed to
take up the matter at all. As it is, you need not worry about the
expense. I am going to take the case largely because it has interested
me, and it will be a pleasure to work it out, not only on your
daughter's account, but on my own. You know, to me, such matters are of
absorbing interest, like the solving of some complex and baffling
puzzle." "Then you will go back to New York with me this evening?" "I can hardly do that, Mrs. Morton. But I can agree to call on you there
to-morrow. It will take me some hours to arrange matters here so that I
can leave. I do not think you need worry for a few days at least. If
these people had meant to act at once they would not have named the
period of thirty days in their threats." "Very well." Mrs. Morton rose, and held out her hand. "I will expect you
to-morrow. Will it be in the morning?" "Very likely. In any event, I will first telephone to you." He entered
the address in his notebook. "By the way, perhaps you had better let me
keep that photograph." "Certainly." Mrs. Morton handed it to him, and he thrust it into his
pocket. "The letters you already have?" "Yes." "Is there anything else?" "Yes. One thing. Do not tell your daughter that you have employed me in
this case. It--it might alarm her." "Certainly not. And that leads me to say that you, on your part, will of
course observe the utmost secrecy. Even with Mrs. Duvall." "That goes without saying, madam. My professional secrets I share with
no one. Even between my wife and myself there is an unwritten law which
is never broken. Unless we are working on a case together--unless she
can be of service to me, she asks no questions. She would not speak to
me, or even recognize me, were we to meet, while I am engaged in work of
this sort. You need have no fear on that score." "I am very glad to know that. Were these people to suspect that I have
placed the matter in the hands of a detective, they would be instantly
on their guard, and all means of tracing them might be lost." "That is undoubtedly true, and for that reason, I may appear in other
characters than my own, from time to time, disguised perhaps, in such a
way that even you would not recognize me. Under those circumstances I
will suggest a password--one that will not be known to anyone else. Should occasion arise in which I desire to acquaint you with my
identity, without making it known to others, I will merely repeat the
words--twenty-eight days, or twenty-seven or six or five, as the case
may be, on that particular day, and you will know that it is I, and act
accordingly. Is that perfectly clear?" "Perfectly, Mr. Duvall." "Very well. Then we will leave further details until to-morrow." He
shook hands with his caller, escorted her to her automobile, then
returned to the library and began a careful study of the two notes which
Mrs. Morton had left with him. Here Grace found him, half an hour later. "Well," she said, coming up to him with a smile. "Shall I begin to pack
our things?" Duvall put his arm about her. "Yes, dear," he said. "We'll leave on the sleeper to-night. You can get
Mrs. Preston to come and take charge of the house while we are gone. It
may be two weeks. That is, if you want to go along." "Want to go along? Why, Richard, I'm just dying for a trip to New York. I haven't been there since before Christmas, as you know, and I've got
to get a spring outfit. Of course I'm going." She went gayly toward the
hall stairs. "Then you must be ready right after lunch," he called after her. "But why so soon, if we are taking the sleeper?" "Because we are going up to town this afternoon and see a few moving
pictures." "Moving pictures?" Grace paused at the door, an expression of the utmost
astonishment upon her face. "Why, Dick, you never go to moving pictures. You've always said they didn't interest you." "We're going, just the same." "What's come over you?" Grace asked. "Nothing. I'm curious to see some of them, that's all. Never too old to
learn, you know. If I am not mistaken, I saw a new feature film
advertised in the newspaper this morning." He took a paper from the desk
and glanced through it. "Here it is. Ruth Morton, in _The Miser's
Daughter_. Have you seen it?" "No. But I've seen Miss Morton often--in pictures, I mean. She's a
lovely creature, and a splendid actress, too." "Then this film ought to be a good one, don't you think?" Grace burst into a rippling laugh. "You're getting positively human, Richard," she exclaimed. "Here I've
been telling you for months past what a lot you've been missing, and you
only made fun of me, and now you actually suggest going yourself. Was
the lady who called interested in the motion picture business?" Duvall laughed, but made no reply. "What's the mystery?" Grace went on, with an amused smile. "You haven't
told me, you know. Has she lost her jewels, or only her husband?" Duvall raised his hand. "No questions, my dear. This is a professional matter. But I don't mind
telling you this much, if I ever become a motion picture 'fan,' you'll
have her to thank for it." "Really. Then I'm glad she came. I hate going alone. And it seems I
shall also have to thank her for a trip to New York. She has my eternal
gratitude. Now I'm going up to pack." Duvall resumed his seat, and once more took up his examination of the
letters Mrs. Morton had left with him, but they told him little. There
were the usual individual peculiarities in the typewritten characters,
but that was about all he could discover. The letter paper, while of
excellent quality, was such as might be bought at any first-class
stationery store. The death's head seal, of course, was highly
individual, but to trace anyone by means of it presented almost
insuperable difficulties. To find the seal, one must of necessity first
find its owner, and then the chase would be over. He replaced the
letters in his pocket book, and went to his room to make ready for their
journey. CHAPTER IV


Mrs. Morton returned to New York that afternoon, greatly pleased with
the results of her trip. That she had been able to enlist the services
of Richard Duvall gave her a sense of security. She found Ruth at home,
safe and well, with no further threats or warnings to disturb her peace
of mind. The girl was absorbed in her new role. The picture promised to
be the most successful of her career. The following morning Mrs. Morton rose early, in order to go through the
mail before Ruth had an opportunity to do so. The shock caused by the
first threatening letter had passed from the girl's mind. The second she
knew nothing of. Mrs. Morton was determined that if any more arrived,
she should not see those either. Trembling with eagerness she opened the pile of letters, but found
nothing. With a sigh of relief she turned away. Perhaps, after all she
had exaggerated the importance of the matter. Half an hour later, while
Ruth was eating her breakfast, a messenger boy arrived with a telegram,
addressed to Miss Ruth Morton. The maid, seeing no reason to do
otherwise, brought it to the girl as she sat at the table. Mrs. Morton,
who had been at the rear of the apartment, hurried in as she heard the
sound of the doorbell, but by the time she had reached the dining room,
Ruth had already opened and read the message. She sat staring at a bit
of yellow paper, her face pale and drawn. "What is it, dear?" Mrs. Morton cried, hurrying to her side. Ruth picked up the telegram and handed it to her mother. "Another threat," she said, quietly. "These people, whoever they are,
seem to be in deadly earnest." Mrs. Morton took the telegram and hurriedly read it. "Even the beauty of the rose," the message said, "cannot endure for
twenty-seven days." There was no signature to the telegram. A look of the deepest apprehension crept into Mrs. Morton's eyes, but
she turned away, so that Ruth might not realize her fears. "Pay no attention to the matter, Ruth," she said, in tones suddenly
grown a trifle unsteady. "It is certainly nothing more than a stupid
joke." "Well, mother, of course you may be right, but for my part, I have a
feeling that it isn't a joke at all, but a real and very terrible
threat. What is to prevent these people, whoever they are, from
attacking me--sending me some infernal machine in the disguise of a box
or package, which, as soon as I open it, might burn or blind or
otherwise disfigure me so that my life would be ruined?" She rose and
glanced at herself in the mirror which hung over the mantel. Already
there were deep circles of anxiety beneath her eyes, while the lines of
her face, usually sweet and placid, were now those of an anxious and
frightened woman. The first threat had upset her far more than her
mother had realized. The one just received had intensified the effect a
hundredfold. "But you mustn't open any packages, my child. Be very careful about
that. And Robert must not stop the car, under any circumstances, in
going to or from the studio. There, at least, I believe you are quite
safe. I will have a talk with Mr. Edwards to-day, and explain matters to
him. And here you cannot possibly be in any danger. Meanwhile, in spite
of what you say, I still beg you not to let this matter prey upon your
mind. I cannot, will not, take it seriously." Poor Mrs. Morton, herself
thoroughly frightened, strove with all her might to convince Ruth that
she had nothing to fear. She knew the girl's intense, high-strung
nature, and feared that constant worry, ceaseless anxiety, might readily
so work upon her as to reduce her to a nervous wreck long before the
expiration of the thirty days named in the first threatening letter. She
found herself wishing devoutly that Duvall would appear. As she finished speaking there came a ring at the doorbell, and Nora
started to answer it. Mrs. Morton stopped her. "Nora," she said. "Listen to me. You are not, under any circumstances,
to admit anyone--no matter who it is--until I have first seen and talked
with them. Do you understand?" "Yes, ma'am. I understand," replied the girl, as she went out into the
hall. A moment later Mrs. Morton, hearing a man's voice, hurried after her. Nora, with the door but slightly open, was speaking with a rough-looking
fellow, a workman, apparently, who stood in the hallway outside. He was
a man of thirty-five, with a reddish moustache, wearing working clothes
and a cap. This he removed, as Mrs. Morton came to the door. "Is this Mrs. Morton's apartment?" he asked. "Yes. What do you want?" Mrs. Morton's voice and manner were far from
encouraging. "There seems to be a leak in the plumbing somewhere on this floor," the
man went on. "There's trouble with the ceilings in the apartment below. The superintendent wants me to go over the connections and see that
everything is all right." He lifted a canvas bag containing his tools
from the floor, and made as though to enter. Mrs. Morton, however, did
not open the door any wider. "You can't come in now," she said. "Come back later--in an hour. My
daughter is not dressed yet." She seemed ready to close the door
entirely, but the man again spoke. "Can't afford to wait, ma'am," he said, with a significant smile. "I got
every apartment in this building to go over before the end of the month,
and there are _only twenty-seven days left_." He emphasized his
concluding words, at the same time looking Mrs. Morton squarely in the
eye. The words, the man's look, brought sudden recognition. Mrs. Morton
drew open the door. "Very well," she said. "Come in." She realized that the supposed workman
was no other than Duvall. The latter went quietly toward the kitchen at the rear of the apartment,
and occupied himself by examining the connections of the sink. He seemed
to work slowly, unconcernedly, whistling softly to himself as he moved
about. His eyes, however, were very bright and keen, and no detail of
the room, the negro cook who occupied it, or the buildings in the rear,
escaped his attention. Mrs. Morton came back presently and addressed him. "My daughter has gone, now," she said. "You may look over the plumbing
in the bathroom whenever you are ready." With a nod Duvall picked up his tools and followed her to the front of
the apartment. As they left the kitchen, Mrs. Morton closed the door
leading from it to the hall. "I want you to stay here for the next hour, Sarah," she said, as she
left the kitchen. "If anyone rings, I will answer the bell." A moment
later she and Duvall were in the library. The latter pretended to be busy inspecting the connections of the hot
water radiator. "Have you received any more threats?" he asked, in a low voice, without
turning his head. Mrs. Morton took the telegram that Ruth had received a short time
before, and placed it in his hand. "This came half an hour ago," she said, without further comment. Duvall read it, then thrust it into his pocket. "Did your daughter see it?" he asked. "Yes. It had been delivered to her before I could prevent it." "That is too bad. Was she much upset?" "Yes. The thing is beginning to get on her nerves." Duvall rose, and placed his tools in the kit. "Please take me to your daughter's bedroom," he said. Mrs. Morton led
the way. The room was a fairly large one, situated in an ell at the rear of the
building. Of its two windows, one, as has already been pointed out,
overlooked the court between the apartment building and the house next
door. The other faced toward the rear. Duvall placed his kit of tools
upon the floor, and began an examination of the room. After a quick
glance about, he turned to Mrs. Morton. "Where was the letter found--the one that did not come through the
mails?" "Here." Mrs. Morton indicated a spot on the floor near the small
enameled dressing table that stood against the east wall of the room. Its position was midway between the two windows. It was clear that
whoever had entered the room might have done so through either of the
windows; at least, the position in which the dressing table stood
afforded no indication as to which one it might have been. "Which of the two windows was open, when you found the letter?" Duvall
asked. Mrs. Morton indicated the one facing the court. "This one," she said. "Not wide open. Perhaps six or eight inches." "The other was not fastened, I suppose?" "No. Ruth always keeps it raised during the night, but usually closes it
while dressing." Duvall went to the window, and opened it. It was well balanced and moved
easily. "Anyone coming up by way of the fire escape could, of course, have
raised the window from the outside, and closed it again after leaving
the room," he said, more to himself than to Mrs. Morton. Then he got out
on the fire escape and made a careful examination of its surface. "When was this ironwork painted?" he asked Mrs. Morton, through the
window. "About ten days ago." "H--m." Duvall examined the newly painted iron surface with rather a
blank expression. That anyone had walked upon it since it had received
its newly applied coat was, he felt, out of the question. The paint was
so new, so shiny, so yielding in its fresh glossiness that, even
treading as lightly as he could, the marks of his shoes were plainly
visible. He leaned over and pressed the palm of his hand upon the grated
iron floor. The pressure of his hand was sufficient to dull the freshly
painted surface. It seemed impossible that anyone, even in bare or
stockinged feet, could have been upon the fire escape, without having
left tell-tale marks upon it. He re-entered the room, and turned his
attention to the other window. Here the opportunities for entrance seemed even more unfavorable. The
window was situated on the fourth floor. There was still another floor
above, with a window similarly located. Anyone might, of course, have
been lowered from this window above, to the sill of the one at which he
now stood, and entered the room in that way. He examined with care the
white woodwork of the window sill, also freshly painted. It showed no
marks. This, of course, was not conclusive. He determined to investigate
the occupants of the apartment on the top floor. The wall of the brownstone dwelling house next door, which formed the
east side of the narrow court, was of brick, covered with ivy. There
were no windows in it whatever. Apparently it had once adjoined the wall
of a similar house, where the apartment building now stood, and when the
second house had been torn down to make way for the new building, the
partition wall had remained as originally built, without windows. Duvall examined this house next door with a great deal of interest. It
was four stories high, with an attic, and rose to almost the same height
as the fifth floor of the apartment house, owing, no doubt, to its
ceilings being somewhat higher. In the sloping roof of the attic were
three small dormer windows, facing the court, but the nearest one was
perhaps twenty feet from the window of Ruth's room, in a horizontal
direction, and some eight or ten feet above it. There was no way in
which anyone could have passed from the attic window to that of Ruth's
room, even supposing such a person to be an expert climber. Anyone
lowered from this window by means of a rope would merely have found
himself hanging against a bare brick wall, twenty feet from the window
of the girl's room. Duvall, accompanied by Mrs. Morton, made his way
back to the library. "You feel quite certain about the cook?" he asked. "Sarah?" Mrs. Morton smiled. "What do you think? You've seen her." "She certainly appears to be above suspicion," Duvall replied. "But one
can never be sure. Suppose you send her out on some errand. I should
like to search her room." Mrs. Morton left him for a few moments, and presently the old colored
woman passed down the hall and left the apartment. Then Duvall,
accompanied by Mrs. Morton, made a thorough examination of the woman's
room. His search disclosed nothing of interest, nor was a similar search of
the room of Nora, the maid, productive of anything that could in any way
connect her with the mysterious warnings. There remained only the
occupants of the fifth floor apartment. Duvall requested Mrs. Morton to
summon the janitor of the building, and explain to him, in a guarded
way, that he wished to ask him certain questions. The janitor proved to be a good-natured fellow, who seemed extremely
anxious to please Mrs. Morton in every possible way. In answer to a
question from the latter, he said that the apartment on the top floor
was vacant, and had been vacant for nearly two months. The family that had occupied it, he explained, had moved away, and had
requested the management of the building to sublet it. This they had not
yet succeeded in doing. "May I go up and look it over?" Duvall asked. "Sure you may," the janitor replied, and he and Duvall went to the
elevator, leaving Mrs. Morton waiting in the library. The apartment on the top floor had been newly done over, and smelt of
fresh varnish and paint. The shiny floors had scarcely been walked upon,
since they had been refinished. The air was close and warm, by reason of
the tightly closed windows. Duvall proceeded at once to the room
directly over Ruth's bedroom. To his disappointment the two windows were not only closed and fastened,
but so tightly stuck on account of the fresh paint that it required the
combined efforts of the janitor and himself to open them. That they had
been opened, since the painting had been done, some ten days before, was
clearly out of the question. Duvall made up his mind at once that
however the person who had placed the mysterious message in Ruth's room
had effected his or her entrance, it had not been by way of the
apartment on the top floor. Somewhat disappointed, he went to the floor below, and thanking the
janitor for his kindness, rejoined Mrs. Morton. "What have you discovered, Mr. Duvall?" the latter asked, eagerly. "Nothing, so far. I confess the thing is somewhat of a puzzle." "Someone _must_ have been in Ruth's room." "Not necessarily." "But--why not?" "You will remember that you found the letter on the floor. That would
seem to me to indicate rather the opposite. If anyone had actually been
_in_ the room, they would have been far more apt to place the message on
the dressing table. That it was found upon the floor indicates to my
mind that it was in some way inserted--thrown, perhaps--through the
window from without." He took the letter in question from his pocket,
and sitting down, gazed intently at the surface of the envelope. Presently he passed it over to Mrs. Morton. "What do you make of that?" he said, indicating with his finger a curious row of indentations,
extending in a semi-circular line about midway of one of the longer
edges of the envelope. The marks were very faint, but by turning the letter about in the light,
Mrs. Morton at last managed to make them out. What they were, how they
had been placed there Duvall could not say. Yet their presence indicated
something of value, of that he felt sure. "I don't understand them at all," Mrs. Morton replied, returning the
letter to him. "It looks as though someone had held the letter in a--a
pair of pincers." The suggestion conveyed by her words interested Duvall greatly. The same
thought had been forming in his own mind. He rose to his feet, his eyes shining with interest. Why could not such
a pair of pincers or forceps have been attached to a long pole, such as
a fishing rod, and the letter in this way pushed through the window and
released by pulling on a cord attached to one of the forceps' handles? The thing was perfectly practical, except for the fact that there seemed
no place from which such a pole or rod might have been extended. He
gazed out of the library window, across the court to the row of dormer
windows in the house opposite. The distance from the nearest of them, to
Ruth's window was, as he had before observed, at least twenty feet
horizontally, or some twenty-three feet on the diagonal. Then there was
the distance from the window to the dressing table, at least eight feet
more, to be added, making necessary a rod over thirty feet long. And he
saw at a glance that even could a rod of this length be secured and
handled, the angle made by a line from the dormer window through Ruth's
window was such that the end of the rod or pole would strike the floor
only a few feet beyond the windowsill, and in no possible way could its
further end be elevated sufficiently to deposit the letter in front of
the dressing table. The thing was manifestly out of the question, even
had the window of the girl's room been _wide open_. And Mrs. Morton had
assured him with the greatest positiveness that it had been open, at the
time the letter was found, _but a few inches_. He returned the letters
to his pocket and rose. "The thing is astonishing--remarkable," he said to Mrs. Morton, who was
regarding him intently. "I confess that so far I am quite in the dark. I
feel sure that whoever entered the room, or left the message, must have
done so by means of the fire-escape, and yet, how was it possible,
without marks having been left upon the paint? I think I shall make
another and even more careful examination, in the hope that some slight
clues may have escaped me." He once more made his way toward the girl's
room, followed by Mrs. Morton. The room was precisely as they had left it. The window facing to the
rear was wide open, Duvall having omitted to close it after his
examination of the fire escape. The window fronting on the court was
raised perhaps six inches. And yet, to the utter amazement of them both,
there lay on the floor of the room, near its center, a square white
envelope, addressed in typewriting to Ruth Morton. Duvall sprang forward and seized it with an exclamation of astonishment. It bore the same seal, in the same black wax, and upon it was the same
semi-circular row of indentations. He tore the letter open. Its
typewritten message was brief but significant. "Only twenty-seven days
more," it read. The grinning death's head seal seemed to Duvall's
astonished eyes even more terrifying than before. With a bound he reached the rear window, and swung himself upon the fire
escape. There was no one in sight. The gray surface of the ironwork
showed not the slightest scratch, save those made by his own heels
earlier in the day. The steps of the ladder leading up to the next floor
were glistening, immaculate. Those of the one to the floor below were
equally so. He re-entered the room, and going to the opposite window,
threw it wide open. The three dormer windows of the adjoining house were
gray, dusty, as though they had not been opened for years. He turned to
his companion with a look of amazement. "In all my experience, Mrs. Morton," he said, "I do not think that I
have ever encountered anything quite so astonishing. That letter must
have been placed there while I was in the apartment above. Your cook,
your maid, are out. Certainly you did not place it there yourself. And
yet we know that someone has been in this room, or at least delivered
the letter, during the past fifteen minutes. Had I not found it here
myself, I should have been almost tempted to disbelieve it, but I am
forced to admit its truth." Mrs. Morton stood wringing her hands. "It--it seems almost supernatural," she exclaimed. "Poor Ruth. What are
we to do?" "There is nothing supernatural about the matter, madam," Duvall
remarked. "I don't doubt the explanation is simple enough, could we but
hit upon it. But so far I confess I am unable to understand it." He went
over to the wall which adjoined that of the house next door, and sounded
it, inch by inch, with a small hammer he took from his bag of tools. The
operation required several minutes. When he had completed it, he tossed
the hammer back into his kit in disgust. "Brick, of course," he said,
"and perfectly solid." He turned toward the door. "What are you going to
do now?" Mrs. Morton asked. "Try to find out something through this telegram. And also, investigate
the house next door." "But, you will come back? I am afraid." "I shall be at your call at all times, Mrs. Morton. If anything of
interest occurs, notify me here." He drew a card from his pocket and
wrote upon it the name of his hotel. "Say nothing to your daughter about
these new threats. I shall probably see you again later in the day." Shouldering his kit of tools, Duvall left the apartment. He was by no
means satisfied with the results of his visit. In fact there had
apparently been no results at all. CHAPTER V


Duvall's first move, after leaving Mrs. Morton's apartment that morning,
was to enter the taxicab which had been waiting for him at the door and
return to his hotel. A light overcoat which he had in the vehicle
concealed his workman's disguise sufficiently to enable him to reach his
room without exciting comment. Once there, he changed his clothes,
putting on a professional looking frock coat, and adjusting a pair of
shell-rimmed eyeglasses to complete the slight disguise. Thus equipped,
he once more set out. Grace had left a note for him, saying that she had gone shopping. Beside
it lay the photograph of Ruth Morton, which he had, he remembered, left
on his chiffonier while putting on his workman's clothes that morning. At the foot of her hastily written note Grace had added a postscript. "Is _this_ the reason for your sudden interest in motion pictures?" it
read. "Well, I'll admit she's a raving beauty, Richard, but I'll bet she
isn't half as nice as I am." Duvall read the note with a smile. Grace
was always such a thoroughly good comrade. Leaving the hotel, he went to the telegraph office from which the
message to Ruth Morton had been delivered that morning. It was on
Columbus Avenue, some four blocks from the Mortons' apartment. "Can you tell me where this telegram was sent from?" he asked. The
message showed that it had been filed, as well as delivered, within the
city limits. The man behind the desk looked up his records. "It was sent from the main office on lower Broadway, at 8.30," he said,
briefly. Duvall thanked him, then turned away. Although he realized that he could
scarcely hope to obtain even a scanty description of the sender of the
telegram from the main office, he determined to go there. First,
however, he walked back toward the Mortons' apartment, and going up the
steps of the brownstone house adjoining, rang the doorbell. A neat maid-servant opened the door. Duvall favored her with a smile, at
the same time taking a notebook and pencil from his pocket. "I am making some corrections in the city directory," he said. "Will you
please give me the names of all the persons living in this house." The
girl stared at him for a moment, but his prosperous appearance, his
businesslike manner, disarmed any suspicion she may have felt. "There's--there's Mr. William Perkins," she said, "and Mrs. Perkins, and
Mr. Robert, that's Mr. Perkins' son, and--and Miss Elizabeth, although
she's away at boarding school, and--and Emily Thompson, the cook,
and--and me. My name's Mary. Mary Wickes." "Thank you, Mary," Duvall replied, entering the names carefully in his
notebook. "And Mr. Perkins, the elder Mr. Perkins, I mean, is he the
lawyer?" "No, sir. It's Mr. Robert that's the lawyer, sir. Mr. William Perkins is
in the leather business." "Ah, yes. I see. Thank you very much indeed. And there are no boarders,
or other persons whatever living in the house?" "No, sir. Not any, sir." Duvall closed his book and put it carefully in his pocket. "Now, Mary," he continued. "Just one more question. Does any one sleep
in the attic?" "The attic, sir? Why, no sir. Cook and I sleep on the fourth floor, sir,
but the attic isn't used, except for storage, sir. Are you going to put
that in the directory too, sir?" The girl regarded him with wondering
eyes. "No, Mary. Not in the directory. But we want to be sure not to omit any
names, and I thought that if there was anyone living in the attic----"
he paused. "No one, as I've told you. Nobody ever goes up there, so far as I know. Is that all, sir?" "Yes. That's all. Thank you. Good morning." Duvall went down the steps, and proceeded to the subway station,
somewhat mystified. He had handled many curious cases in the past, many
that had been notable for their intricacy, their complexity of motive
and detail. But here, he felt, was a case of a very different sort, the
peculiarity of which lay in its astonishing lack of clues of any sort. Usually in the past there had been motives, evidence, traces of some
kind or other, upon which to build a case. Here there was nothing,
except the three mysterious letters, the one equally mysterious
telegram. He felt baffled, uncertain which way to turn. In rather a
dissatisfied frame of mind he made his way to the telegraph office in
lower Broadway. There were several clerks engaged in receiving messages. He approached one of them. "This telegram," he said, holding out the slip of yellow paper Mrs.
Morton had given him, "was sent from this office at half past eight this
morning. Can you by any chance give me a description of the person who
sent it?" He leaned over and addressed the clerk in a low tone. "I am a
detective," he said. "The telegram is part of a blackmailing scheme." The man looked at him for a moment, and then consulted with an older
man, evidently his superior. The latter came forward. "I received this message myself, sir," he said. "I remember it, because
of its peculiar wording. What is it you wish to know?" "I would like a description of the person who sent it," Duvall told him. The man thought for a moment. "I'm not able to tell you much," he said. "It was a woman--I didn't
notice particularly whether she was young or old. In fact, she didn't
give me a chance, just laid the message and the money down and went
right out. She evidently knew the rate, for the amount she left was
correct. I took the message and read it, without noticing her
particularly, and then, when I had finished reading it and looked up,
she had gone." "Then you can't tell me anything about her?" Duvall asked, greatly
disappointed. "Not a thing. I remember it was a woman, and my general impression is
that she was rather young and small, but I can't be at all sure. You
see, sir, a great many persons come in, during the day, and we haven't
time to take note of them particularly. As I say, I read the telegram
first, and counted the words. By that time she had left the office." Duvall thanked the man for his information and made his way to the
street. Something at least had been gained. The person who was hounding
Ruth Morton was a woman. By this he was not at all surprised. He had felt for some time that
Ruth's enemy was, in all probability, some jealous and envious movie
actress who, herself unsuccessful, resented the youth and beauty of her
successful rival. He called a taxi and directed the driver to take him
out to the studio of the company with which Ruth was connected. Here, in
all probability, was to be found the woman he sought. The journey consumed considerably over an hour, and it was lunch time
when he finally drew up before the entrance to the series of studio
buildings. Before entering he went to a nearby restaurant to get a bite
to eat. It was a small and rather cheap place, but at this hour was crowded with
the employees of the big company. Duvall at first could not find a seat,
but presently discovered one at a table not far from the door, at which
were seated some young men, apparently stenographers or clerks. While waiting for his order of sandwiches and milk, the detective
occupied himself with a newspaper. He was not reading it, however,
although he pretended to be deeply engrossed in its contents. He was in
reality listening to the gossip of the studio, which rose in a chorus
about him. From a nearby table came the voice of a woman, evidently a great admirer
of Ruth Morton. "I tell you," she said, "that new film that she finished last week, An
American Beauty, is going to be a knockout. She's the swellest thing on
the screen. Got 'em _all_ faded, _I_ think." "Think so?" questioned one of her companions. "I'm pretty strong for
Helen Ward, myself." "Ruth Morton won't last," remarked a third, in a petulant voice. "Course she'll last. Say--ain't that a bear of a title? An American
Beauty. She always seems like a beautiful big rose, to me." "Well, roses don't last, do they?" asked the petulant voice again. "Not
very long, anyway." Duvall turned suddenly in an effort to see the face of the speaker, but
try as he would, he was unable to do so. Two of the girls sat with their
backs to him. He could not manage to catch a glimpse of either of them. Almost as he turned, the three rose and made their way to the street. For a moment he thought of following them, but the idea seemed absurd. These twelve dollar a week stenographers or clerks could have no part in
the plot against Miss Morton. And yet, there was something startling in
the young woman's words. "Roses don't last." The telegram received by
Ruth Morton that morning had contained almost the same phrase. "Even the
beauty of the rose cannot endure." Then he remembered the title of the
new film of which the girls had spoken, and smiled at his own
suspicions. "An American Beauty." It would be natural, perfectly natural
for anyone to refer to Ruth as a rose, with that title for her latest
picture. He dismissed the matter from his mind, and proceeded to make a
hasty lunch. [Illustration: He was watching, not only Ruth, but those about her]

At the entrance of the studio he explained that he was a writer of
special articles for the Sunday papers, and had come to "write up" the
life at the studios. He was promptly turned over to one of the officials
who, after a few inquiries, seemed delighted at the opportunity to
obtain free publicity for his company and its stars. "I want particularly to give a sketch of Miss Ruth Morton," he said. "She seems to be such a universal favorite." "A most delightful and charming woman," his companion asserted, with a
pleased smile. "Come this way. You may be able to see her at work." He
led Duvall down a long corridor, and into one of the big studio rooms. The first impression Duvall got was that of utter confusion. People were
darting here and there, in ordinary clothes, or in all sorts of makeups. Stage carpenters were creating a terrific racket, building a new scene. A tangle of electric light cables, a blinding glare from the arcs, a
confusion of voices, a wilderness of scenery and "props" all combined to
create an impression quite the reverse of what he had expected. Here, he
felt, was something very different from the theater, something bigger,
yet more elemental, in which vast sums were expended daily to amuse a
vaster indeed, a world-wide, audience. He sat down upon a box, and
inspected the scene before him. "Miss Morton will be on in a few moments," his guide said. Duvall nodded. His attention was fixed upon the little drama going on
before him. He knew nothing of the plot of the play, but the mechanical
features of the operation held his interest keenly. The brilliant
electric lights, the setting of the little room, the actors in their
ghastly greenish makeups, the camera man, grinding stolidly away at his
machine, the director, hovering about like a hawk, watching every
movement, every gesture, with a superlatively critical eye, all spoke to
him of a new world, and one with which he was not in the least familiar. Suddenly he saw the lovely face of Ruth Morton, as the girl appeared
from an open doorway. She did not take part in the picture at once, but
stood chatting with the director, awaiting the moment when she would
make her entrance. Duvall watched her intently. Her face, he thought,
was drawn, nervous, her expression one of fear. She seemed suspicious of
every one who came near her, as though she suspected that every stage
hand, every electrician or helper, had in his possession a bottle of
vitriol, which he only awaited the moment to hurl in her face. That the
girl's nervous manner, her strained and tense expression, was evident to
others as well as to himself, he realized from a remark his companion
made to him. "Miss Morton doesn't seem herself to-day," he said. "She must have
something on her mind. I shouldn't be surprised if she has been working
too hard lately." Duvall made no reply. He was watching, not only Ruth, but those about
her. In particular he observed the other women in the cast. It seemed
not improbable that among them he would find the one whose envy had led
to the sending of the threats Ruth had been receiving. 