



Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE MOVING
 FINGER

 BY

 E. PHILLIPS OPPENHEIM

 AUTHOR OF "THE LOST AMBASSADOR," "THE ILLUSTRIOUS
 PRINCE," "JEANNE OF THE MARSHES," ETC. _With Illustrations by_
 J. V. McFALL

 BOSTON
 LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY
 1911




 _Copyright, 1910, 1911_,
 BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY. _All rights reserved._

 Published, May, 1911. _Printed by
 THE  COLONIAL  PRESS
 C. H. Simonds & Co., Boston, U. S. A._




 [Illustration: "Sit still," he whispered. "Don't say anything. There
 is someone coming." FRONTISPIECE. _See p._ 166]




     "The Moving Finger writes; and having writ,
     Moves on: nor all your Piety nor Wit
     Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
     Nor all your Tears wash out a Word of it." CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                                     PAGE

         PROLOGUE--THE DREAMER                                 1
      I. A LETTER PROVES USEFUL                               11
     II. OLD ACQUAINTANCES                                    17
    III. "WHO IS MR. SATON?" 23
     IV. A QUESTION OF OBLIGATION                             32
      V. A MORNING WALK                                       46
     VI. PAULINE MARRABEL                                     54
    VII. AN UNWELCOME VISITOR                                 61
   VIII. AN INSTANCE OF OCCULTISM                             67
     IX. A SENTIMENTAL TALK                                   74
      X. THE SCENE CHANGES                                    80
     XI. A BUSY EVENING                                       86
    XII. A CALL ON LADY MARRABEL                              97
   XIII. LADY MARY'S DILEMMA                                 105
    XIV. PETTY WORRIES                                       114
     XV. ROCHESTER IS INDIGNANT                              124
    XVI. PLAIN SPEAKING                                      133
   XVII. THE GREAT NAUDHEIM                                  141
  XVIII. ROCHESTER'S ULTIMATUM                               150
    XIX. TROUBLE BREWING                                     158
     XX. FIRST BLOOD                                         165
    XXI. AFRAID! 172
   XXII. SATON REASSERTS HIMSELF                             178
  XXIII. AN UNPLEASANT ENCOUNTER                             186
   XXIV. LOIS IS OBEDIENT                                    194
    XXV. A LAST WARNING                                      202
   XXVI. THE DUCHESS'S DINNER PARTY                          209
  XXVII. THE ANSWER TO A RIDDLE                              215
 XXVIII. SPOKEN FROM THE HEART                               224
   XXIX. THE COURAGE OF DESPERATION                          232
    XXX. A SURPRISING REQUEST                                239
   XXXI. BETWEEN LOVE AND DUTY                               248
  XXXII. AT THE EDGE OF THE PRECIPICE                        255
 XXXIII. "YOU DO NOT BELIEVE IN ME!" 261
  XXXIV. A WOMAN'S TONGUE                                    269
   XXXV. ON LOIS' BIRTHDAY                                   278
  XXXVI. THE CHARLATAN UNMASKED                              284
         EPILOGUE--THE MAN                                   294




 ILLUSTRATIONS


 "Sit still," he whispered. "Don't say anything. There is someone coming"                         _Frontispiece_

 He came to a standstill by the side of the boy       _Page_   2

 "Some water quick, and brandy," Rochester
 cried                                                   "    73

 She swayed for a moment, and fell over on
 her side                                                "   222




THE MOVING FINGER




PROLOGUE

THE DREAMER


The boy sat with his back to a rock, his knees drawn up and clasped
within fingers nervously interlocked. His eyes were fixed upon the
great stretch of landscape below, shadowy now, and indistinct, like a
rolling plain of patchwork woven by mysterious fingers. Gray mists
were floating over the meadows and low-lying lands. Away in the
distance they marked the circuitous course of the river, which only an
hour ago had shone like a belt of silver in the light of the setting
sun. Twilight had fallen with unexpected swiftness. Here and there a
light flashed from the isolated farmhouses. On the darkening horizon,
a warm glow was reflected in the clouds from the distant town. The boy, when he had settled down to his vigil, had been alone. From
over the brow of the hill, however, had come a few minutes ago a man,
dressed in loose shooting clothes, and with a gun under his arm. He
came to a standstill by the side of the boy, and stood there watching
him for several moments, with a certain faintly amused curiosity
shining out of his somewhat supercilious gray eyes. The newcomer was
obviously a person of breeding and culture--the sort of person who
assumes without question the title of "Gentleman." The boy wore
ready-made clothes and hobnailed boots. They remained within a few
feet of one another for several moments, without speech. "My young friend," the newcomer said at last, "you will be late for
your tea, or whatever name is given to your evening meal. Did you not
hear the bell? It rang nearly half-an-hour ago." The boy moved his head slightly, but made no attempt to rise. "It does not matter. I am not hungry." The newcomer leaned his gun against the rock, and drawing a pipe from
the pocket of his shooting-coat, commenced leisurely to fill it. Every
now and then he glanced at the boy, who seemed once more to have
become unconscious of his presence. He struck a match and lit the
tobacco, stooping down for a moment to escape the slight evening
breeze. Then he threw the match away, and lounged against the
lichen-covered fragment of stone. "I wonder," he remarked, "why, when you have the whole day in which to
come and look at this magnificent view, you should choose to come just
at the hour when it has practically been swallowed up." The boy lifted his head for the first time. His face was a little
long, his features irregular but not displeasing, his deep-set eyes
seemed unnaturally bright. His cheeks were sunken, his forehead
unusually prominent. The whole effect of his personality was a little
curious. If he had no claims to be considered good-looking, his face
was at least a striking one. [Illustration: He came to a standstill by the side of the boy.] "I come at this hour," he said slowly, "because the view does not
attract me so much at any other time. It is only when the twilight
falls that one can see--properly." The newcomer took his pipe from his mouth. "You must have marvelous eyesight, my young friend," he remarked. "To
me everything seems blurred and uncertain." "You don't understand!" said the boy impatiently. "I do not come here
to see the things that anyone can see at any hour of the day. There is
nothing satisfying in that. I come here to look down and see the
things which do not really exist. It is easy enough when one is
alone," he added, a little pointedly. The newcomer laughed softly--there was more banter than humor in his
mirth. "So my company displeases you," he remarked. "Do you know that I have
the right to tell you to get up, and never to pass through that gate
again?" The boy shrugged his shoulders. "One place is as good as another," he said. The man smoked in silence for several moments. Then he withdrew the
pipe from his teeth and sighed gently. "These are indeed democratic days," he said. "You do not know, my
young friend, that I am Henry Prestgate Rochester, Esquire, if you
please, High Sheriff of this county, Magistrate and Member of
Parliament, owner, by the bye, of that rock against which you are
leaning, and of most of that country below, which you can or cannot
see." "Really!" the boy answered slowly. "My name is Bertrand Saton, and I
am staying at the Convalescent Home down there, a luxury which is
costing me exactly eight shillings a week." "So I concluded," his companion remarked. "May I ask what your
occupation is, when in health?" "It's of no consequence," the boy answered, a little impatiently. "Perhaps I haven't one at all. Whatever it is, as you may imagine, it
has not brought me any great success. If you wish me to go----"

"Not at all," Rochester interrupted, with a little protesting gesture. "I do not wish to remain here on sufferance," the boy continued. "I
understood that we were allowed to spend our time upon the hills
here." "That is quite true, I believe," Rochester admitted. "My bailiff sees
to those things, and if it amuses you to sit here all night, you are
perfectly welcome." "I shall probably do so." Rochester watched him curiously for a few seconds. "Look here," he said, "I will make a bargain with you. You shall have
the free run of all my lands for as long as you like, and in return
you shall just answer me one question." The boy turned his head slightly. "The question?" he asked. "You shall tell me the things which you see down there," Rochester
declared, holding his hand straight out in front of him, pointing
downward toward the half-hidden panorama. The boy shook his head. "For other people they would not count," he said. "They are for myself
only. What I see would be invisible to you." "A matter of eyesight?" Rochester asked, with raised eyebrows. "Of imagination," the boy answered. "There is no necessity for you to
look outside your own immediate surroundings to see beautiful things,
unless you choose deliberately to make your life an ugly thing. With
us it is different--with us who work for a living, who dwell in the
cities, and who have no power to push back the wheels of life. If we
are presumptuous enough to wish to take into our lives anything of the
beautiful, anything to help us fight our daily battle against the
commonplace, we have to create it for ourselves. That is why I am here
just now, and why I was regretting, when I heard your footstep, that
one finds it so hard to be alone." "So I am to be ordered off?" Rochester remarked, smiling. The boy did not answer. The man did not move. The minutes went by, and
the silence remained unbroken. Below, the twilight seemed to be
passing into night with unusual rapidity. It was a shapeless world
now, a world of black and gray. More lights flashed out every few
seconds. It was the boy who broke the silence at last. He seemed, in some
awkward way, to be trying to atone for his former unsociability. "This is my last night at the Convalescent Home," he said, a little
abruptly. "I am cured. To-morrow I am going back to my work in
Mechester. For many days I shall see nothing except actual things. I
shall know nothing of life except its dreary and material side. That
is why I came here with the twilight. That is why I am going to sit
here till the night comes--perhaps, even, I shall wait until the dawn. I want one last long rest. I want to carry away with me some absolute
impression of life as I would have it. Down there," he added, moving
his head slowly, "down there I can see the things I want--the things
which, if I could, I would take into my life. I am going to look at
them, and think of them, and long for them, until they seem real. I am
going to create a concrete memory, and take it away with me." Rochester looked more than a little puzzled. The boy's speech seemed
in no way in keeping with his attire, and the fact of his presence in
a charitable home. "Might one inquire once more," he asked, "what your occupation in
Mechester is?" "It is of no consequence," the boy answered shortly. "It is an
occupation that does not count. It does not make for anything in life. One must do something to earn one's daily bread." "You find my questioning rather a nuisance, I am afraid," Rochester
remarked, politely. "I will not deny it," the boy answered. "I will admit that I wish to
be alone. I am hoping that very soon you will be going." "On the contrary," Rochester replied, smiling, "I am much too
interested in your amiable conversation. You see," he added, knocking
the ashes from his pipe, and leaning carelessly back against the rock,
"I live in a world, every member of which is more or less satisfied. I
will be frank with you, and I will admit that I find satisfaction in
either man or woman a most reprehensible state. I find a certain
relief, therefore, in talking to a person who wants something he
hasn't got, or who wants to be something that he isn't." "Then you can find all the satisfaction you want in talking to me,"
the boy declared, gloomily. "I am at the opposite pole of life, you
see, to those friends of yours. I want everything I haven't got. I am
content with nothing that I have." "For instance?" Rochester asked, suggestively. "I want freedom from the life of a slave," the boy said. "I want
money, the money that gives power. I want the right to shape my own
life in my own way, and to my own ends, instead of being forced to
remain a miserable, ineffective part of a useless scheme of
existence." "Your desires are perfectly reasonable," Rochester remarked, calmly. "Imagine, if you please--you seem to have plenty of imaginative
force--that I am a fairy godfather. I may not look the part, but at
least I can live up to it. I will provide the key for your escape. I
will set you down in the world you are thirsting to enter. You shall
take your place with the others, and run your race." The boy suddenly abandoned his huddled-up position, and rose to his
feet. Against the background of empty air, and in the gathering
darkness, he seemed thinner than ever, and smaller. "I am going," he said shortly. "It may seem amusing to you to make fun
of me. I will not stay----"

"Don't be a fool!" Rochester interrupted. "Haven't you heard that I am
more than half a madman? I am going to justify my character for
eccentricity. You see my house down there--Beauleys, they call it? At
twelve o'clock to-morrow, if you come to me, I will give you a sum of
money sufficient to keep you for several years. I do not specify the
amount at this moment, I shall think it over before you come." The boy had no words. He simply stared at his chance companion in
blank astonishment. "My offer seems to surprise you," Rochester remarked, pleasantly. "It need not. You can go and tell the whole world of it, if you like,
although, as a reputation for sanity is quite a valuable asset,
nowadays, I should suggest that you keep your mouth closed. Still,
if you do speak of it, no one will be in the least surprised. My friends--I haven't many--call me the most eccentric man in
Christendom. My enemies wonder how it is that I keep out of the
asylum. Personally, I consider myself a perfectly reasonable mortal. I
have whims, and I am not afraid to indulge them. I give you this money
on one--or perhaps we had better say two conditions. The first is that
you make a _bona fide_ use of it. When I say that, I mean that you
leave immediately your present employment, whatever it may be, and go
out into the world with the steadfast purpose of finding for yourself
the things which you saw a few minutes ago down in the valley there. You may not find them, but still I pledge you to the search. The
second condition is that some day or other you find your way back into
this part of the country, and tell me how my experiment has fared." The boy realized with a little gasp. "Am I to thank you?" he asked. "It would be usual but foolish," Rochester answered. "I need no
thanks, I deserve none. I yield to a whim, nothing else. I do this
thing for my own pleasure. The sum of money which I propose to put
into your hands will probably represent to me what a five-shilling
piece might to you. This may sound vulgar, but it is true. I think
that I need not warn you never to come to me for more. You need not
look so horrified. I am quite sure that you would not do that. And
there is one thing further." "Yes?" the boy asked. "Another condition?" Rochester shook his head. "No!" he said. "It is not a condition. It is just a little advice. The
way through life hasn't been made clear for everyone. You may find
yourself brought up in the thorny paths. Take my advice. Don't be
content with anything less than success. If you fail, strip off your
clothes, and swim out to sea on a sunny day, swim out until your
strength fails and you must sink. It is the pleasantest form of
oblivion I know of. Don't live on. You are only a nuisance to
yourself, and a bad influence to the rest of the world. Succeed, or
make your little bow, my young friend. It is the best advice I can
give you. Remember that the men who have failed, and who live on, are
creatures of the gutter." "You are right!" the boy muttered. "I have read that somewhere, and it
comes home to me. Failure is the one unforgivable sin. If I have to
commit every other crime in the decalogue, I will at least avoid that
one!" Rochester shouldered his gun, and prepared to stroll off. "At twelve o'clock to-morrow, then," he said. "I wouldn't hurry away
now, if I were you. Sit down in your old place, and see if there isn't
a thread of gold down there in the valley." The boy obeyed almost mechanically. His heart was beating fast. His
back was pressed against the cold rock. The fingers of both hands were
nervously buried in the soft turf. Once more his eyes were riveted
upon this land of shifting shadows. The whole panorama of life seemed
suddenly unveiled before his eyes. More real, more brilliant now were
the things upon which he looked. The thread of gold was indeed there! CHAPTER I

A LETTER PROVES USEFUL


Bertrand Saton leaned against the stone coping of the bridge, and
looked downwards, as though watching the seagulls circling round and
round, waiting for their usual feast of scraps. The gulls, however,
were only his excuse. He stood there, looking hard at the gray, muddy
water beneath, trying to make up his mind to this final and inevitable
act of despair. He had walked the last hundred yards almost eagerly. He had told himself that he was absolutely and entirely prepared for
death. Yet the first sight of that gray, cold-looking river, had
chilled him. He felt a new and unaccountable reluctance to quit the
world which certainly seemed to have made up its mind that it had no
need of him. His thoughts rushed backwards. "Swim out to sea on a
sunny day," he repeated to himself slowly. Yes, but this! It was a
different thing, this! The longer he looked below, the more he shrank
from such a death! He stood upright with a little shiver, and began--it was not for the
first time that day--a searching investigation into the contents of
his pocket. The result was uninspiring. There was not an article
there which would have fetched the price of a dose of poison. Then
his fingers strayed into a breast-pocket which he seldom used, and
brought out a letter, unopened, all grimy, and showing signs of having
been there for some considerable time. He held it between his fingers,
doubtful at first from where it had come. Then suddenly he remembered. He remembered the runaway horses in the Bois, and the strange-looking
old woman who had sat in the carriage with grim, drawn lips and pallid
face. He remembered the dash into the roadway, the brief, maddening
race by the side of the horses, his clutch at the reins, the sense
of being dragged along the dusty road. It was, perhaps, the one
physically courageous action of his life. The horses were stopped, and
the woman's life was saved. He looked at the letter in his hand. "Why not?" he asked himself softly. He hesitated, and glanced downward once more toward the river. The
sight seemed to decide him. He turned his weary footsteps again
westward. Walking with visible effort, and resting whenever he had a chance, he
reached at last the Oxford Street end of Bond Street. Holding the
letter in his hand, he made his way, slowly and more painfully than
ever, down the right-hand side. People stared at him a little
curiously. He was a strange figure, passing through the crowds of
well-dressed, sauntering men and women. He was unnaturally thin--the
pallor of his cheeks and the gleam in his eyes spoke of starvation. His clothes had been well-cut, but they were almost in rags. His cap
had cost him a few pence at a second-hand store. He made his way toward his destination, looking neither to the right
nor to the left. The days had gone when he found it interesting to
study the faces of the passers-by, looking out always for adventures,
amusing himself with shrewd speculations as to the character and
occupation of those who seemed worthy of notice. This was his last
quest now--the quest of life or death. He stopped in front of a certain number, and comparing it with the
tattered envelope which he held in his hand, finally entered. The
lift-boy, who was lounging in the little hall, looked at him in
surprise. "I want to find Madame Helga," the young man said shortly. "This is
number 38, isn't it?" The boy looked at him doubtfully, and led the way to the lift. "Third floor," he said. "I'll take you up." The lift stopped, and Bertrand Saton found in front of him a door upon
which was a small brass plate, engraved simply with the name of Helga. He knocked twice, and received no answer. Then, turning the handle, he
entered, and stood looking about him with some curiosity. It was a small room, luxuriously but sombrely furnished. Heavy
curtains were drawn more than half-way across the windows, and the
room was so dark that at first he was not sure whether it was indeed
empty. On a small black oak table in the middle of the rich green
carpet, stood a crystal ball. There was nothing else unusual about the
apartment, except the absence of any pictures upon the walls, and a
faint aromatic odor, as though somewhere dried weeds were being
burned. Some curtains opposite him were suddenly thrust aside. A woman stood
there looking at him. She was of middle height, fair, with a
complexion which even in that indistinct light he could see owed
little of its smoothness to nature. She wore a loose gown which seemed
to hang from her shoulders, of some soft green material, drawn around
her waist with a girdle. Her eyes were deep-set and penetrating. "You wish to see me?" she asked. He held out the note. "If you are Madame Helga," he answered. She came a little further into the room, looking at him with a slight
frown contracting her pencilled eyebrows. He had no appearance of
being a client. "You have brought a letter, then?" she asked. "My name is Bertrand Saton," he explained. "This letter was given to
me in Paris more than a year ago, by an elderly lady. I have carried
it with me all that time. At first it did not seem likely that I
should ever need to use it. Unfortunately," he added, a little
bitterly, "things have changed." She took the letter, and tore open the envelope. Its contents
consisted only of a few lines, which she read with some appearance of
surprise. Then she turned once more to the young man. "You are the Mr. Bertrand Saton of whom the writer of this letter
speaks?" she asked. He nodded. "I am," he answered. She looked him over from head to foot. There was scarcely an inch of
his person which did not speak of poverty and starvation. "You have had trouble," she remarked. "I have," he admitted. "The lady who wrote that letter," she said, "is at present in Spain." He turned to go. "I am not surprised," he answered. "My star is not exactly in the
ascendant just now." "Don't be too sure," she said. "And whatever you do, don't go away. Sit down if you are tired. You don't seem strong." "I am not," he admitted. "Would you like," he added, "to know what is
the matter with me?" "It is nothing serious, I hope?" "I am starving," he declared, simply. "I have eaten nothing for
twenty-four hours." She looked at him for a moment as though doubting his words. Then she
moved rapidly to a desk which stood in a corner of the room. "You are a very foolish person," she said, "to allow yourself to get
into such a state, when all the time you had this letter in your
pocket. But I forgot," she added, unlocking the desk. "You had not
read it. You had better have some money to buy yourself food and
clothes, and come here again." "Food and clothes!" he repeated, vaguely. "I do not understand." She touched the letter with her forefinger. "You have a very powerful friend here," she said. "I am told to give
you whatever you may be in need of, and to telegraph to her, in
whatever part of the world she may be, if ever you should present this
letter." Saton began to laugh softly. "It is the turn of the wheel," he said. "I am too weak to hear any
more. Give me some money, and I will come back. I must eat or I shall
faint." She gave him some notes, and watched him curiously as he staggered out
of the room. He forgot the lift, and descended by the stairs,
unsteadily, like a drunken person, reeling from the banisters to the
wall, and back again. Out in the street, people looked at him
curiously as he turned northward toward Oxford Street. His eyes
searched the shop-windows. He hurried along like a man feverishly
anxious to make use of his last stint of strength. He was in search of
food! CHAPTER II

OLD ACQUAINTANCES


Rochester was walking slowly along the country lane which led from the
main road to Beauleys, when the hoot of a motor overtaking him caused
him to slacken his pace and draw in close to the hedge-side. The great
car swung by, with a covered top upon which was luggage, a chauffeur,
immaculate in dark green livery, and inside, two people. Rochester
caught a glimpse of them as they passed by--the woman, heavily muffled
up notwithstanding the warm afternoon, old and withered; the man,
young, with dark, sallow complexion, and thoughtful eyes. They were
gone like a flash. Yet Rochester stood for a moment in the road
looking after them, before he turned into a field to escape the cloud
of dust. The man's face was peculiar, and strangely enough it
was familiar. He racked his brains in vain for some clue to its
identity--searched every corner of his memory without success. Finally, with a little shrug of his shoulders, he dismissed the
subject. He was soon to be reminded of it, though, for when he reached home, he
was told at once that a gentleman was waiting to see him in the study. Then Rochester, with a little gasp of surprise, recalled that likeness
which had puzzled him so much. He knew who his visitor was! He walked
toward the study, filled with a curious--perhaps, even, an ominous
sense of excitement!... They were face to face in a few seconds. The man was unchanged. The
boy alone was altered. Rochester's hair was a little grayer, perhaps,
but his face was still smooth. His out-of-door life and that wonderful
mouth of his, with its half humorous, half cynical curve, still kept
his face young. To the boy had come a change much more marked and
evident. He was a boy no longer--not even a youth. He carried himself
with the assured bearing of a man of the world. His thick black hair
was carefully parted. His clothes bore the stamp of Saville Row. His
face was puzzling. His eyes were still the eyes of a dreamer, the eyes
of a man who is content to be rather than to do. Yet the rest of his
face seemed somehow to have suffered. His cheeks had filled out. His
mouth and expression were no longer easy to read. There were things in
his face which would have puzzled a physiognomist. Rochester had entered the library and closed the door behind him. He
nodded toward the man who rose slowly to greet him, but ignored his
outstretched hand. "I am sure that I cannot be mistaken," he said. "It is my young friend
of the hillside." "It is he," Saton answered. "I scarcely expected to be remembered." "One sees so few fresh faces," Rochester murmured. "You have kept the
condition, then? I must confess that I am glad to see you. I shall
hope that you will have a great deal that is interesting to tell me. At any rate, it is a good sign that you have kept the condition." "I have kept the condition," Saton answered. "I was never likely to
break it. I have wandered up and down the world a good deal during the
past five years, and I have met many strange sorts of people, but I
have never yet met with philanthropy on such a unique scale as yours." "Not philanthropy, my young friend," Rochester murmured. "I had but
one motive in making you that little gift--curiosity pure and simple." "Forgive me," Saton remarked. "We will call it a loan, if you do not
mind. I am not going to offer you any interest. The five hundred
pounds are here." He handed a little packet across to Rochester, who slipped it
carelessly into his pocket. "This is romance indeed!" he declared, with something of the old
banter in his tone. "You are worse than the industrious apprentice. Have I, by chance, the pleasure of speaking to one of the world's
masters--a millionaire?" The young man laughed. His laugh, at any rate, was not unpleasant. "No!" he said. "I don't suppose that I am even wealthy, as the world
reckons wealth. I have succeeded to a certain extent, although I came
very, very near to disaster. I have made a little money, and I can
make more when it is necessary." "Your commercial instincts," Rochester remarked, "have not been
thoroughly aroused, then?" The young man smiled. "Do I need to tell you," he asked, "that great wealth was not among
the things I saw that night?" "That was a marvelous motor-car in which you passed me," remarked the
other. "It belongs to the lady," Saton said, "who brought me down from
London." Rochester nodded. "It will be interesting to me," he remarked, "later on, to hear
something of your adventures. To judge by your appearance, and your
repayment of that small amount of money, you have prospered." "One hates the word," Saton murmured, with a sudden frown upon his
forehead. "I suppose I must admit that I have been fortunate to some
extent. I am able to repay my debt to you." "That," Rochester interrupted, "is a trifle. It was not worth
considering. In fact I am rather disappointed that you have paid me
back." "I was forced to do it," Saton answered. "One cannot accept alms." Rochester eyed his visitor a little thoughtfully. "A platitude merely," he said. "One accepts alms every day, every
moment of the day. One goes about the world giving and receiving. It
is a small point of view which reckons gold as the only means of
exchange." The young man bowed. "I am corrected," he said. "Yet you must admit that there is something
different in the obligation which is created by money." "Mine, I fear," Rochester answered, "is not an analytic mind. A blunt
regard to truth has always been one of my characteristics. Therefore,
at the risk of indelicacy, I am going on to ask you a question. I
found you on the hillside, a discontented, miserable youth, and I did
for you something which very few sane people would have been inclined
even to consider. Years afterwards--it must be nearly seven, isn't
it?--you return me my money, and we exchange a few polite platitudes. I notice--or is it that I only seem to notice--on your part an entire
lack of gratitude for that eccentric action of mine. The discontented
boy has become, presumably, a prosperous citizen of the world. The two
are so far apart, perhaps----"

Saton threw out his hands. For the first time, there flashed into his
face something of the boy, some trace of that more primitive, more
passionate hold upon life. He abandoned his measured tones, his calm,
almost studied bearing. "Gratitude!" he interrupted. "I am not sure that I feel any! In those
days I had at least dreams. I am not sure that it was not a devilish
experiment of yours to send me out to grope my way amongst the
mirages. You were a man of the world then. You knew and understood. You knew how bitter a thing life is, how for one who climbs, a
thousand must fall. I am not sure," he repeated, with a little catch
in his throat, "that I feel any gratitude." Rochester nodded thoughtfully. He was not in the least annoyed. "You interest me," he murmured. "From what you say, I gather that your
material prosperity has been somewhat dearly bought." "There isn't much to be wrung from life," Saton answered bitterly,
"that one doesn't pay for." "A little later on," Rochester said, "it will give me very much
pleasure to hear something of your adventures. At present, I fear that
I must deny myself that pleasure. My wife has done me the honor to
make me one of her somewhat rare visits, and my house is consequently
full of guests." "I will not intrude," the young man answered, rising. "I shall stay in
the village for a few days. We may perhaps meet again." Rochester hesitated for a moment. Then the corners of his mouth
twitched. There was humor in this situation, after all, and in the
thing which he proposed to himself. "You must not hurry way," he said. "Come and be introduced to some of
my friends." If Rochester expected any hesitation on the part of his visitor, he
was disappointed. The young man seemed to accept the suggestion as the
most natural in the world. "I shall be very glad," he said calmly. "I shall be interested, too,
to meet your wife. At the time when I had the pleasure of seeing you
before, you were, I believe, unmarried." Rochester opened the door, and led the way out into the hall without a
word. CHAPTER III

"WHO IS MR. SATON?" "Really, Henry," Lady Mary Rochester said to her husband, a few
minutes before the dinner-gong sounded, "for once you have been
positively useful. A new young man is such a godsend, and Charlie
Peyton threw us over most abominably. So mean of him, too, after the
number of times I had him to dine in Grosvenor Square." "He's gone to Ostend, I suppose." Lady Mary nodded. "So foolish!" she declared. "He hasn't a shilling in the world, and he
never wins anything. He might just as well have come down here and
made himself agreeable to Lois." "Matchmaking again?" Rochester asked. She shook her head. "What nonsense! Charlie is one of my favorite young men. I am not at
all sure that I could spare him, even to Lois. But the poor boy must
marry someone! I don't see how else he is to live. By the bye, who is
your protege?" Rochester, who was lounging in a low chair in his wife's
dressing-room, looked thoughtfully at the tip of his patent shoe. "I haven't the faintest idea," he declared. His wife frowned, a little impatiently. "You are so extreme," she protested. "Of course you know something
about him. What am I to tell people? They will be sure to ask." "Make them all happy," Rochester suggested. "Tell Lady Blanche that he
is a millionaire from New York, and Lois that he is the latest thing
in Spring poets. They probably won't compare notes until to-morrow, so
it really doesn't matter." "I wish you could be serious for five minutes," Lady Mary said. "You
really are a trial, Henry. You seem to see everything from some quaint
point of view of your own, and to forget all the time that there are a
few other people in the world whose eyesight is not so distorted. Sometimes I can't help realizing how fortunate it is that we see so
little of one another." "I can scarcely be expected to agree with you," Rochester answered,
with an ironical bow. "I must try and mend my ways, however. To return
to the actual subject under discussion, then, I can really tell you
very little about this young man." "You can tell me where he comes from, at any rate," Lady Mary
remarked. Rochester shook his head. "He comes from the land of mysteries," he declared. "I really am
ashamed to be so disappointing, but I only met him once before in my
life." Lady Mary sighed gently. "It is almost a relief," she said, "to hear you admit that you have
seen him before at all. Please tell me where it was that you met," she
added, studying the effect of a tiara upon her splendidly coiffured
hair. "I met him," Rochester answered, "sitting with his back to a rock on
the top of one of my hills." "What, you mean here at Beauleys?" Lady Mary asked. "On Beacon Hill," her husband assented. "It was seven years ago, and
as you can gather from his present appearance, he was little more than
a boy. He sat there in the twilight, seeing things down in the valley
which did not and never had existed--seeing things that never were
born, you know--things for which you stretch out your arms, only to
find them float away. He was quite young, of course." Lady Mary turned around. "Henry!" she exclaimed. "My dear?" "You are absolutely the most irritating person I ever attempted to
live with!" "And I have tried so hard to make myself agreeable," he sighed. "You are one of those uncomfortable people," she declared, "who loathe
what they call the obvious, and adore riddles. You would commit any
sort of mental gymnastic rather than answer a plain question in a
straightforward manner." "It is perfectly true," he admitted. "You have such insight, my dear
Mary." "I am to take it, then," she continued, "that you know absolutely
nothing about your protege? You know nothing, for instance, about his
family, or his means?" "Absolutely nothing," he admitted. "He has an uncommon name, but I
believe that I gathered from him once that his parentage was not
particularly exalted." "At least," she said, with a little sigh, "he is quite presentable. I
call him, in fact, remarkably good-looking, and his manners leave
nothing to be desired. He has lived abroad, I should think." "He may have lived anywhere," Rochester admitted. "Well, I'll have him next me at dinner," she declared. "I daresay I
shall find out all about him pretty soon. Come, Henry, I am quite sure
that everyone is down. You and I play host and hostess so seldom that
we have forgotten our manners." They descended to the drawing-room, and Lady Mary murmured her
apologies. Everyone, however, seemed too absorbed to hear them. They
were listening to Saton, who was standing, the centre of a little
group, telling stories. "It was in Buenos Ayres," Rochester heard him conclude, amidst a
ripple of laughter. "I can assure you that I saw the incident with my
own eyes." Lois Champneyes--an heiress, pretty, and Rochester's ward--came
floating across the room to them. She wore a plain muslin gown, of
simpler cut than was usually seen at Lady Mary's house-parties, and
her complexion showed no signs whatever of town life. Her hair--it was
bright chestnut color, merging in places to golden--was twisted simply
in one large coil on the top of her head. She wore no jewelry, and
she had very much the appearance of a child just escaped from the
schoolroom. "Mary," she exclaimed, drawing her hostess on one side, "you must send
me in with Mr. Saton! He is perfectly charming, and isn't it a lovely
name? Do tell me who he is, and whether I may fall in love with him." Lady Mary nodded. "My dear child," she said, "I shall do nothing of the sort. You are
not nearly old enough to take care of yourself, and we know nothing
about this young man at all. Besides, I want him for myself." "You are the most selfish hostess I ever stayed with," Lois declared,
turning away with a little pout. "Never mind! I'll make him talk to me
after dinner." "Is your friend in the diplomatic service?" Lord Penarvon asked
Rochester. "He is a most amusing fellow." "Not at present, at any rate," Rochester answered. "I really forget
what he used to do when I met him first. As a matter of fact, I have
seen very little of him lately." A servant announced dinner, and they all trooped across the hall a
little informally. It was only a small party, and Lady Mary was a
hostess whose ideas were distinctly modern. Conversation at first was
nearly altogether general. Saton, without in any way asserting
himself, bore at least his part in it. He spoke modestly enough, and
yet everything he said seemed to tell. From the first, the dinner was
a success. Rochester found himself listening with a curiosity for which he
could not wholly account, to this young man, seated only a few feet
away. His presence was so decidedly piquant. It appealed immensely
to his sense of humor. Saton's appearance was in every respect
irreproachable. His tie was perfectly tied, his collar of the latest
shape. His general appearance was that of an exceedingly smart young
man about town. The only sign of eccentricity which he displayed was
an unobtrusive eyeglass, suspended from his neck by a narrow black
ribbon, and which he had only used to study the menu. Rochester looked at him across the white tablecloth, with its
glittering load of silver and glass, its perfumed banks of pink
blossoms, and told himself that one at least of his somewhat eccentric
experiments had borne strange fruit. He thought of that night upon
the hillside, the boy's passionate words, his almost wild desire to
realize, to turn into actual life, the fantasies which were then only
the creation of his fancy. How far had he realized them, he wondered? What did this alteration in his exterior denote? From a few casual and
half-forgotten inquiries, Rochester knew that he was the son, or
rather the orphan of working-people in the neighboring town. There
was nothing in his blood to make him in any way the social equal
of these men and women amongst whom he now sat with such perfect
self-possession. Rochester found himself watching for some traces of
inferior breeding, some lapse of speech, some signs of an innate lack
of refinement. The absence of any of these things puzzled him. Saton
was assured, without being over-confident. He spoke of himself only
seldom. It was marvelous how often he seemed to avoid the use of the
first person. He seemed, too, modestly unconscious of the fact that
his conversation was in any way more interesting than the speech of
those by whom he was surrounded. "You seem to have lived," his hostess said to him once, "in so many
countries, Mr. Saton. Are you really only as old as you look?" "How can I answer that," he asked, smiling, "except by telling you
that I am twenty-five." "You must have commenced to live in your perambulator," she declared. "I have lived nowhere," he answered. "I have visited many places, and
travelled through many lands, but life with me has been a search." "A search?" she murmured, dropping her voice a little, and intimating
by the slight movement of her head towards him, that their
conversation was to become a tete-a-tete. "Well," she continued, "I
suppose that life is that with all of us, only you see with us poor
frivolous people, a search means nearly always the same thing--a
search for amusement or distraction, whichever you choose to call it." Saton shrugged his shoulders slightly. "Different things amuse different people," he remarked. "My search, I
will admit, was of a different order." "It is finished?" she asked. "It will never be finished," he answered. "The man who finds what he
seeks," he added, raising his dark eyes to hers, "as a rule has fixed
his ambitions too low." "Speaking of ambitions, Mr. Saton," Lord Penarvon asked across the
table, "are you interested in politics?" "Not in the least," Saton answered frankly. "There seem to me to be so
many other things in life better worth doing than making fugitive laws
for a dissatisfied country." "Tell me," his hostess asked, "what do you yourself consider the
things better worth doing?" Saton hesitated. For the first time, he seemed scarcely at his ease. He glanced across at Rochester, and down at his plate. "The sciences," he answered, quietly. "There are many torches lit
which need strong hands to carry them forward." Lois leaned across the table. As yet she had scarcely spoken, but she
had listened intently to his every word. "Which of the sciences, Mr. Saton?" she asked, a little breathlessly. He smiled at her, and hesitated a moment before answering. "There are so many," he said, "which are equally fascinating, but I
think that it is always the least known which is the most attractive. When I spoke, I was really thinking of one which many people would
scarcely reckon amongst the orthodox list. I mean occultism." There was a little murmur of interest. Saton himself, however,
deliberately turned the conversation. He reverted to a diplomatic
incident which had come to his notice when in Brazil, and asked Lord
Penarvon's opinion concerning it. "By the bye," the latter asked, as their conversation drew toward a
close, "how long did you say that you had been in England, Mr. Saton?" "A very short time," Saton answered, with a faint smile. "I have been
something of a wanderer for years." "And you came from?" Rochester asked, leaning a little forward. Saton smiled as his eyes met his host's. He hesitated perceptibly. "I came from the land where the impossible sometimes happens," he
answered, lightly, "the land where one dreams in the evening, and is
never sure when one wakes in the morning that one's dreams have not
become solid things." Lady Mary sighed. "Can one get a Cook's ticket?" she asked. "Can one get there by motor-car, or even flying-machine?" Lois
demanded. "I would risk my bones to find my way there." Saton laughed. "Unfortunately," he said, "there is a different path for every one of
us, and there are no signposts." Lady Mary sighed as she rose to her feet. She nodded a friendly little
farewell to her interesting neighbor. "Then we may as well go and have some really good bridge," she said,
"until you men take it into your heads to come and disturb us." CHAPTER IV

A QUESTION OF OBLIGATION


Afternoon tea was being served in the hall at Beauleys on the day
after Saton's arrival. Saton himself was sitting with Lois Champneyes
in a retired corner. "I was going to ask you," he remarked, as he handed her some cakes,
"about Mr. Rochester's marriage. He was a bachelor when I--first met
him." "Were you very intimate in those days?" she asked. "Not in the least," he answered, with a faint reminiscent smile. "Then you never heard about the romance of his life?" she asked. Saton shook his head. "Never," he declared. "Nor should I ever have associated the word with
Mr. Rochester." She sighed gently. "I daresay he was very different in those days," she said. "Before the
Beauleys property came to him, he was quite poor, and he was very much
in love with the dearest woman--Pauline Hambledon. It was impossible
for them to marry--her people wouldn't hear of it--so he went abroad,
and she married Sir Walter Marrabel! Such a pig! Everyone hated him. Then old Mr. Stephen Rochester died suddenly, without a will, and all
this property came to Henry!" "And then he married, I suppose?" Saton remarked. "I was going to tell you about that," Lois continued. "Mary was a
niece of Stephen Rochester, and a daughter of the Marquis of Haselton,
who was absolutely bankrupt when he died. Stephen Rochester adopted
her, and then died without leaving her a farthing! So there she was,
poor dear, penniless, and Henry had everything. Of course, he had to
marry her." "Why not?" Saton remarked. "She is quite charming." "Yes! But this is the tantalizing part of it," Lois continued. "They
hadn't been married a year when Sir Walter Marrabel died. Pauline is a
widow now. She is coming here in a few days. I do hope you will meet
her." "This is quite interesting," Saton murmured. "How do Lady Mary and her
husband get on?" Lois made a little grimace. "They go different ways most of the time," she answered. "I suppose
they're only what people call modern. Isn't that a motor horn?" she
cried out, springing to her feet. "I wonder if it's Guerdie!" "For a man who has been a great lawyer," Lord Penarvon declared,
"Guerdon is the most uncertain and unpunctual of men. One never knows
when to expect him." "He was to have arrived yesterday," Lady Mary remarked. "We sent to
the station twice." "I suppose," Rochester said, "that even to gratify the impatience of
an expectant house-party, it is not possible to quicken the slow
process of the law. If you look at the morning papers, you will see
that he was at the Central Criminal Court, trying some case or other,
all day yesterday. The man who pleads 'Not Guilty,' and who pays for
his defence, expects to be heard out to the bitter end. It is really
only natural." Saton, who had been left alone in his corner, rose suddenly to his
feet and came into the circle. He handed his cup to his hostess, and
turned toward Rochester. "You were speaking of judges?" he remarked. Rochester nodded. "In a few moments," he said, "you will probably meet the cleverest one
we have upon the English bench. Without his robe and wig, some people
find him insignificant. Personally, I must confess that I never feel
his eyes upon me without a shiver. They say that he never loses sight
of a fact or forgets a face." "And what is the name of this wonderful person?" Saton asked. "Lord Guerdon," Rochester answered. "Even though you have spent so
little time in England of late years, you must have heard of him." The curtains were suddenly thrown aside, and a footman entered
announcing the newly-arrived guest. From the hall beyond came the
sound of a departing motor, and the clatter of luggage being brought
in. The footman stood on one side. "Lord Guerdon!" he announced. Lady Mary held out her hands across the tea-tray. Rochester came a
few steps forward. Everyone ceased their conversation to look at the
small, spare figure of the man who, clad in a suit of travelling
clothes of gray tweed, and cut after a somewhat ancient pattern,
insignificant-looking in figure and even in bearing, yet carried
something in his clean-shaven, wrinkled face at once impressive and
commanding. Everyone seemed to lean forward with a little air of
interest, prepared to exchange greetings with him as soon as he had
spoken to his host and hostess. Only Saton stood quite still, still as
a figure turned suddenly into stone. No one appeared to notice him, to
notice the twitching of his fingers, the almost ashen gray of his
cheeks--no one except the girl with whom he had been talking, and
whose eyes had scarcely left his. He recovered himself quickly. When
Rochester turned towards him, a moment or so later, he was almost at
his ease. "You find us all old friends, Guerdon," he said, "except that I have
to present to you my friend Mr. Saton. Saton, this is Lord Guerdon,
whose caricature you have doubtless admired in many papers, comic and
otherwise, and who I am happy to assure you is not nearly so terrible
a person as he might seem from behind that ominous iron bar." Saton held out his hand, but almost immediately withdrawing it,
contented himself with a murmured word, and a somewhat low bow. For a
second the judge's eyebrows were upraised, his keen eyes seemed to
narrow. He made no movement to shake hands. "I am very glad to meet Mr. Saton," he said slowly. "By the bye," he
continued, after a second's pause, "is this our first meeting? I seem
to have an idea--your face is somehow familiar to me." There were few men who could have faced the piercing gaze of those
bright brown eyes, set deep in the withered face, without any sign of
embarrassment. Yet Saton smiled back pleasantly enough. He was
completely at his ease. His face showed only a reasonable amount of
pleasure at this encounter with the famous man. "I am afraid, Lord Guerdon," he said, "that I cannot claim the
privilege of any previous acquaintance. Although I am an Englishman,
my own country has seen little of me during the last few years." "Come and have some tea at once," Lady Mary insisted, looking up at
the judge. "I want to hear all about this wonderful Clancorry case. Oh, I know you're not supposed to talk about it, but that really
doesn't matter down here. You shall have a comfortable chair by my
side, and some hot muffins." Saton went back to his seat by the side of Lois Champneyes, carrying
his refilled teacup in his hand. She looked at him a little curiously. "Tell me," she said, "have you really never met Lord Guerdon before?" "Never in my life," he answered. "Did he remind you of anyone?" she asked. "It is curious that you should ask that," Saton remarked. "In a way he
did." "I thought so," she declared, with a little breath of relief. "That
was it, of course. Do you know how you looked when you first heard
his name--when he came into the room?" "I have no idea," he answered. "I only know that when I saw him enter,
it gave me almost a shock. He reminded me most strangely of a man who
has been dead for many years. I could scarcely take my eyes off him at
first." "I will tell you," she said, "what your look reminded me of. Many
years before I was out--in my mother's time--there was a man named
Mallory who was tried for murder, the murder of a friend, who everyone
knew was his rival. Well, he got off, but only after a long trial, and
only by a little weakness in the chain of evidence, which even his
friends at the time thought providential. He went abroad for a long
time. Then he came into a title and returned to England. He was
obliged to take up his position, and people were willing enough to
forget the past. He opened his London house, and accepted every
invitation which came. At the very first party he went to, he came
face to face with the judge who had tried him. My mother was there. I
remember she told me how he looked. It was foolish of me, but I
thought of it when I saw you just then." Saton smiled sympathetically. "And the end of the story?" he asked. "The man had such a shock," she continued, "that he shut up his house,
gave up all his schemes for re-entering life, left England, and never
set foot in the country again." Saton rose to his feet. "I see that my host is beckoning me," he said. "Will you excuse me for
a moment?" Rochester passed his arm through the younger man's. "Come into the gun-room for a few minutes," he said. "I want to show
you the salmon flies I was speaking of." Saton smiled a little curiously, and followed his host across the hall
and down the long stone passage which led to the back quarters of the
house. The gun-room was deserted and empty. Rochester closed the door. "My young friend," he said, "if you do not object, I should like to
have a few minutes of plain speaking with you." "I should be delighted," Saton answered, seating himself deliberately
in a battered old easy-chair. "Seven years ago," Rochester continued, leaning his elbow against
the mantelpiece, "we made a bargain. I sent you out into the world,
an egotistical Don Quixote, and I provided you with the means with
which you were to turn the windmills into castles. I made one
condition--two, in fact. One that you came back. Well, you have kept
that. The other was that you told me what it was like to build the
castles of bricks and mortar, which in the days when I knew you, you
built in fancy only." "Aren't you a little allegorical?" Saton asked, calmly. "I admit it," Rochester answered. "I was very nearly, in fact, out of
my depth. Tell me, in plain words, what have you done with yourself
these seven years?" "You want me," Saton remarked, "to give an account of my stewardship." "Put it any way you please," Rochester answered. "The fact remains
that though you are a guest in my house, you are a complete stranger
to me." Saton smiled. "You might have thought of that," he said, "before you asked me here." Rochester shrugged his shoulders. "Perhaps," he said, "I preferred to keep up my reputation as an
eccentric person. At any rate, you must remember that it was open to
me at any moment to ask you the question I have asked you now." Saton sat perfectly still in his chair, his eyes apparently fixed upon
the ground. All the time Rochester was watching him. Was it seven
years ago, seven years only, since he had stood by the side of that
boy, whose longing eyes had been fixed with almost passionate
intensity upon that world of shadows and unseen things? This was a
different person. With the swiftness of inspiration itself, he
recognised something of the change which had taken place. Saton had
fought his battle twice over. He might esteem himself a winner. He
might even say that he had proved it. Yet there was another side. This
young man with the lined face, and the almost unnatural restraint of
manner, might well have taken up the thread of life which the boy had
laid down. But there was a difference. The thread might be the same,
but it was no longer of gold. Then Saton raised his eyes, and Rochester, who was watching him
intensely, realized with a sudden convincing thrill something which he
had felt from the moment when he had stepped into the library and
welcomed this unexpected visitor. There was nothing left of gratitude
or even kindly feeling in the heart of this young man. There was
something else which looked out from his eyes, something else which he
did not even trouble to conceal. Rochester knew, from that moment,
that he had an enemy. "There are just two things," Saton said quietly, "of which I should
like to remind you. The first is that from the day I left this house
with five hundred pounds in bank-notes buttoned up in my pocket, I
regarded that sum as a loan. I have always regarded it as a loan, and
I have repaid it." "I do not consider your obligation to me lessened," Rochester remarked
coldly. "If it was a loan, it was a loan such as no sane man would
have made. You had not a penny in the world, and I did not even know
your name. The chances were fifty to one against my ever seeing a
penny of my money again." "I admit that," Saton answered. "Yet I will remind you of your own
words--five hundred pounds were no more to you than a crown piece to
me. You gave me the money. You gave me little else. You gave me no
encouragement, no word of kindly advice. Go back that seven years, and
remember what you said to me when you stood by my side, toying with
your gun, and looking at me superciliously, as though I were some sort
of curiosity which it amused you to turn inside out.--The one
unforgivable thing in life, you said, was failure. Do you remember
telling me that if I failed I was to swim out on a sunny day--to swim
and swim until the end came? Do you remember telling me that death was
sometimes a pleasant thing, but that life after failure was Hell
itself?" Rochester nodded. "I always had such a clear insight into life," he murmured. "I was
perfectly right." "From your point of view you doubtless were," Saton answered. "You
were a cynic and a pessimist, and I find you now unchanged. I went
away with your words ringing in my brain. It was the first poisonous
thought which had ever entered there, and I never lost it. I said to
myself that whatever price I paid for success, success of some sort I
would gain. When things went against me, I seemed to hear always those
bitter, supercilious words. I could even see the curl of your lips as
you looked down upon me, and figured to yourself the only possible
result of trusting me, an unfledged, imaginative boy, with the means
to carve his way a little further into the world. Failure! I wrote the
word out of the dictionary of my life. Sin, crime, ill-doing of any
sort if they became necessary--I kept them there. But failure--no! And
this was your doing. Now you come to ask me questions. You want to
know if I am a fit and proper person to receive in your house. Perhaps
I have sinned. Perhaps I have robbed. Perhaps I have proved myself a
master in every form of ill-doing. But I have not failed! I have paid
you back your five hundred pounds." "The question of ethics," Rochester remarked, "interests me very
little if at all. The only point is that whereas on the hillside you
were simply a stray unit of humanity, and the things which we said to
one another concerned ourselves only, here matters are a little
different. In a thoughtless moment, I asked you to become a guest
under my roof. It was, I frankly admit, a mistake. I trust that I need
not say more." "If you will have my things removed to the Inn," Saton said slowly--

"No such extreme measures are necessary," Rochester answered. "You
will stay with us until to-morrow morning. After luncheon you will
probably find it convenient to terminate your visit as soon as
possible." "I shall be gone," Saton answered, "before any of your guests are up. In case I do not see you again alone, let me ask you a question, or
rather a favor." Rochester bowed slightly. "There is a house below the Convalescent Home--Blackbird's Nest, they
call it," Saton said. "It is empty now--too large for your keepers,
too small for a country seat. Will you let it to me?" Rochester looked at him with uplifted eyebrows. "Let it to you?" he repeated. "Do you mean to say that after an
adventurous career such as I imagine you have had, you think of
settling down, at your age, in a neighborhood like this?" "Scarcely that," Saton answered. "I shall be here only for a few days
at a time, at different periods in the year. The one taste which I
share in common with the boy whom you knew, is a love for the country,
especially this part of it." "You wish to live there alone?" Rochester asked. "There is one--other person," Saton answered with some hesitation. Rochester sighed gently. "Alas!" he said. "Instinct tells me that that person will turn out to
be of the other sex. If only you knew, my young friend, what the
morals of this neighborhood are, you would understand how fatal your
proposal is." Something that was almost malign gleamed for a moment in Saton's eyes. "It is true," he said, "that the person I spoke of is a woman, but as
she is at least sixty years old, and can only walk with the help of a
stick, I do not think that she would be apt to disturb the moral
prejudices of your friends." "What has she to do with you?" Rochester asked, a little shortly. "Have you found relatives out in the world, or are you married?" Saton smiled. "I am not married," he answered, "and as the lady in question is a
foreigner, there is no question of any relationship between us. I am,
as a matter of fact, her adopted son." "You can go and see my agent," Rochester answered. "Personally, I
shall not interfere. I am to take it for granted, then, I presume,
that you have nothing more to tell me concerning yourself?" "At present, nothing," Saton answered. "Some day, perhaps," he added,
rising, "I may tell you everything. You see," he added, "I feel that
my life, such as it is, is in some respects dedicated to you, and that
you therefore have a certain right to know something of it. But that
time has not come yet." Once more there was a short and somewhat inexplicable pause, and once
more Rochester knew that he was in the presence of an enemy. He
shrugged his shoulders and turned toward the door. "Well," he said, "we had better be getting off. Guerdon is a decent
fellow, but he always needs looking after. If he is bored for five
minutes, he gets sulky. If he is bored for a quarter of an hour, he
goes home. You never met Lord Guerdon before, I suppose?" he asked, as
he threw open the door. They were men of nerve, both of them. Neither flinched. Rochester's
question had been asked in an absolutely matter-of-fact tone, and
Saton's reply was entirely casual. Yet he knew very well that it was
only since the coming of the great judge that Rochester had suddenly
realized that amongst the guests staying in his house, there was one
who might have been any sort of criminal. "I have seen him in court," Saton remarked, with a slight smile, "and
of course I have seen pictures of him everywhere. Do not let me keep
you, please. I have some letters to write in my room." Rochester went back to his guests. His brows were knitted. He was
unusually thoughtful. His wife, who was watching him, called him
across to the bridge table, where she was dummy. "Well?" she asked. "What is it?" Rochester looked down at her. The corners of his mouth slowly unbent. "Have you ever heard," he whispered in her ear, "of the legend of the
Frankenstein?" CHAPTER V

A MORNING WALK


"My dear Henry," Lady Mary said, a few days later, swinging round in
her chair from the writing-table, "whatever in this world induced you
to encourage that extraordinary person Bertrand Saton to settle down
in this part of the world?" Rochester continued for a moment to gaze out of the window across the
Park, with expressionless face. "My dear Mary," he said, "I did not encourage him to do anything of
the sort." "You let him Blackbird's Nest," she reminded him. "I had scarcely a reasonable excuse for refusing to let it," Rochester
answered. "I did not suggest that he should take it. I merely referred
him to my agents. He went to see old Bland the very next morning, and
the thing was arranged." "I think," Lady Mary said deliberately, "that it is one of those cases
where you should have exercised a little more discrimination. This is
a small neighborhood, and I find it irritating to be continually
running up against people whom I dislike." "You dislike Saton?" Rochester remarked, nonchalantly. "Dislike is perhaps a strong word," his wife answered. "I distrust
him. I disbelieve in him. And I dislike exceedingly the friendship
between him and Lois." Rochester shrugged his shoulders. "Does it amount to a friendship?" he asked. "What else?" his wife answered. "It was obvious that she was
interested in him when he was staying here, and twice since I have met
them walking together. I hate mysterious people. They tell me that he
has made Blackbird's Nest look like a museum inside, and there is the
most awful old woman, with white hair and black eyes, who never leaves
his side, they say, when he is at home." "She is," Rochester remarked, "I presume, of an age to disarm
scandal?" "She looks as old as Methuselah," his wife answered, "but what does
the man want with such a creature at all?" "She may be an elderly relative," Rochester suggested. "Relative? Why, she calls herself the Comtesse somebody!" Lady Mary
declared. "I do wish you would tell me, Henry, exactly what you know
and what you do not know about this young man." "What I do know is simple enough," he answered. "What I do not know
would, I begin to believe, fill a volume." "Then you had better go and see him, and readjust matters," she
declared, a little sharply. "I want Lois to marry well, and she
mustn't have her head turned by this young man." Rochester strolled through the open French-window into the
flower-garden. He pulled a low basket chair out into the sun, close to
a bed of pink and white hyacinths. A man-servant, seeing him, brought
out the morning papers, which had just arrived, but Rochester waved
them away. "Fancy reading the newspapers on a morning like this!" he murmured,
half to himself. "The person who would welcome the intrusion of a
world of vulgar facts into an aesthetically perfect half-hour,
deserves--well, deserves to be the sort of person he must be. Take the
papers away, Groves," he added, as the man stood by, a little
embarrassed. 