



Produced by Charles Keller. HTML version by Al Haines. IN THE BISHOP'S CARRIAGE


By

MIRIAM MICHELSON





I. When the thing was at its hottest, I bolted. Tom, like the darling he
is--(Yes, you are, old fellow, you're as precious to me as--as you are
to the police--if they could only get their hands on you)--well, Tom
drew off the crowd, having passed the old gentleman's watch to me, and
I made for the women's rooms. The station was crowded, as it always is in the afternoon, and in a
minute I was strolling into the big, square room, saying slowly to
myself to keep me steady:

"Nancy, you're a college girl--just in from Bryn Mawr to meet your
papa. Just see if your hat's on straight." I did, going up to the big glass and looking beyond my excited face to
the room behind me. There sat the woman who can never nurse her baby
except where everybody can see her, in a railroad station. There was
the woman who's always hungry, nibbling chocolates out of a box; and
the woman fallen asleep, with her hat on the side, and hairpins
dropping out of her hair; and the woman who's beside herself with fear
that she'll miss her train; and the woman who is taking notes about the
other women's rigs. And--

And I didn't like the look of that man with the cap who opened the
swinging door a bit and peeped in. The women's waiting-room is no
place for a man--nor for a girl who's got somebody else's watch inside
her waist. Luckily, my back was toward him, but just as the door swung
back he might have caught the reflection of my face in a mirror hanging
opposite to the big one. I retreated, going to an inner room where the ladies were having the
maid brush their gowns, soiled from suburban travel and the dirty
station. The deuce is in it the way women stare. I took off my hat and jacket
for a reason to stay there, and hung them up as leisurely as I could. "Nance," I said under my breath, to the alert-eyed, pug-nosed girl in
the mirror, who gave a quick glance about the room as I bent to wash my
hands, "women stare 'cause they're women. There's no meaning in their
look. If they were men, now, you might twitter." I smoothed my hair and reached out my hand to get my hat and jacket
when--when--

Oh, it was long; long enough to cover you from your chin to your heels! It was a dark, warm red, and it had a high collar of chinchilla that
was fairly scrumptious. And just above it the hat hung, a red-cloth
toque caught up on the side with some of the same fur. The black maid misunderstood my involuntary gesture. I had all my best
duds on, and when a lot of women stare it makes the woman they stare at
peacock naturally, and--and--well, ask Tom what he thinks of my style
when I'm on parade. At any rate, it was the maid's fault. She took
down the coat and hat and held them for me as though they were mine. What could I do, 'cept just slip into the silk-lined beauty and set the
toque on my head? The fool girl that owned them was having another
maid mend a tear in her skirt, over in the corner; the little place was
crowded. Anyway, I had both the coat and hat on and was out into the
big anteroom in a jiffy. What nearly wrecked me was the cut of that coat. It positively made me
shiver with pleasure when I passed and saw myself in that long mirror. My, but I was great! The hang of that coat, the long, incurving sweep
in the back, and the high fur collar up to one's nose--even if it is a
turned-up nose--oh! I stayed and looked a second too long, for just as I was pulling the
flaring hat a bit over my face, the doors swung, as an old lady came
in, and there behind her was that same curious man's face with the cap
above it. Trapped? Me? Not much! I didn't wait a minute, but threw the doors
open with a gesture that might have belonged to the Queen of Spain. I
almost ran into his arms. He gave an exclamation. I looked him
straight in the eyes, as I hooked the collar close to my throat, and
swept past him. He weakened. That coat was too jolly much for him. It was for me,
too. As I ran down the stairs, its influence so worked on me that I
didn't know just which Vanderbilt I was. I got out on the sidewalk all right, and was just about to take a car
when the turnstile swung round, and there was that same man with the
cap. His face was a funny mixture of doubt and determination. But it
meant the Correction for me. "Nance Olden, it's over," I said to myself. But it wasn't. For it was then that I caught sight of the carriage. It was a fat, low, comfortable, elegant, sober carriage, wide and
well-kept, with rubber-tired wheels. And the two heavy horses were fat
and elegant and sober, too, and wide and well-kept. I didn't know it
was the Bishop's then--I didn't care whose it was. It was empty, and
it was mine. I'd rather go to the Correction--being too young to get
to the place you're bound for, Tom Dorgan--in it than in the patrol
wagon. At any rate, it was all the chance I had. I slipped in, closing the door sharply behind me. The man on the
box--he was wide and well-kept, too--was tired waiting, I suppose, for
he continued to doze gently, his high coachman's collar up over his
ears. I cursed that collar, which had prevented his hearing the door
close, for then he might have driven off. But it was great inside: soft and warm, the cushions of dark plum, the
seat wide and roomy, a church paper, some notes for the Bishop's next
sermon and a copy of Quo Vadis. I just snuggled down, trust me. I
leaned far back and lay low. When I did peek out the window, I saw the
man with the brass buttons and the cap turning to go inside again. Victory! He had lost the scent. Who would look for Nancy Olden in the
Bishop's carriage? Now, you know how early I got up yesterday to catch the train so's Tom
and I could come in with the people and be naturally mingling with
them? And you remember the dance the night before? I hadn't had more
than three hours' sleep, and the snug warmth of that coach was just
nuts to me, after the freezing ride into town. I didn't dare get out
for fear of some other man in a cap and buttons somewhere on the
lookout. I knew they couldn't be on to my hiding-place or they'd have
nabbed me before this. After a bit I didn't want to get out, I was so
warm and comfortable--and elegant. O Tom, you should have seen your
Nance in that coat and in the Bishop's carriage! First thing I knew, I was dreaming you and I were being married, and
you had brass buttons all over you, and I had the cloak all right, but
it was a wedding-dress, and the chinchilla was a wormy sort of orange
blossoms, and--and I waked when the handle of the door turned and the
Bishop got in. Asleep? That's what! I'd actually been asleep. And what did I do now? That's easy--fell asleep again. There wasn't anything else to do. Not
really asleep this time, you know; just, just asleep enough to be wide
awake to any chance there was in it. The horses had started, and the carriage was half-way across the street
before the Bishop noticed me. He was a little Bishop, not big and fat and well-kept like the rig, but
short and lean, with a little white beard and the softest eye--and the
softest heart--and the softest head. Just listen. "Lord bless me!" he exclaimed, hurriedly putting on his spectacles, and
looking about bewildered. I was slumbering sweetly in the corner, but I could see between my
lashes that he thought he'd jumped into somebody else's carriage. The sight of his book and his papers comforted him, though, and before
he could make a resolution, I let the jolting of the carriage, as it
crossed the car-track, throw me gently against him. "Daddy," I murmured sleepily, letting my head rest on his little, prim
shoulder. That comforted him, too. Hush your laughing, Tom Dorgan; I mean
calling him "daddy" seemed to kind of take the cuss off the situation. "My child," he began very gently. "Oh, daddy," I exclaimed, snuggling down close to him, "you kept me
waiting so long I went to sleep. I thought you'd never come." He put his arm about my shoulders in a fatherly way. You know, I found
out later the Bishop never had had a daughter. I guess he thought he
had one now. Such a simple, dear old soul! Just the same, Tom Dorgan,
if he had been my father, I'd never be doing stunts with tipsy men's
watches for you; nor if I'd had any father. Now, don't get mad. Think
of the Bishop with his gentle, thin old arm about my shoulders, holding
me for just a second as though I was his daughter! My, think of it! And me, Nance Olden, with that fat man's watch in my waist and some
girl's beautiful long coat and hat on, all covered with chinchilla! "There's some mistake, my little girl," he said, shaking me gently to
wake me up, for I was going to sleep again, he feared. "Oh, I knew you were kept at the office," I interrupted quickly. I
preferred to be farther from the station with that girl's red coat
before I got out. "We've missed our train, anyway, haven't we? After
this, daddy dear, let's not take this route. If we'd go straight
through on the one road, we wouldn't have this drive across town every
time. I was wondering, before I fell asleep, what in the world I'd do
in this big city if you didn't come." He forgot to withdraw his arm, so occupied was he by my predicament. "What would you do, my child, if you had--had missed your--your father?" Wasn't it clumsy of him? He wanted to break it to me gently, and this
was the best he could do. "What would I do?" I gasped indignantly. "Why, daddy, imagine me
alone, and--and without money! Why--why, how can you--"

"There! there!" he said, patting me soothingly on the shoulder. That baby of a Bishop! The very thought of Nancy Olden out alone in
the streets was too much for him. He had put his free hand into his pocket and had just taken out a bill
and was trying to plan a way to offer it to me and reveal the fact to
poor, modest little Nance Olden that he was not her own daddy, when an
awful thing happened. We had got up street as far as the opera-house, when we were caught in
the jam of carriages in front; the last afternoon opera of the season
was just over. I was so busy thinking what would be my next move that
I didn't notice much outside--and I didn't want to move, Tom, not a
bit. Playing the Bishop's daughter in a trailing coat of red, trimmed
with chinchilla, is just your Nancy's graft. But the dear little
Bishop gave a jump that almost knocked the roof off the carriage,
pulled his arm from behind me and dropped the ten-dollar bill he held
as though it burned him. It fell in my lap. I jammed it into my coat
pocket. Where is it now? Just you wait, Tom Dorgan, and you'll find
out. I followed the Bishop's eyes. His face was scarlet now. Right next to
our carriage--mine and the Bishop's--there was another; not quite so
fat and heavy and big, but smart, I tell you, with the silver harness
jangling and the horses arching their backs under their blue-cloth
jackets monogrammed in leather. All the same, I couldn't see anything
to cause a loving father to let go his onliest daughter in such a
hurry, till the old lady inside bent forward again and gave us another
look. Her face told it then. It was a big, smooth face, with
accordion-plaited chins. Her hair was white and her nose was curved,
and the pearls in her big ears brought out every ugly spot on her face. Her lips were thin, and her neck, hung with diamonds, looked like a bed
with bolsters and pillows piled high, and her eyes--oh, Tom, her eyes! They were little and very gray, and they bored their way straight
through the windows--hers and ours--and hit the Bishop plumb in the
face. My, if I could only have laughed! The Bishop, the dear, prim little
Bishop in his own carriage, with his arm about a young woman in red and
chinchilla, offering her a bank-note, and Mrs. Dowager Diamonds, her
eyes popping out of her head at the sight, and she one of the lady
pillars of his church--oh, Tom! it took all of this to make that poor
innocent next to me realize how he looked in her eyes. But you see it was over in a minute. The carriage wheels were
unlocked, and the blue coupe went whirling away, and we in the
plum-cushioned carriage followed slowly. I decided that I'd had enough. Now and here in the middle of all these
carriages was a bully good time and place for me to get away. I turned
to the Bishop. He was blushing like a boy. I blushed, too. Yes, I
did, Tom Dorgan, but it was because I was bursting with laughter. "Oh, dear!" I exclaimed in sudden dismay. "You're not my father." "No--no, my dear, I--I'm not," he stammered, his face purple now with
embarrassment. "I was just trying to tell you, you poor little girl,
of your mistake and planning a way to help you, when--"

He made a gesture of despair toward the side where the coupe had been. I covered my face with my hands, and shrinking over into the corner, I
cried:

"Let me out! let me out! You're not my father. Oh, let me out!" "Why, certainly, child. But I'm old enough, surely, to be, and I
wish--I wish I were." "You do!" The dignity and tenderness and courtesy in his voice sort of sobered
me. But all at once I remembered the face of Mrs. Dowager Diamonds,
and I understood. "Oh, because of her," I said, smiling and pointing to the side where
the coupe had been. My, but it was a rotten bad move! I ought to have been strapped for
it. Oh, Tom, Tom, it takes more'n a red coat with chinchilla to make a
black-hearted thing like me into the girl he thought I was. He stiffened and sat up like a prim little school-boy, his soft eyes
hurt like a dog's that's been wounded. I won't tell you what I did then. No, I won't. And you won't
understand, but just that minute I cared more for what he thought of me
than whether I got to the Correction or anywhere else. It made us friends in a minute, and when he stopped the carriage to let
me out, my hand was still in his. But I wouldn't go. I'd made up my
mind to see him out of his part of the scrape, and first thing you know
we were driving up toward the Square, if you please, to Mrs. Dowager
Diamonds' house. He thought it was his scheme, the poor lamb, to put me in her charge
till my lost daddy could send for me. He'd no more idea that I was
steering him toward her, that he was doing the only thing possible, the
only square thing by his reputation, than he had that Nance Olden had
been raised by the Cruelty, and then flung herself away on the first
handsome Irish boy she met. That'll do, Tom. Girls, if you could have seen Mrs. Dowager Diamonds' face when she came
down the stairs, the Bishop's card in her hand, and into the gorgeous
parlor, it'd have been as good as a front seat at the show. She was mad, and she was curious, and she was amazed, and she was
disarmed; for the very nerve of his bringing me to her staggered her so
that she could hardly believe she'd seen what she had. "My dear Mrs. Ramsay," he began, confused a bit by his remembrance of
how her face had looked fifteen minutes before, "I bring to you an
unfortunate child, who mistook my carriage for her father's this
afternoon at the station. She is a college girl, a stranger in town,
and till her father claims her--"

Oh, the baby! the baby! She was stiffening like a rod before his very
eyes. How did his words explain his having his arm round the
unfortunate child? His conscience was so clean that the dear little
man actually overlooked the fact that it wasn't my presence in the
carriage, but his conduct there that had excited Mrs. Dowager Diamonds. And didn't the story sound thin? I tell you, Tom, when it comes to
lying to a woman you've got to think up something stronger than it
takes to make a man believe in you--if you happen to be female yourself. I didn't wait for him to finish, but waltzed right in. I danced
straight up to that side of beef with the diamonds still on it, and
flinging my arms about her, turned a coy eye on the Bishop. "You said your wife was out of town, daddy," I cried gaily. "Have you
got another wife besides mummy?" The poor Bishop! Do you think he tumbled? Not a bit--not a bit. He
sat there gasping like a fish, and Mrs. Dowager Diamonds, surprised by
my sudden attack, stood bolt upright, about as pleasant to hug as--as
you are, Tom, when you're jealous. The trouble with the Bishop's set is that it's deadly slow. Now, if I
had really been the Bishop's daughter--all right, I'll go on. "Oh, mummy," I went on quickly. You know how I said it, Tom--the way I
told you after that last row that Dan Christensen wasn't near so
good-looking as you--remember? "Oh, mummy, you don't know how good it
feels to get home. Out there at that awful college, studying and
studying and studying, sometimes I thought I'd lose my senses. There's
a girl out there now suffering from nervous prostration. She worked so
hard preparing for the mid-years. What's her name? I can't think--I
can't think, my head's so tired. But it sounds like mine, a lot like
mine. Once--I think it was yesterday--I thought it was mine, and I made
up my mind suddenly to come right home and bring it with me. But it
can't be mine, can it? It can't be my name she's got. It can't be,
mummy, say it can't, say it can't!" Tom, I ought to have gone on the stage. I'll go yet, when you're sent
up some day. Yes, I will. You'll be where you can't stop me. I couldn't see the Bishop, but the Dowager--oh, I'd got her. Not so
bad an old body, either, if you only take her the right way. First, she
was suspicious, and then she was scared. And then, bit by bit, the
stiffness melted out of her, her arms came up about me, and there I
was, lying all comfy, with the diamonds on her neck boring rosettes in
my cheeks, and she a-sniffling over me and patting me and telling me
not to get excited, that it was all right, and now I was home mummy
would take care of me, she would, that she would. She did. She got me on to a lounge, soft as--as marshmallows, and she
piled one silk pillow after another behind my back. "Come, dear, let me help you off with your coat," she cooed, bending
over me. "Oh, mummy, it's so cold! Can't I please keep it on?" To let that coat off me was to give the whole thing away. My rig
underneath, though good enough for your girl, Tom, on a holiday, wasn't
just what they wear in the Square. And, d'ye know, you'll say it's
silly, but I had a conviction that with that coat I should say good-by
to the nerve I'd had since I got into the Bishop's carriage,--and from
there into society. I let her take the hat, though, and I could see by
the way she handled it that it was all right--the thing; her kind, you
know. Oh, the girl I got it from had good taste, all right. I closed my eyes for a moment as I lay there and she stood stroking my
hair. She must have thought I'd fallen asleep, for she turned to the
Bishop, and holding out her hand, she said softly:

"My dear, dear Bishop, you are the best-hearted, the saintliest man on
earth. Because you are so beautifully clean-souled yourself, you must
pardon me. I am ashamed to say it, but I shall have no rest till I do. When I saw you in the carriage downtown, with that poor, demented
child, I thought, for just a moment--oh, can you forgive me? It shows
what an evil mind I have. But you, who know so well what Edward is,
what my life has been with him, will see how much reason I have to be
suspicious of all men!" I shook, I laughed so hard. What a corker her Edward must be! See,
Tom, poor old Mrs. Dowager up in the Square having the same devil's
luck with her man as Molly Elliott down in the Alley has with hers. I
wonder if you're all alike. No, for there's the Bishop. He had taken
her hand sympathizingly, forgivingly, but his silence made me curious. I knew he wouldn't let the old lady believe for a moment I was luny, if
once he could be sure himself that I wasn't. You lie, Tom Dorgan, he
wouldn't! Well--But the poor baby, how could he expect to see through
a game that had caught the Dowager herself? Still, I could hear him
walking softly toward me, and I felt him looking keenly down at me long
before I opened my eyes. When I did, you should have seen him jump. Guilty he felt. I could see
the blood rush up under his clear, thin old skin, soft as a baby's, to
find himself caught trying to spy out my secret. I just looked, big-eyed, up at him. You know; the way Molly's kid
does, when he wakes. I looked a long, long time, as though I was
puzzled. "Daddy," I said slowly, sitting up. "You--you are my daddy, ain't you?" "Yes--yes, of course." It was the Dowager who got between him and me,
hinting heavily at him with nods and frowns. But the dear old fellow
only got pinker in the effort to look a lie and not say it. Still, he
looked relieved. Evidently he thought I was luny all right, but that I
had lucid intervals. I heard him whisper something like this to the
Dowager just before the maid came in with tea for me. Yes, Tom Dorgan, tea for Nancy Olden off a silver salver, out of a cup
like a painted eggshell. My, but that almost floored me! I was afraid
I'd give myself dead away with all those little jars and jugs. So I
said I wasn't hungry, though, Lord knows, I hadn't had anything to eat
since early morning. But the Dowager sent the maid away and took the
tray herself, operating all the jugs and pots for me, and then tried to
feed me the tea. She was about as handy as Molly's little sister is
with the baby--but I allowed myself to be coaxed, and drank it down. Tea, Tom Dorgan. Ever taste tea? If you knew how to behave yourself
in polite society, I'd give you a card to my friend, the Dowager, up in
the Square. How to get away! That was the thing that worried me. I'd just made up
my mind to have a lucid interval, when cr-creak, the front door opened,
and in walked--

Tom, you're mighty cute--so cute you'll land us both behind bars some
day--but you can't guess who came in on our little family party. Yes--oh, yes, you've met him. Well, the old duffer whose watch was ticking inside my waist that very
minute! Yes, sir, the same red-faced, big-necked fellow we'd spied
getting full at the little station in the country. Only, he was a bit
mellower than when you grabbed his chain. Well, he was Edward. I almost dropped the cup when I saw him. The Dowager took it from me,
saying:

"There, dear, don't be nervous. It's only--only--"

She got lost. It couldn't be my daddy--the Bishop was that. But it
was her husband, so who could it be? "Evening, Bishop. Hello, Henrietta, back so soon from the opera?" roared Edward, in a big, husky voice. He'd had more since we saw him,
but he walked straight as the Bishop himself, and he's a dear little
ramrod. "Ah!" --his eyes lit up at sight of me--"ah, Miss--Miss--of
course, I've met the young lady, Henrietta, but hang me if I haven't
forgotten her name." "Miss--Miss Murieson," lied the old lady, glibly. "A--a relative." "Why, mummy!" I said reproachfully. "There--there. It's only a joke. Isn't it a joke, Edward?" she
demanded, laughing uneasily. "Joke?" he repeated with a hearty bellow of laughter. "Best kind of a
joke, I call it, to find so pretty a girl right in your own house, eh,
Bishop?" "Why does he call my father 'Bishop', mummy?" I couldn't help it. The fun of hearing the Dowager lie and knowing the
Bishop beside himself with the pain of deception was too much for me. I could see she didn't dare trust her Edward with my sad story. "Ho! ho! The Bishop--that's good. No, my dear Miss Murieson, if this
lady's your mother, why, I must be--at least, I ought to be, your
father. As such, I'm going to have all the privileges of a
parent--bless me, if I'm not." I don't suppose he'd have done it if he'd been sober, but there's no
telling, when you remember the reputation the Dowager had given him. But he'd got no further than to put his arm around me when both the
Bishop and the Dowager flew to the rescue. My, but they were shocked! I couldn't help wondering what they'd have done if Edward had happened
to see the Bishop in the same sort of tableau earlier in the afternoon. But I got a lucid interval just then, and distracted their attention. I stood for a moment, my head bent as though I was thinking deeply. "I think I'll go now," I said at length. "I--I don't understand
exactly how I got here," I went on, looking from the Bishop to the
Dowager and back again, "or how I happened to miss my father. I'm
ever--so much obliged to you, and if you will give me my hat, I'll take
the next train back to college." "You'll do nothing of the sort," said the Dowager, promptly. "My dear,
you're a sweet girl that's been studying too hard. You must go to my
room and rest--"

"And stay for dinner. Don't you care. Sometimes I don't know how I
get here myself." Edward winked jovially. Well, I did. While the Dowager's back was turned, I gave him the
littlest one, in return for his. It made him drunker than ever. "I think," said the Bishop, grimly, with a significant glance at the
Dowager, as he turned just then and saw the old cock ogling me, "the
young lady is wiser than we. I'll take her to the station--"

The station! Ugh! Not Nance Olden, with the red coat still on. "Impossible, my dear Bishop," interrupted the Dowager. "She can't be
permitted to go back on the train alone." "Why, Miss--Miss Murieson, I'll see you back all the way to the college
door. Not at all, not at all. Charmed. First, we'll have dinner--or,
first I'll telephone out there and tell 'em you're with us, so that if
there's any rule or anything of that sort--"

The telephone! This wretched Edward with half his wits gave me more
trouble than the Bishop and the Dowager put together. She jumped at
the idea, and left the room, only to come back again to whisper to me:

"What name, my dear?" "What name? what name?" I repeated blankly. What name, indeed. I
wonder how "Nance Olden" would have done. "Don't hurry, dear, don't perplex yourself," she whispered anxiously,
noting my bewilderment. "There's plenty of time, and it makes no
difference--not a particle, really." I put my hand to my head. "I can't think--I can't think. There's one girl has nervous
prostration, and her name's got mixed with mine, and I can't--"

"Hush, hush! Never mind. You shall come and lie down in my room. You'll stay with us to-night, anyway, and we'll have a doctor in,
Bishop." "That's right," assented the Bishop. "I'll go get him myself." "You--you're not going!" I cried in dismay. It was real. I hated to
see him go. "Nonsense--'phone." It was Edward who went himself to telephone for
the doctor, and I saw my time getting short. But the Bishop had to go, anyway. He looked out at his horses
shivering in front of the house, and the sight hurried him. "My child," he said, taking my hand, "just let Mrs. Ramsay take care of
you to-night. Don't bother about anything, but just rest. I'll see
you in the morning," he went on, noticing that I kind of clung to him. Well, I did. "Can't you remember what I said to you in the
carriage--that I wished you were my daughter. I wish you were, indeed I
do, and that I could take you home with me and keep you, child." "Then--to-night--if--when you pray--will you pray for me as if I
was--your own daughter?" Tom Dorgan, you think no prayers but a priest's are any good, you
bigoted, snickering Catholic! I tell you if some day I cut loose from
you and start in over again, it'll be the Bishop's prayers that'll do
it. The Dowager and I passed Edward in the ball. He gave me a look behind
her back, and I gave him one to match it. Just practice, you know,
Tom. A girl can never know when she'll want to be expert in these
things. She made me lie down on a couch while she turned the lamp low, and then
left me alone in a big palace of a bedroom filled with things. And I
wanted everything I saw. If I could, I'd have lifted everything in
sight. But every minute brought that doctor nearer. Soon as I could be really
sure she was gone, I got up, and, hurrying to the long French windows
that opened on the great stone piazza, I unfastened them quietly, and
inch by inch I pushed them open. There within ten feet of me stood Edward. No escape that way. He saw
me, and was tiptoeing heavily toward me, when I heard the door click
behind me, and in walked the Dowager back again. I flew to her. "I thought I heard some one out there," I said. "It frightened me so that I got up to look. Nobody could be out there,
could they?" She walked to the window and put her head out. Her lips tightened
grimly. "No, nobody could be out there," she said, breathing hard, "but you
might get nervous just thinking there might be. We'll go to a room
upstairs." And go we did, in spite of all I could plead about feeling well enough
now to go alone and all the rest of it. How was I to get out of a
second or third-story window? I began to think about the Correction again as I followed her upstairs,
and after she'd left me I just sat waiting for the doctor to come and
send me there. I didn't much care, till I remembered the Bishop. I
could almost see his face as it would look when he'd be called to
testify against me, and I'd be standing in that railed-in prisoner's
pen, in the middle of the court-room, where Dan Christensen stood when
they tried him. No, I couldn't bear that; not without a fight, anyway. It was for the
Bishop I'd got into this part of the scrape. I'd get out of it so's he
shouldn't know how bad a thing a girl can be. While I lay thinking it over, the same maid that had brought me the tea
came in. She was an ugly, thin little thing. If she's a sample of the
maids in that house, the lot of them would take the kink out of your
pretty hair, Thomas J.  Dorgan, Esquire, late of the House of Refuge
and soon of Moyamensing. Don't throw things. People in my set, mine
and the Dowager's, don't. She had been sent to help me undress, she said, and make me
comfortable. The doctor lived just around the corner and would be in
in a minute. Phew! She wasn't very promising, but she was my only chance. I took
her. "I really don't need any help, thank you, Nora," I said, chipper as a
sparrow, and remembering the name the Dowager had called her by. "Aunt
Henrietta is too fussy, don't you think? Oh, of course, you won't say a
word against her. She told me the other day that she'd never had a
maid so sensible and quick-witted, too, as her Nora. Do you know, I've
a mind to play a joke on the doctor when he comes. You'll help me,
won't you? Oh, I know you will!" Suddenly I remembered the Bishop's
bill. I took it out of my pocket. Yep, Tom, that's where it went. I
had to choose between giving that skinny maid the biggest tip she ever
got in her life--or Nance Olden to the Correction. You needn't swear, Tom Dorgan. I fancy if I'd got there, you'd got
worse. No, you bully, you know I wouldn't tell; but the police sort of
know how to pair our kind. In her cap and apron, I let the doctor in and myself out. And I don't
regret a thing up there in the Square except that lovely red coat with
the high collar and the hat with the fur on it. I'd give--Tom, get me
a coat like that and I'll marry you for life. No, there's one thing I could do better if it was to be done over
again. I could make that dear little old Bishop wish harder I'd been
his daughter. What am I mooning about? Oh--nothing. There's the watch--Edward's
watch. Take it. II. Yes, empty-handed, Tom Dorgan. And I can't honestly say I didn't have
the chance, but--if my hands are empty my head is full. Listen. There's a girl I know with short brown hair, a turned-up nose and gray
eyes, rather far apart. You know her, too? Well, she can't help that. But this girl--oh, she makes such a pretty boy! And the ladies at the
hotel over in Brooklyn, they just dote on her when she's not only a boy
but a bell-boy. Her name may be Nancy when she's in petticoats, but in
trousers she's Nathaniel--in short, Nat. Now, Nat, in blue and buttons, with his nails kept better than most
boys', with his curly hair parted in the middle, and with a gentle tang
to his voice that makes him almost girlish--who would suspect Nat of
having a stolen pass-key in his pocket and a pretty fair knowledge of
the contents of almost every top bureau-drawer in the hotel? Not Mrs. Sarah Kingdon, a widow just arrived from Philadelphia, and
desperately gone on young Mr. George Moriway, also fresh from
Philadelphia, and desperately gone on Mrs. Kingdon's money. The tips that lady gave the bad boy Nat! I knew I couldn't make you
believe it any other way; that's why I passed 'em on to you, Tommy-boy. The hotel woman, you know, girls, is a hotel woman because she isn't
fit to be anything else. She's lazy and selfish and little, and she's
shifted all her legitimate cares on to the proprietor's shoulders. She
actually--you can understand and share my indignation, can't you, Tom,
as you've shared other things?--she even gives over her black tin box
full of valuables to the hotel clerk to put in the safe; the coward! But her vanity--ah, there's where we get her, such speculators as you
and myself. She's got to outshine the woman who sits at the next
table, and so she borrows her diamonds from the clerk, wears 'em like
the peacock she is, and trembles till they're back in the safe again. In the meantime she locks them up in the tin box which she puts in her
top bureau-drawer,  hides the key, forgets where she hid it, and--O
Tom! after searching for it for hours and making herself sick with
anxiety, she ties up her head in a wet handkerchief with vinegar on it
and--rings the bell for the bell-boy! He comes. As I said, he's a prompt, gentle little bell-boy, slight, looks rather
young for his job, but that very youth and innocence of his make him
such a fellow to trust! "Nat," says Mrs. Kingdon, tearfully pressing half a dollar into the
nice lad's hand, "I--I've lost something and I want you to--to help me
find it." "Yes'm," says Nat. He's the soul of politeness. "It must be here--it must be in this room," says the lady, getting wild
with the terror of losing. "I'm sure--positive--that I went straight
to the shoe-bag and slipped it in there. And now I can't find it, and
I must have it before I go out this afternoon for--for a very special
reason. My daughter Evelyn will be home to-morrow and--why don't you
look for it?" "What is it, ma'am?" "I told you once. My key--a little flat key that locks--a box I've
got," she finishes distrustfully. "Have you looked in the shoe-bag, ma'am?" "Why, of course I have, you little stupid. I want you to hunt other
places where I can't easily get. There are other places I might have
put it, but I'm positive it was in the shoe-bag." Well, I looked for that key. Where? Where not? I looked under the
rubbish in the waste-paper basket; Mrs. Kingdon often fooled thieves by
dropping it there. I pulled up the corner of the carpet and looked
there--it was loose; it had often been used for a hiding-place. I
looked in Miss Evelyn's boot and in her ribbon box. I emptied Mrs.
Kingdon's full powder box. I climbed ladders and felt along cornices. I looked through the pockets of Mrs. Kingdon's gowns--a clever bell-boy
it takes to find a woman's pocket, but even the real masculine ones
among 'em are half feminine; they've had so much to do with women. I rummaged through her writing-desk, and, in searching a gold-cornered
pad, found a note from Moriway hidden under the corner. I hid it again
carefully--in my coat pocket. A love-letter from Moriway, to a woman
twenty years older than himself--'tain't a bad lay, Tom Dorgan, but you
needn't try it. At first she watched every move I made, but later, as her headache grew
worse, she got desperate. So then I put my hand down into the shoe-bag
and found the key, where it had slipped under a fold of cloth. Do you suppose that woman was grateful? She snatched it from me. "I knew it was there. I told you it was there. If you'd had any sense
you'd have looked there first. The boys in this hotel are so stupid." "That's all, ma'am?" She nodded. She was fitting the key into the black box she'd taken
from the top drawer. Nat had got to the outside door when he heard her
come shrieking after him. "Nat--Nat--come back! My diamonds--they're not here. I know I put
them back last night--I'm positive. I could swear to it. I can see
myself putting them in the chamois bag, and--O my God, where can they
be! This time they're gone!" Nat could have told her--but what's the use? He felt she'd only lose
'em again if she had 'em. So he let them lie snug in his trousers
pocket--where he had put the chamois bag, when his eyes lit on it,
under the corner of the carpet. He might have passed it over to her
then, but you see, Tom, she hadn't told him to look for a bag; it was a
key she wanted. Bell-boys are so stupid. This time she followed his every step. He could not put his hand on
the smallest thing without rousing her suspicion. If he hesitated, she
scolded. If he hurried, she fumed. Most unjust, I call it, because he
had no thought of stealing--just then. "Come," she said at last, "we'll go down and report it at the desk." "Hadn't I better wait here, ma'am, and look again?" She looked sharply at him. "No; you'd better do just as I tell you." So down we went. And we met Mr. Moriway there. She'd telephoned him. The chambermaid was called, the housekeeper, the electrical engineer
who'd been fixing bells that morning, and, as I said, a bell-boy named
Nat, who told how he'd just come on duty when Mrs. Kingdon's bell rang,
found her key and returned it to her, and was out of the room when she
unlocked the box. That was all he knew. "Is he telling the truth?" Moriway asked Mrs Kingdon. "Ye--es, I guess he is; but where are the diamonds? We must have
them--you know--to-day, George," she whispered. And then she turned
and went upstairs, leaving Moriway to do the rest. "There's only one thing to do, Major," he said to the proprietor. "Search 'em all and then--"

"Search me? It's an outrage!" cried the housekeeper. "Search me if ye loike," growled McCarthy, resentfully. "Oi wasn't
there but a minute; the lady herself can tell ye that." Katie, the chambermaid, flushed painfully, and there were indignant
tears in her eyes, which, I'll tell you in confidence, made a girl
named Nancy uncomfortable. But the boy Nat; knowing that bell-boys have no rights, said nothing. But he thought. He thought, Tom Dorgan, a lot of things and a long way
ahead. The peppery old Major marched us all off to his private office. Not much, girls, it hadn't come. For suddenly the annunciator rang out. Out of the corner of his eye, Nat looked at the bell-boy's bench. It
was empty. There was to be a ball that night, and the bells were going
it over all the place. "Number Twenty-one!" shouted the clerk at the desk. But Number Twenty-one didn't budge. His heart was beating like a
hammer, and the ting--ng--ng of that bell calling him rang in his head
like a song. "Number Twenty-one!" yelled the clerk. Oh, he's got a devil of a temper, has that clerk. Some day, Tom, when
you love me very much, go up to the hotel and break his face for me. "You.--boy--confound you, can't you hear?" he shouted. That time he caught the Major's ear--the one that wasn't deaf. He
looked from Powers' black face to the bench and then to me. And all
the time the bell kept ringing like mad. "Git!" he said to the boy. "And come back in a hurry." Number Twenty-one got--but leisurely. It wouldn't do for a bell-boy to
hurry, particularly when he had such good cause. Oh, girls, those stone stairs, the servants' stairs at the St. James! They're fierce. I tell you, Mag, scrubbing the floors at the Cruelty
ain't so bad. But this time I was jolly glad bell-boys weren't allowed
in the elevator. For there were those diamonds in my pants pocket, and
I must get rid of 'em before I got down to the office again. So I
climbed those stairs, and every step I took my eye was searching for a
hiding-place. I could have pitched the little bag out of a window, but
Nancy Olden wasn't throwing diamonds to the birds, any more than Mag
here is likely to cut off the braids of red hair we used to play horse
with when we drove her about the Cruelty yard. One flight. No chance. Another. Everything bare as stone and soap could keep it. The third flight--my knees began to tremble, and not with climbing. The call came from this floor. But I ran up a fourth just on the
chance, and there in a corner was a fire hatchet strapped to the wall. Behind that hatchet Mrs. Kingdon's diamonds might lie snug till
evening. I put the ends of my fingers first in the little crack to
make sure the little bag wouldn't drop to the floor, and then dived
into my pocket and--

And there behind me, stealthily coming up the last turn of the stairs
was Mr. George Moriway! Don't you hate a soft-walking man, Mag? That cute fellow was cuter
than the old Major himself, and had followed me every inch of the way. "There's something loose with this hatchet, sir," I said, innocently
looking down at him. "Oh, there is? What an observing little fellow you are! Never mind
the hatchet; just tell me what number you were sent to answer." "Number?" I repeated, as though I couldn't see why he wanted to know. "Why--431." "Not much, my boy--331." "'Scuse me, sir, ain't you mistaken?" He looked at me for full a minute. I stared him straight in the eye. A nasty eye he's got--black and bloodshot and cold and full of
suspicion. But it wavered a bit at the end. "I may be," he said slowly, "but not about the number. Just you turn
around and get down to 331." "All right, sir. Thank you very much. It might have got me in
trouble. The ladies are so particular about having the bells answered
quick--"

"I guess you'll get in trouble all right," he said and stood
watching--from where he stood he could watch me every inch of the
way--till I got to 331, at the end of the hall, Mrs. Kingdon's door. And the goods still on me, Tom, mind that. My, but Mrs. Kingdon was wrathy when she saw me! "Why did they send you?" she cried. "Why did you keep me waiting so
long? I want a chambermaid. I've rung a dozen times. The whole place
is crazy about that old ball to-night, and no one can get decent
attention." "Can't I do what you want, ma'am?" I just yearned to get inside that
door. "No," she snapped. "I don't want a boy to fasten my dress in the
back--"

"We often do, ma'am," I said softly. "You do? Well--"

"Yes'm." I breathed again. "Well--it's indecent. Go down and send me a maid." She was just closing the door in my face--and Moriway waiting for me to
watch me down again. "Mrs. Kingdon--"

"Well, what do you want?" "I want to tell you that when I get down to the office they'll search
me." She looked at me amazed. "And--and there's something in my pocket I--you wouldn't like them to
find." "What in the world--my diamonds! You did take them, you little wretch?" She caught hold of my coat. But Lordy! I didn't want to get away a
little bit. I let her pull me in, and then I backed up against the
door and shut it. "Diamonds! Oh, no, ma'am. I hope I'm not a thief. But--but it was
something you dropped--this." I fished Moriway's letter out of my pocket and handed it to her. The poor old lady! Being a bell-boy you know just how old ladies
really are. This one at evening, after her face had been massaged for
an hour, and the manicure girl and the hair-dresser had gone, wasn't so
bad. But to-day, with the marks of the morning's tears on her agitated
face, with the blood pounding up to her temples where the hair was thin
and gray--Tom Dorgan, if I'm a vain old fool like that when I'm three
times as old as I am, just tie a stone around my neck and take me down
and drop me into the nearest water, won't you? "You abominable little wretch!" she sobbed. "I suppose you've told
everybody in the office." "How could I, ma'am?" "How could you?" She looked up, the tears on her flabby, flushed cheek. "I didn't know myself. I can't read writing--"

It was thin, but she wanted to believe it. She could have taken me in her arms, she was so happy. "There! there!" she patted my shoulder and gave me a dollar bill. "I
was a bit hasty, Nat. It's only a--a little business matter that Mr.
Moriway's attending to for me. We--we'll finish it up this afternoon. I shouldn't like Miss Kingdon to know of it, because--because I--never
like to worry her about business, you know. So don't mention it when
she comes to-morrow." "No'm. Shall I fasten your dress?" I simply had to stay in that room
till I could get rid of those diamonds. With a faded old blush--the nicest thing about her I'd ever seen--she
turned her back. "It's dark to-day, ma'am," I coaxed. "Would you mind coming nearer the
window?" No, she wouldn't mind. She backed up to the corner like a gentle
little lamb. While I hooked with one hand, I dropped the little bag
where the carpet was still turned up, and with the toe of my shoe
spread it flat again. "You're real handy for a boy," she said, pleased. "Thank you, ma'am," I answered, pleased myself. Moriway was still watching me, of course, when I came out, but I ran
downstairs, he following close, and when the Major got hold of me, I
pulled my pockets inside out like a little man. Moriway was there at the time. I knew he wasn't convinced. But he
couldn't watch a bell-boy all day long, and the moment I was sure his
eyes were off me I was ready to get those diamonds back again. But not a call came all that afternoon from the west side of the house,
except the call of those pretty, precious things snug under the carpet
calling, calling to me to come and get them and drop bell-boying for
good. At last I couldn't stand it any longer. There's only one thing to do
when your chance won't come to you; that is, to go to it. At about
four o'clock I lit out, climbed to the second story and there--Mag, I
always was the luckiest girl at the Cruelty, wasn't I? Well, there was
suite 231 all torn up, plumbers and painters in there, and nothing in
the world to prevent a boy's skinning through when no one was watching,
out of the window and up the fire-escape. Just outside of Mrs. Kingdon's window I lay still a minute. I had seen
her and Moriway go out together--she all gay with finery, he carrying
her bag. The lace curtains in 331 were blowing in the breeze. Cautiously I parted them and looked in. Everything was lovely. From
where I lay I reached down and turned back the flap of the carpet. It
was too easy. Those darling diamonds seemed just to leap up into my
hand. In a moment I had them tucked away in my pants pocket. Then
down the fire-escape and out through 231, where I told the painter I'd
been to get a toy the boy in 441 had dropped out of the window. But he paid no attention to me. No one did, though I felt those
diamonds shining like an X-ray through my very body. I got downstairs
and was actually outside the door, almost in the street and off to you,
when a girl called me. "Here, boy, carry this case," she said. Do you know who it was? Oh, yes, you do, a dear old friend of mine
from Philadelphia, a young lady whose taste--well, all right, I'll tell
you: it was the girl with the red coat, and the hat with the chinchilla
fur. How did they look? Oh, fairly well on a blonde! But to my taste the
last girl I'd seen in the coat and hat was handsomer. Well, I carried her suit-case and followed her back into the hotel. I
didn't want to a bit, though that coat still--wonder how she got it
back! She sailed up the hall and into the elevator, and I had to follow. We
got of at the third story, and she brought me right to the door of 331. And then I knew this must be Evelyn. "Mrs. Kingdon's out, Miss. She didn't expect you till to-morrow." "Did she tell you that? Too bad she isn't at home! She said she'd be
kept busy all day to-day with a business matter, and that I'd better
not get here till to-morrow. But I--"

"Wanted to get here in time for the wedding?" I suggested softly. You should have seen her jump. "Wedding! Not--"

"Mrs. Kingdon and Mr. Moriway." She turned white. "Has that man followed her here? Quick, tell me. Has she actually
married him?" "No--not yet. It's for five o'clock at the church on the corner." "How do you know?" She turned on me, suddenly suspicious. "Well--I do know. And I'm the only person in the house that does." "I don't believe you." She took out her key and opened the door, and I followed her in with
the suit-case. But before I could get it set down on the floor, she
had swooped on a letter that was lying in the middle of the table, had
torn it open, and then with a cry had come whirling toward me. "Where is this church? Come, help me to get to it before five and
I'll--oh, you shall have anything in the world you want!" She flew out into the hall, I after her. And first thing you know we
were down in the street, around the corner, and there in front of the
church was a carriage with Moriway just helping Mrs. Kingdon out. "Mother!" At that cry the old lady's knees seemed to crumble under her. Her poor
old painted face looked out ghastly and ashamed from her wedding
finery. But Evelyn in her red coat flew to her and took her in her
arms as though she was a child. And like a child, Mrs. Kingdon sobbed
and made excuses and begged to be forgiven. I looked at Moriway. It was all the pay I wanted--particularly as I
had those little diamonds. "You're just in time, Miss Kingdon," he said uneasily, "to make your
mother happy by your presence at her wedding." "I'm just in time, Mr. Moriway, to see that my mother's not made
unhappy by your presence." "Evelyn!" Mrs. Kingdon remonstrated. "Come, Sarah." Moriway offered his arm. The bride shook her head. "To-morrow," she said feebly. Moriway breathed a swear. Miss Kingdon laughed. "I've come to take care of you, you silly little mother, dear.... It
won't be to-morrow, Mr. Moriway." "No--not to-morrow--next week," sighed Mrs. Kingdon. "In fact, mother's changed her mind, Mr. Moriway. She thinks it
ungenerous to accept such a sacrifice from a man who might be her
son--don't you, mother?" "Well, perhaps, George--" She looked up from her daughter's
shoulder--she was crying all over that precious red coat of mine--and
her eyes lit on me. "Oh--you wicked boy, you told a lie!" she gasped. "You did read my letter." I laughed; laughed out loud, it was such a bully thing to watch
Moriway's face. But that was an unlucky laugh of mine; it turned his wrath on me. He
made a dive toward me. I ducked and ran. Oh, how I ran! But if he
hadn't slipped on the curb he'd have had me. As he fell, though, he
let out a yell. "Stop thief! stop thief! Thief! Thief! Thief!" May you never hear it, Mag, behind you when you've somebody else's
diamonds in your pocket. It sounds--it sounds the way the bay of the
hounds must sound to the hare. It seems to fly along with the air; at
the same time to be behind you, at your side, even in front of you. I heard it bellowed in a dozen different voices, and every now and then
I could hear Moriway as I pelted on--that brassy, cruel bellow of his
that made my heart sick. And then all at once I heard a policeman's whistle. That whistle was like a signal--I saw the gates of the Correction open
before me. I saw your Nance, Tom, in a neat striped dress, and she was
behind bars--bars--bars! There were bars everywhere before me. In
fact, I felt them against my very hands, for in my mad race I had shot
up a blind alley--a street that ended in a garden behind an iron fence. I grabbed the diamonds to throw them from me, but I couldn't--I just
couldn't! I jumped the fence where the gate was low, and with that
whistle flying shrill and shriller after me I ran to the house. I might have jumped from the frying-pan? Of course, I might. But it
was all fire to me. To be caught at the end is at least no worse than
to be caught at the beginning. Anyhow, it was my one chance, and I
took it as unhesitatingly as a rat takes a leap into a trap to escape a
terrier. Only--only, it was my luck that the trap wasn't set! The
room was empty. I pushed open a glass door, and fell over an open
trunk that stood beside it. It bruised my knee and tore my hand, but oh!--it was nuts to me. For it
was a woman's trunk filled with women's things. A skirt! A blessed skirt! And not a striped one. I threw off the
bell-boy's jacket and I got into that dear dress so quick it made my
head swim. The jacket was a bit tight but I didn't button it, and I'd just got a
stiff little hat perched on my head when I heard the tramp of men on
the sidewalk, and in the dusk saw the cop's buttons at the gate. Caught? Not much. Not yet. I threw open the glass doors and walked
out into the garden. "Miss--Omar--I wonder if it would be Miss Omar?" You bet I didn't take time to see who it was talking before I answered. Of course I was Miss Omar. I was Miss Anybody that had a right to wear
skirts and be inside those blessed gates. "Ah--h! I fancied you might be. I've been expecting you." It was a lazy, low voice with a laugh in it, and it came from a wheeled
chair, where a young man lay. Sallow he was and slim and long, and
helpless--you could see that by his white hanging hands. But his
voice--it was what a woman's voice would be if she were a man. It made
you perk up and pretend to be somewhere near its level. It fitted his
soft, black clothes and his fine, clean face. It meant silks and
velvets and--

Oh, all right, Tommy Dorgan, if you're going to get jealous of a voice! "Excuse me, Mr. Latimer." The cop came in as he spoke, Moriway
following; the rest of the hounds hung about. "There's a thieving
bell-boy from the hotel that's somewhere in your grounds. Can I come
in and get him?" "In here, Sergeant? Aren't you mistaken?" "No; Mr. Moriway here saw him jump the gate not five minutes since." "Strange, and I here all the time! I may have dozed of, though. Certainly--certainly. Look for the little rascal. What's he stolen? Diamonds! Tut! tut! Enterprising, isn't he? ...  Miss Omar, won't
you kindly reach the bell yonder--no, on the table; that's it--and ring
for some one to take the officer about?" I rang. Do you know what happened? An electric light strung on the tree above
the table shone out, and there I stood under it with Moriway's eyes
full upon me. "Great--!" he began. "Just ring again--" Mr. Latimer's voice came soft as silk. My fingers trembled so, the bell clattered out of them and fell
jangling to the ground. But it rang. And the light above me went out
like magic. I fell back into a garden chair. "I beg your pardon, Mr.--was Moriway the name?--I must have interrupted
you, but my eyes are troubling me this evening, and I can't bear the
light. Miss Omar, I thought the housekeeper had instructed you: one
ring means lights, two mean I want Burnett. Here he comes...  Burnett,
take Sergeant Mulhill through the place. He's looking for a thief. You will accompany the Sergeant, Mr.--Moriway?" "Thank you--no. If you don't mind, I'll wait out here." That meant me. I moved toward the gate. "Not at all. Have a seat. Miss Omar, sit down, won't you?" I sat down. "Miss Omar reads to me, Mr. Moriway. I'm an invalid, as you see,
dependent on the good offices of my man. I find a woman's voice a
soothing change." "It must be. Particularly if the voice is pleasing. Miss Omar--I
didn't quite catch the name--"

He waited. But Miss Omar had nothing to say that minute. "Yes, that's the name. You've got it all right," said Latimer. "An
uncommon name, isn't it?" "I don't think I ever heard it before. Do you know, Miss Omar, as I
heard your voice just before we got to the gate, it sounded singularly
boyish to me." "Mr. Latimer does not find it so--do you?" I said as sweet--as sweet as
I could coax. How sweet's that, Tom Dorgan? "Not at all." A little laugh came from Latimer as though he was
enjoying a joke all by himself. But Moriway jumped with satisfaction. He knew the voice all right. "Have you a brother, may I ask?" He leaned over and looked keenly at
me. "I am an orphan," I said sadly, "with no relatives." "A pitiful position," sneered Moriway. "You look so much like a boy I
know that--"

"Do you really think so?" So awfully polite was Latimer to such a rat
as Moriway. Why? Well, wait. "I can't agree with you. Do you know,
I find Miss Omar very feminine. Of course, short hair--"

"Her hair is short, then!" "Typhoid," I murmured. "Too bad!" Moriway sneered. "Yes," I snapped. "I thought it was at the time. My hair was very
heavy and long, and I had a chance to sit in a window at Troyon's where
they were advertising a hair tonic and--"

Rotten? Of course it was. I'd no business to gabble, and just because
you and your new job, Mag, came to my mind at that minute, there I went
putting my foot in it. Moriway laughed. I didn't like the sound of his laugh. "Your reader is versatile, Mr. Latimer," he said. "Yes." Latimer smoothed the soft silk rug that lay over him. "Poverty
and that sort of versatility are often bedfellows, eh?... Tell me, Mr.
Moriway, these lost diamonds are yours?" "No. They belong to a--a friend of mine, Mrs. Kingdon." "Oh! the old lady who was married this afternoon to a young
fortune-hunter!" I couldn't resist it. Moriway jumped out of his seat. "She was not married," he stuttered. "She--"

"Changed her mind? How sensible of her! Did she find out what a crook
the fellow was? What was his name--Morrison? No--Middleway--I have
heard it." "May I ask, Miss Omar"--I didn't have to see his face; his voice told
how mad with rage he was--"how you come to be acquainted with a matter
that only the contracting parties could possibly know of?" "Why, they can't have kept it very secret, the old lady and the young
rascal who was after her money, for you see we both knew of it; and I
wasn't the bride and you certainly weren't the groom, were you?" An exclamation burst from him. "Mr. Latimer," he stormed, "may I see you a moment alone?" Phew! That meant me. But I got up just the same. "Just keep your seat, Miss Omar." Oh, that silken voice of Latimer's! "Mr. Moriway, I have absolutely no acquaintance with you. I never saw
you till to-night. I can't imagine what you may have to say to me,
that my secretary--Miss Omar acts in that capacity--may not hear." "I want to say," burst from Moriway, "that she looks the image of the
boy Nat, who stole Mrs. Kingdon's diamonds, that the voice is exactly
the same, that--"

"But you have said it, Mr. Moriway--quite successfully intimated it, I
assure you." "She knows of my--of Mrs. Kingdon's marriage, that that boy Nat found
out about." "And you yourself also, as Miss Omar mentioned." "Myself? Damn it, I'm Moriway, the man she was going to marry. Why
shouldn't I--"

"Ah--h!" Latimer's shoulders shook with a gentle laugh. "Well, Mr.
Moriway, gentlemen don't swear in my garden. Particularly when ladies
are present. Shall we say good evening? Here comes Mulhill now.... Nothing, Sergeant? Too bad the rogue escaped, but you'll catch him. They may get away from you, but they never stay long, do they? Good
evening--good evening, Mr. Moriway." They tramped on and out, Moriway's very back showing his rage. He
whispered something to the Sergeant, who turned to look at me but shook
his head, and the gate clanged after them. A long sigh escaped me. "Warm, isn't it?" Latimer leaned forward. "Now, would you mind
ringing again, Miss Omar?" I bent and groped for the bell and rang it twice. "How quick you are to learn!" he said. "But I really wanted the light
this time....  Just light up, Burnett," he called to the man, who had
come out on the porch. The electric bulb flashed out again just over my head. Latimer turned
and looked at me. When I couldn't bear it any longer, I looked
defiantly up at him. "Pardon," he said, smiling; nice teeth he has and clear eyes. "I was
just looking for that boyish resemblance Mr. Moriway spoke of. I hold
to my first opinion--you're very feminine, Miss Omar. Will you read to
me now, if you please?" He pointed to a big open book on the table
beside his couch. "I think--if you don't mind, Mr. Latimer, I'll begin the reading
to-morrow." I got up to go. I was through with that garden now. "But I do mind!" Silken voice? Not a bit of it! I turned on him so furious I thought I
didn't care what came of it--when over by the great gate-post I saw a
man crouching--Moriway. I sat down again and pulled the book farther toward the light. We didn't learn much poetry at the Cruelty, did we, Mag? But I know
some now, just the same. When I began to read I heard only one
word--Moriway--Moriway--Moriway. But I must have--forgotten him after
a time, and the dark garden with the light on only one spot, and the
roses smelling, and Latimer lying perfectly still, his face turned
toward me, for I was reading--listen, I bet I can remember that part of
it if I say it slow--

  Oh, Thou, who Man of baser Earth didst make,
  And ev'n with Paradise devise the Snake:
       For all the sin wherewith the Face of Man
  Is blacken'd--Man's forgiveness give--and take! --when all at once Mr. Latimer put his hand on the book. I looked up
with a start. The shadow by the gate was gone. Yon rising Moon that looks for us again--
  How oft hereafter will she wax and wane;
      How oft hereafter rising look for us
  Through this same Garden--and for ONE in vain! Latimer was saying it without the book and with a queer smile that made
me feel I hadn't quite caught on. "Thank you, that will do," he went on. "That is enough, Miss--" He
stopped. I waited. He did not say "Omar." I looked him square in the eye--and then I had enough. "But what in the devil did you make believe for?" I asked. He smiled. "If ever you come to lie on your back day and night, year in and year
out, and know that never in your life will it be any different, you may
take pleasure in a bit of excitement and--and learn to pity the under
dog, who, in this case, happened to be a boy that leaped over the gate
as though his heart was in his mouth. Just as you would admire the
nerve of the young lady that came out of the house a few minutes after
in your housekeeper's Sunday gown." Yes, grin, Torn Dorgan. You won't grin long. I put down the book and got up to go. "Good night, then, and thank you, Mr. Latimer." "Good night....  Oh, Miss--" He didn't say "Omar"--"there is a favor
you might do me." "Sure!" I wondered what it could be. "Those diamonds. I've got to have them, you know, to send them back to
their owner. I don't mind helping a--a person who helps himself to
other people's things, but I can't let him get away with his plunder
without being that kind of person myself. So--"

Why didn't I lie? Because there are some people you don't lie to, Tom
Dorgan. Don't talk to me, you bully, I'm savage enough. To have rings
and pins and ear-rings, a whole bagful of diamonds, and to haul 'em out
of your pocket and lay 'em on the table there before him! "I wonder," he said slowly, as he put them away in his own pocket,
"what a man like me could do for a girl like you?" "Reform her!" I snarled. "Show her how to get diamonds honestly." Say, Tom, let's go in for bigger game. III. Oh, Mag, Mag, for heaven's sake, let me talk to you! No, don't say
anything. You must let me tell you. No--don't call the other girls. 