




THE PARADISE MYSTERY


By J. S. Fletcher





CHAPTER I. ONLY THE GUARDIAN

American tourists, sure appreciators of all that is ancient and
picturesque in England, invariably come to a halt, holding their breath
in a sudden catch of wonder, as they pass through the half-ruinous
gateway which admits to the Close of Wrychester. Nowhere else in England
is there a fairer prospect of old-world peace. There before their eyes,
set in the centre of a great green sward, fringed by tall elms and giant
beeches, rises the vast fabric of the thirteenth-century Cathedral, its
high spire piercing the skies in which rooks are for ever circling and
calling. The time-worn stone, at a little distance delicate as lacework,
is transformed at different hours of the day into shifting shades of
colour, varying from grey to purple: the massiveness of the great nave
and transepts contrasts impressively with the gradual tapering of
the spire, rising so high above turret and clerestory that it at last
becomes a mere line against the ether. In morning, as in afternoon, or
in evening, here is a perpetual atmosphere of rest; and not around the
great church alone, but in the quaint and ancient houses which fence in
the Close. Little less old than the mighty mass of stone on which their
ivy-framed windows look, these houses make the casual observer feel
that here, if anywhere in the world, life must needs run smoothly. Under
those high gables, behind those mullioned windows, in the beautiful
old gardens lying between the stone porches and the elm-shadowed lawn,
nothing, one would think, could possibly exist but leisured and pleasant
existence: even the busy streets of the old city, outside the crumbling
gateway, seem, for the moment, far off. In one of the oldest of these houses, half hidden behind trees and
shrubs in a corner of the Close, three people sat at breakfast one fine
May morning. The room in which they sat was in keeping with the old
house and its surroundings--a long, low-ceilinged room, with oak
panelling around its walls, and oak beams across its roof--a room of
old furniture, and, old pictures, and old books, its antique atmosphere
relieved by great masses of flowers, set here and there in old china
bowls: through its wide windows, the casements of which were thrown wide
open, there was an inviting prospect of a high-edged flower garden, and,
seen in vistas through the trees and shrubberies, of patches of the west
front of the Cathedral, now sombre and grey in shadow. But on the garden
and into this flower-scented room the sun was shining gaily through the
trees, and making gleams of light on the silver and china on the table
and on the faces of the three people who sat around it. Of these three, two were young, and the third was one of those men
whose age it is never easy to guess--a tall, clean-shaven, bright-eyed,
alert-looking man, good-looking in a clever, professional sort of way, a
man whom no one could have taken for anything but a member of one of the
learned callings. In some lights he looked no more than forty: a strong
light betrayed the fact that his dark hair had a streak of grey in
it, and was showing a tendency to whiten about the temples. A
strong, intellectually superior man, this, scrupulously groomed and
well-dressed, as befitted what he really was--a medical practitioner
with an excellent connection amongst the exclusive society of a
cathedral town. Around him hung an undeniable air of content and
prosperity--as he turned over a pile of letters which stood by his
plate, or glanced at the morning newspaper which lay at his elbow, it
was easy to see that he had no cares beyond those of the day, and that
they--so far as he knew then--were not likely to affect him greatly. Seeing him in these pleasant domestic circumstances, at the head of
his table, with abundant evidences of comfort and refinement and modest
luxury about him, any one would have said, without hesitation, that Dr.
Mark Ransford was undeniably one of the fortunate folk of this world. The second person of the three was a boy of apparently seventeen--a
well-built, handsome lad of the senior schoolboy type, who was devoting
himself in business-like fashion to two widely-differing pursuits--one,
the consumption of eggs and bacon and dry toast; the other, the study
of a Latin textbook, which he had propped up in front of him against the
old-fashioned silver cruet. His quick eyes wandered alternately between
his book and his plate; now and then he muttered a line or two to
himself. His companions took no notice of these combinations of eating
and learning: they knew from experience that it was his way to make up
at breakfast-time for the moments he had stolen from his studies the
night before. It was not difficult to see that the third member of the party, a girl
of nineteen or twenty, was the boy's sister. Each had a wealth of brown
hair, inclining, in the girl's case to a shade that had tints of gold in
it; each had grey eyes, in which there was a mixture of blue; each had
a bright, vivid colour; each was undeniably good-looking and eminently
healthy. No one would have doubted that both had lived a good deal of
an open-air existence: the boy was already muscular and sinewy: the
girl looked as if she was well acquainted with the tennis racket and
the golf-stick. Nor would any one have made the mistake of thinking
that these two were blood relations of the man at the head of the
table--between them and him there was not the least resemblance of
feature, of colour, or of manner. While the boy learnt the last lines of his Latin, and the doctor turned
over the newspaper, the girl read a letter--evidently, from the large
sprawling handwriting, the missive of some girlish correspondent. She
was deep in it when, from one of the turrets of the Cathedral, a bell
began to ring. At that, she glanced at her brother. "There's Martin, Dick!" she said. "You'll have to hurry." Many a long year before that, in one of the bygone centuries, a worthy
citizen of Wrychester, Martin by name, had left a sum of money to the
Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral on condition that as long as ever the
Cathedral stood, they should cause to be rung a bell from its smaller
bell-tower for three minutes before nine o'clock every morning, all the
year round. What Martin's object had been no one now knew--but this bell
served to remind young gentlemen going to offices, and boys going to
school, that the hour of their servitude was near. And Dick Bewery,
without a word, bolted half his coffee, snatched up his book, grabbed
at a cap which lay with more books on a chair close by, and vanished
through the open window. The doctor laughed, laid aside his newspaper,
and handed his cup across the table. "I don't think you need bother yourself about Dick's ever being late,
Mary," he said. "You are not quite aware of the power of legs that are
only seventeen years old. Dick could get to any given point in just
about one-fourth of the time that I could, for instance--moreover, he
has a cunning knowledge of every short cut in the city." Mary Bewery took the empty cup and began to refill it. "I don't like him to be late," she remarked. "It's the beginning of bad
habits." "Oh, well!" said Ransford indulgently. "He's pretty free from anything
of that sort, you know. I haven't even suspected him of smoking, yet." "That's because he thinks smoking would stop his growth and interfere
with his cricket," answered Mary. "He would smoke if it weren't for
that." "That's giving him high praise, then," said Ransford. "You couldn't
give him higher! Know how to repress his inclinations. An excellent
thing--and most unusual, I fancy. Most people--don't!" He took his refilled cup, rose from the table, and opened a box of
cigarettes which stood on the mantelpiece. And the girl, instead of
picking up her letter again, glanced at him a little doubtfully. "That reminds me of--of something I wanted to say to you," she said. "You're quite right about people not repressing their inclinations. I--I
wish some people would!" Ransford turned quickly from the hearth and gave her a sharp look,
beneath which her colour heightened. Her eyes shifted their gaze away to
her letter, and she picked it up and began to fold it nervously. And at
that Ransford rapped out a name, putting a quick suggestion of meaning
inquiry into his voice. "Bryce?" he asked. The girl nodded her face showing distinct annoyance and dislike. Before
saying more, Ransford lighted a cigarette. "Been at it again?" he said at last. "Since last time?" "Twice," she answered. "I didn't like to tell you--I've hated to bother
you about it. But--what am I to do? I dislike him intensely--I can't
tell why, but it's there, and nothing could ever alter the feeling. And though I told him--before--that it was useless--he mentioned it
again--yesterday--at Mrs. Folliot's garden-party." "Confound his impudence!" growled Ransford. "Oh, well!--I'll have to
settle with him myself. It's useless trifling with anything like that. I
gave him a quiet hint before. And since he won't take it--all right!" "But--what shall you do?" she asked anxiously. "Not--send him away?" "If he's any decency about him, he'll go--after what I say to him,"
answered Ransford. "Don't you trouble yourself about it--I'm not at all
keen about him. He's a clever enough fellow, and a good assistant, but I
don't like him, personally--never did." "I don't want to think that anything that I say should lose him his
situation--or whatever you call it," she remarked slowly. "That would
seem--"

"No need to bother," interrupted Ransford. "He'll get another in two
minutes--so to speak. Anyway, we can't have this going on. The fellow
must be an ass! When I was young--"

He stopped short at that, and turning away, looked out across the garden
as if some recollection had suddenly struck him. "When you were young--which is, of course, such an awfully long time
since!" said the girl, a little teasingly. "What?" "Only that if a woman said No--unmistakably--once, a man took it as
final," replied Ransford. "At least--so I was always given to believe. Nowadays--"

"You forget that Mr. Pemberton Bryce is what most people would call a
very pushing young man," said Mary. "If he doesn't get what he wants in
this world, it won't be for not asking for it. But--if you must speak
to him--and I really think you must!--will you tell him that he is
not going to get--me? Perhaps he'll take it finally from you--as my
guardian." "I don't know if parents and guardians count for much in these
degenerate days," said Ransford. "But--I won't have him annoying you. And--I suppose it has come to annoyance?" "It's very annoying to be asked three times by a man whom you've told
flatly, once for all, that you don't want him, at any time, ever!" she
answered. "It's--irritating!" "All right," said Ransford quietly. "I'll speak to him. There's going to
be no annoyance for you under this roof." The girl gave him a quick glance, and Ransford turned away from her and
picked up his letters. "Thank you," she said. "But--there's no need to tell me that, because I
know it already. Now I wonder if you'll tell me something more?" Ransford turned back with a sudden apprehension. "Well?" he asked brusquely. "What?" "When are you going to tell me all about--Dick and myself?" she asked. "You promised that you would, you know, some day. And--a whole year's
gone by since then. And--Dick's seventeen! He won't be satisfied
always--just to know no more than that our father and mother died when
we were very little, and that you've been guardian--and all that you
have been!--to us. Will he, now?" Ransford laid down his letters again, and thrusting his hands in his
pockets, squared his shoulders against the mantelpiece. "Don't you think
you might wait until you're twenty-one?" he asked. "Why?" she said, with a laugh. "I'm just twenty--do you really think I
shall be any wiser in twelve months? Of course I shan't!" "You don't know that," he replied. "You may be--a great deal wiser." "But what has that got to do with it?" she persisted. "Is there any
reason why I shouldn't be told--everything?" She was looking at him with a certain amount of demand--and Ransford,
who had always known that some moment of this sort must inevitably come,
felt that she was not going to be put off with ordinary excuses. He
hesitated--and she went on speaking. "You know," she continued, almost pleadingly. "We don't know
anything--at all. I never have known, and until lately Dick has been too
young to care--"

"Has he begun asking questions?" demanded Ransford hastily. "Once or twice, lately--yes," replied Mary. "It's only natural." She
laughed a little--a forced laugh. "They say," she went on, "that
it doesn't matter, nowadays, if you can't tell who your grandfather
was--but, just think, we don't know who our father was--except that his
name was John Bewery. That doesn't convey much." "You know more," said Ransford. "I told you--always have told you--that
he was an early friend of mine, a man of business, who, with your
mother, died young, and I, as their friend, became guardian to you and
Dick. Is--is there anything much more that I could tell?" "There's something I should very much like to know--personally," she
answered, after a pause which lasted so long that Ransford began to feel
uncomfortable under it. "Don't be angry--or hurt--if I tell you plainly
what it is. I'm quite sure it's never even occurred to Dick--but I'm
three years ahead of him. It's this--have we been dependent on you?" Ransford's face flushed and he turned deliberately to the window, and
for a moment stood staring out on his garden and the glimpses of the
Cathedral. And just as deliberately as he had turned away, he turned
back. "No!" he said. "Since you ask me, I'll tell you that. You've both got
money--due to you when you're of age. It--it's in my hands. Not a
great lot--but sufficient to--to cover all your expenses. Education--everything. When you're twenty-one, I'll hand over
yours--when Dick's twenty-one, his. Perhaps I ought to have told you
all that before, but--I didn't think it necessary. I--I dare say I've a
tendency to let things slide." "You've never let things slide about us," she replied quickly, with
a sudden glance which made him turn away again. "And I only wanted to
know--because I'd got an idea that--well, that we were owing everything
to you." "Not from me!" he exclaimed. "No--that would never be!" she said. "But--don't you understand? I--wanted to know--something. Thank you. I won't ask more now." "I've always meant to tell you--a good deal," remarked Ransford, after
another pause. "You see, I can scarcely--yet--realize that you're both
growing up! You were at school a year ago. And Dick is still very young. Are--are you more satisfied now?" he went on anxiously. "If not--"

"I'm quite satisfied," she answered. "Perhaps--some day--you'll tell me
more about our father and mother?--but never mind even that now. You're
sure you haven't minded my asking--what I have asked?" "Of course not--of course not!" he said hastily. "I ought to have
remembered. And--but we'll talk again. I must get into the surgery--and
have a word with Bryce, too." "If you could only make him see reason and promise not to offend again,"
she said. "Wouldn't that solve the difficulty?" Ransford shook his head and made no answer. He picked up his letters
again and went out, and down a long stone-walled passage which led to
his surgery at the side of the house. He was alone there when he had
shut the door--and he relieved his feelings with a deep groan. "Heaven help me if the lad ever insists on the real truth and on having
proofs and facts given to him!" he muttered. "I shouldn't mind telling
her, when she's a bit older--but he wouldn't understand as she would. Anyway, thank God I can keep up the pleasant fiction about the money
without her ever knowing that I told her a deliberate lie just now. But--what's in the future? Here's one man to be dismissed already, and
there'll be others, and one of them will be the favoured man. That man
will have to be told! And--so will she, then. And--my God! she doesn't
see, and mustn't see, that I'm madly in love with her myself! She's no
idea of it--and she shan't have; I must--must continue to be--only the
guardian!" He laughed a little cynically as he laid his letters down on his
desk and proceeded to open them--in which occupation he was presently
interrupted by the opening of the side-door and the entrance of Mr.
Pemberton Bryce. CHAPTER II. MAKING AN ENEMY


It was characteristic of Pemberton Bryce that he always walked into a
room as if its occupant were asleep and he was afraid of waking him. He had a gentle step which was soft without being stealthy, and quiet
movements which brought him suddenly to anybody's side before his
presence was noticed. He was by Ransford's desk ere Ransford knew he was
in the surgery--and Ransford's sudden realization of his presence
roused a certain feeling of irritation in his mind, which he instantly
endeavoured to suppress--it was no use getting cross with a man of whom
you were about to rid yourself, he said to himself. And for the moment,
after replying to his assistant's greeting--a greeting as quiet as his
entrance--he went on reading his letters, and Bryce turned off to that
part of the surgery in which the drugs were kept, and busied himself
in making up some prescription. Ten minutes went by in silence; then
Ransford pushed his correspondence aside, laid a paper-weight on it, and
twisting his chair round, looked at the man to whom he was going to say
some unpleasant things. Within himself he was revolving a question--how
would Bryce take it? He had never liked this assistant of his, although he had then had him
in employment for nearly two years. There was something about Pemberton
Bryce which he did not understand and could not fathom. He had come to
him with excellent testimonials and good recommendations; he was well up
to his work, successful with patients, thoroughly capable as a
general practitioner--there was no fault to be found with him on
any professional grounds. But to Ransford his personality was
objectionable--why, he was not quite sure. Outwardly, Bryce was rather
more than presentable--a tall, good-looking man of twenty-eight or
thirty, whom some people--women especially--would call handsome; he was
the sort of young man who knows the value of good clothes and a smart
appearance, and his professional manner was all that could be desired. But Ransford could not help distinguishing between Bryce the doctor
and Bryce the man--and Bryce the man he did not like. Outside the
professional part of him, Bryce seemed to him to be undoubtedly deep,
sly, cunning--he conveyed the impression of being one of those men whose
ears are always on the stretch, who take everything in and give little
out. There was a curious air of watchfulness and of secrecy about him
in private matters which was as repellent--to Ransford's thinking--as
it was hard to explain. Anyway, in private affairs, he did not like his
assistant, and he liked him less than ever as he glanced at him on this
particular occasion. "I want a word with you," he said curtly. "I'd better say it now." Bryce, who was slowly pouring some liquid from one bottle into another,
looked quietly across the room and did not interrupt himself in his
work. Ransford knew that he must have recognized a certain significance
in the words just addressed to him--but he showed no outward sign of it,
and the liquid went on trickling from one bottle to the other with the
same uniform steadiness. "Yes?" said Bryce inquiringly. "One moment." He finished his task calmly, put the corks in the bottles, labelled one,
restored the other to a shelf, and turned round. Not a man to be easily
startled--not easily turned from a purpose, this, thought Ransford as
he glanced at Bryce's eyes, which had a trick of fastening their gaze on
people with an odd, disconcerting persistency. "I'm sorry to say what I must say," he began. "But--you've brought it on
yourself. I gave you a hint some time ago that your attentions were not
welcome to Miss Bewery." Bryce made no immediate response. Instead, leaning almost carelessly and
indifferently against the table at which he had been busy with drugs
and bottles, he took a small file from his waistcoat pocket and began to
polish his carefully cut nails. "Yes?" he said, after a pause. "Well?" "In spite of it," continued Ransford, "you've since addressed her again
on the matter--not merely once, but twice." Bryce put his file away, and thrusting his hands in his pockets,
crossed his feet as he leaned back against the table--his whole attitude
suggesting, whether meaningly or not, that he was very much at his ease. "There's a great deal to be said on a point like this," he observed. "If
a man wishes a certain young woman to become his wife, what right has
any other man--or the young woman herself, for that matter to say that
he mustn't express his desires to her?" "None," said Ransford, "provided he only does it once--and takes the
answer he gets as final." "I disagree with you entirely," retorted Bryce. "On the last particular,
at any rate. A man who considers any word of a woman's as being final is
a fool. What a woman thinks on Monday she's almost dead certain not to
think on Tuesday. The whole history of human relationship is on my side
there. It's no opinion--it's a fact." Ransford stared at this frank remark, and Bryce went on, coolly and
imperturbably, as if he had been discussing a medical problem. "A man who takes a woman's first answer as final," he continued, "is, I
repeat, a fool. There are lots of reasons why a woman shouldn't know
her own mind at the first time of asking. She may be too surprised. She
mayn't be quite decided. She may say one thing when she really means
another. That often happens. She isn't much better equipped at the
second time of asking. And there are women--young ones--who aren't
really certain of themselves at the third time. All that's common
sense." "I'll tell you what it is!" suddenly exclaimed Ransford, after remaining
silent for a moment under this flow of philosophy. "I'm not going to
discuss theories and ideas. I know one young woman, at any rate, who
is certain of herself. Miss Bewery does not feel any inclination to
you--now, nor at any time to be! She's told you so three times. And--you
should take her answer and behave yourself accordingly!" Bryce favoured his senior with a searching look. "How does Miss Bewery know that she mayn't be inclined to--in the
future?" he asked. "She may come to regard me with favour." "No, she won't!" declared Ransford. "Better hear the truth, and be done
with it. She doesn't like you--and she doesn't want to, either. Why
can't you take your answer like a man?" "What's your conception of a man?" asked Bryce. "That!--and a good one," exclaimed Ransford. "May satisfy you--but not me," said Bryce. "Mine's different. My
conception of a man is of a being who's got some perseverance. You can
get anything in this world--anything!--by pegging away for it." "You're not going to get my ward," suddenly said Ransford. "That's flat! She doesn't want you--and she's now said so three times. And--I support
her." "What have you against me?" asked Bryce calmly. "If, as you say, you
support her in her resolution not to listen to my proposals, you must
have something against me. What is it?" "That's a question you've no right to put," replied Ransford, "for it's
utterly unnecessary. So I'm not going to answer it. I've nothing against
you as regards your work--nothing! I'm willing to give you an excellent
testimonial." "Oh!" remarked Bryce quietly. "That means--you wish me to go away?" "I certainly think it would be best," said Ransford. "In that case," continued Bryce, more coolly than ever, "I shall
certainly want to know what you have against me--or what Miss Bewery has
against me. Why am I objected to as a suitor? You, at any rate, know
who I am--you know that my father is of our own profession, and a man
of reputation and standing, and that I myself came to you on high
recommendation. Looked at from my standpoint, I'm a thoroughly eligible
young man. And there's a point you forget--there's no mystery about me!" Ransford turned sharply in his chair as he noticed the emphasis which
Bryce put on his last word. "What do you mean?" he demanded. "What I've just said," replied Bryce. "There's no mystery attaching to
me. Any question about me can be answered. Now, you can't say that as
regards your ward. That's a fact, Dr. Ransford." Ransford, in years gone by, had practised himself in the art of
restraining his temper--naturally a somewhat quick one. And he made
a strong effort in that direction now, recognizing that there was
something behind his assistant's last remark, and that Bryce meant him
to know it was there. "I'll repeat what I've just said," he answered. "What do you mean by
that?" "I hear things," said Bryce. "People will talk--even a doctor can't
refuse to hear what gossiping and garrulous patients say. Since she
came to you from school, a year ago, Wrychester people have been much
interested in Miss Bewery, and in her brother, too. And there are a good
many residents of the Close--you know their nice, inquisitive ways!--who
want to know who the sister and brother really are--and what your
relationship is to them!" "Confound their impudence!" growled Ransford. "By all means," agreed Bryce. "And--for all I care--let them be
confounded, too. But if you imagine that the choice and select coteries
of a cathedral town, consisting mainly of the relicts of deceased
deans, canons, prebendaries and the like, and of maiden aunts, elderly
spinsters, and tea-table-haunting curates, are free from gossip--why,
you're a singularly innocent person!" "They'd better not begin gossiping about my affairs," said Ransford. "Otherwise--"

"You can't stop them from gossiping about your affairs," interrupted
Bryce cheerfully. "Of course they gossip about your affairs; have
gossiped about them; will continue to gossip about them. It's human
nature!" "You've heard them?" asked Ransford, who was too vexed to keep back his
curiosity. "You yourself?" "As you are aware, I am often asked out to tea," replied Bryce, "and
to garden-parties, and tennis-parties, and choice and cosy functions
patronized by curates and associated with crumpets. I have heard--with
these ears. I can even repeat the sort of thing I have heard. 'That dear, delightful Miss Bewery--what a charming girl! And that
good-looking boy, her brother--quite a dear! Now I wonder who they
really are? Wards of Dr. Ransford, of course! Really, how very
romantic!--and just a little--eh?--unusual? Such a comparatively young
man to have such a really charming girl as his ward! Can't be more than
forty-five himself, and she's twenty--how very, very romantic! Really,
one would think there ought to be a chaperon!'" "Damn!" said Ransford under his breath. "Just so," agreed Bryce. "But--that's the sort of thing. Do you want
more? I can supply an unlimited quantity in the piece if you like. But
it's all according to sample." "So--in addition to your other qualities," remarked Ransford, "you're a
gossiper?" Bryce smiled slowly and shook his head. "No," he replied. "I'm a listener. A good one, too. But do you see my
point? I say--there's no mystery about me. If Miss Bewery will honour
me with her hand, she'll get a man whose antecedents will bear the
strictest investigation." "Are you inferring that hers won't?" demanded Ransford. "I'm not inferring anything," said Bryce. "I am speaking for myself, of
myself. Pressing my own claim, if you like, on you, the guardian. You
might do much worse than support my claims, Dr. Ransford." "Claims, man!" retorted Ransford. "You've got no claims! What are you
talking about? Claims!" "My pretensions, then," answered Bryce. "If there is a mystery--as
Wrychester people say there is--about Miss Bewery, it would be safe with
me. Whatever you may think, I'm a thoroughly dependable man--when it's
in my own interest." "And--when it isn't?" asked Ransford. "What are you then?--as you're so
candid." "I could be a very bad enemy," replied Bryce. There was a moment's silence, during which the two men looked
attentively at each other. "I've told you the truth," said Ransford at last. "Miss Bewery flatly
refuses to entertain any idea whatever of ever marrying you. She
earnestly hopes that that eventuality may never be mentioned to her
again. Will you give me your word of honour to respect her wishes?" "No!" answered Bryce. "I won't!" "Why not?" asked Ransford, with a faint show of anger. "A woman's
wishes!" "Because I may consider that I see signs of a changed mind in her," said
Bryce. "That's why." "You'll never see any change of mind," declared Ransford. "That's
certain. Is that your fixed determination?" "It is," answered Bryce. "I'm not the sort of man who is easily
repelled." "Then, in that case," said Ransford, "we had better part company." He
rose from his desk, and going over to a safe which stood in a corner,
unlocked it and took some papers from an inside drawer. He consulted
one of these and turned to Bryce. "You remember our agreement?" he
continued. "Your engagement was to be determined by a three months'
notice on either side, or, at my will, at any time by payment of three
months' salary?" "Quite right," agreed Bryce. "I remember, of course." "Then I'll give you a cheque for three months' salary--now," said
Ransford, and sat down again at his desk. "That will settle matters
definitely--and, I hope, agreeably." Bryce made no reply. He remained leaning against the table, watching
Ransford write the cheque. And when Ransford laid the cheque down at the
edge of the desk he made no movement towards it. "You must see," remarked Ransford, half apologetically, "that it's the
only thing I can do. I can't have any man who's not--not welcome to
her, to put it plainly--causing any annoyance to my ward. I repeat,
Bryce--you must see it!" "I have nothing to do with what you see," answered Bryce. "Your opinions
are not mine, and mine aren't yours. You're really turning me away--as
if I were a dishonest foreman!--because in my opinion it would be a very
excellent thing for her and for myself if Miss Bewery would consent to
marry me. That's the plain truth." Ransford allowed himself to take a long and steady look at Bryce. The
thing was done now, and his dismissed assistant seemed to be taking it
quietly--and Ransford's curiosity was aroused. "I can't make you out!" he exclaimed. "I don't know whether you're the
most cynical young man I ever met, or whether you're the most obtuse--"

"Not the last, anyway," interrupted Bryce. "I assure you of that!" "Can't you see for yourself, then, man, that the girl doesn't want you!" said Ransford. "Hang it!--for anything you know to the contrary, she may
have--might have--other ideas!" Bryce, who had been staring out of a side window for the last minute or
two, suddenly laughed, and, lifting a hand, pointed into the garden. And
Ransford turned--and saw Mary Bewery walking there with a tall lad, whom
he recognized as one Sackville Bonham, stepson of Mr. Folliot, a wealthy
resident of the Close. The two young people were laughing and chatting
together with evident great friendliness. "Perhaps," remarked Bryce quietly, "her ideas run in--that direction? In
which case, Dr. Ransford, you'll have trouble. For Mrs. Folliot, mother
of yonder callow youth, who's the apple of her eye, is one of the
inquisitive ladies of whom I've just told you, and if her son unites
himself with anybody, she'll want to know exactly who that anybody is. You'd far better have supported me as an aspirant! However--I suppose
there's no more to say." "Nothing!" answered Ransford. "Except to say good-day--and good-bye to
you. You needn't remain--I'll see to everything. And I'm going out now. I think you'd better not exchange any farewells with any one." Bryce nodded silently, and Ransford, picking up his hat and gloves, left
the surgery by the side door. A moment later, Bryce saw him crossing the
Close. CHAPTER III. ST. WRYTHA'S STAIR


The summarily dismissed assistant, thus left alone, stood for a moment
in evident deep thought before he moved towards Ransford's desk and
picked up the cheque. He looked at it carefully, folded it neatly, and
put it away in his pocket-book; after that he proceeded to collect a
few possessions of his own, instruments, books from various drawers and
shelves. He was placing these things in a small hand-bag when a gentle
tap sounded on the door by which patients approached the surgery. "Come in!" he called. There was no response, although the door was slightly ajar; instead,
the knock was repeated, and at that Bryce crossed the room and flung the
door open. A man stood outside--an elderly, slight-figured, quiet-looking man, who
looked at Bryce with a half-deprecating, half-nervous air; the air of a
man who was shy in manner and evidently fearful of seeming to intrude. Bryce's quick, observant eyes took him in at a glance, noting a much
worn and lined face, thin grey hair and tired eyes; this was a man, he
said to himself, who had seen trouble. Nevertheless, not a poor man,
if his general appearance was anything to go by--he was well and even
expensively dressed, in the style generally affected by well-to-do
merchants and city men; his clothes were fashionably cut, his silk hat
was new, his linen and boots irreproachable; a fine diamond pin gleamed
in his carefully arranged cravat. Why, then, this unmistakably furtive
and half-frightened manner--which seemed to be somewhat relieved at the
sight of Bryce? "Is this--is Dr. Ransford within?" asked the stranger. "I was told this
is his house." "Dr. Ransford is out," replied Bryce. "Just gone out--not five minutes
ago. This is his surgery. Can I be of use?" The man hesitated, looking beyond Bryce into the room. "No, thank you," he said at last. "I--no, I don't want professional
services--I just called to see Dr. Ransford--I--the fact is, I once knew
some one of that name. It's no matter--at present." Bryce stepped outside and pointed across the Close. "Dr. Ransford," he said, "went over there--I rather fancy he's gone to
the Deanery--he has a case there. If you went through Paradise, you'd
very likely meet him coming back--the Deanery is the big house in the
far corner yonder." The stranger followed Bryce's outstretched finger. "Paradise?" he said, wonderingly. "What's that?" Bryce pointed to a long stretch of grey wall which projected from the
south wall of the Cathedral into the Close. "It's an enclosure--between the south porch and the transept," he said. "Full of old tombs and trees--a sort of wilderness--why called Paradise
I don't know. There's a short cut across it to the Deanery and that part
of the Close--through that archway you see over there. If you go across,
you're almost sure to meet Dr. Ransford." "I'm much obliged to you," said the stranger. "Thank you." He turned away in the direction which Bryce had indicated, and Bryce
went back--only to go out again and call after him. "If you don't meet him, shall I say you'll call again?" he asked. "And--what name?" The stranger shook his head. "It's immaterial," he answered. "I'll see him--somewhere--or later. Many
thanks." He went on his way towards Paradise, and Bryce returned to the surgery
and completed his preparations for departure. And in the course of
things, he more than once looked through the window into the garden and
saw Mary Bewery still walking and talking with young Sackville Bonham. "No," he muttered to himself. "I won't trouble to exchange any
farewells--not because of Ransford's hint, but because there's no need. If Ransford thinks he's going to drive me out of Wrychester before I
choose to go he's badly mistaken--it'll be time enough to say farewell
when I take my departure--and that won't be just yet. Now I wonder
who that old chap was? Knew some one of Ransford's name once, did he? Probably Ransford himself--in which case he knows more of Ransford than
anybody in Wrychester knows--for nobody in Wrychester knows anything
beyond a few years back. No, Dr. Ransford!--no farewells--to anybody! A
mere departure--till I turn up again." But Bryce was not to get away from the old house without something in
the nature of a farewell. As he walked out of the surgery by the side
entrance, Mary Bewery, who had just parted from young Bonham in the
garden and was about to visit her dogs in the stable yard, came along:
she and Bryce met, face to face. The girl flushed, not so much from
embarrassment as from vexation; Bryce, cool as ever, showed no sign of
any embarrassment. Instead, he laughed, tapping the hand-bag which he
carried under one arm. "Summarily turned out--as if I had been stealing the spoons," he
remarked. "I go--with my small belongings. This is my first reward--for
devotion." "I have nothing to say to you," answered Mary, sweeping by him with a
highly displeased glance. "Except that you have brought it on yourself." "A very feminine retort!" observed Bryce. "But--there is no malice in
it? Your anger won't last more than--shall we say a day?" "You may say what you like," she replied. "As I just said, I have
nothing to say--now or at any time." "That remains to be proved," remarked Bryce. "The phrase is one of much
elasticity. But for the present--I go!" He walked out into the Close, and without as much as a backward look
struck off across the sward in the direction in which, ten minutes
before, he had sent the strange man. He had rooms in a quiet lane on the
farther side of the Cathedral precinct, and his present intention was to
go to them to leave his bag and make some further arrangements. He had
no idea of leaving Wrychester--he knew of another doctor in the city who
was badly in need of help: he would go to him--would tell him, if need
be, why he had left Ransford. He had a multiplicity of schemes and ideas
in his head, and he began to consider some of them as he stepped out of
the Close into the ancient enclosure which all Wrychester folk knew by
its time-honoured name of Paradise. This was really an outer court of
the old cloisters; its high walls, half-ruinous, almost wholly covered
with ivy, shut in an expanse of turf, liberally furnished with yew and
cypress and studded with tombs and gravestones. In one corner rose a
gigantic elm; in another a broken stairway of stone led to a doorway set
high in the walls of the nave; across the enclosure itself was a pathway
which led towards the houses in the south-east corner of the Close. It
was a curious, gloomy spot, little frequented save by people who went
across it rather than follow the gravelled paths outside, and it was
untenanted when Bryce stepped into it. But just as he walked through the
archway he saw Ransford. Ransford was emerging hastily from a postern
door in the west porch--so hastily that Bryce checked himself to look at
him. And though they were twenty yards apart, Bryce saw that Ransford's
face was very pale, almost to whiteness, and that he was unmistakably
agitated. Instantly he connected that agitation with the man who had
come to the surgery door. "They've met!" mused Bryce, and stopped, staring after Ransford's
retreating figure. "Now what is it in that man's mere presence that's
upset Ransford? He looks like a man who's had a nasty, unexpected
shock--a bad 'un!" He remained standing in the archway, gazing after the retreating figure,
until Ransford had disappeared within his own garden; still wondering
and speculating, but not about his own affairs, he turned across
Paradise at last and made his way towards the farther corner. There was
a little wicket-gate there, set in the ivied wall; as Bryce opened it,
a man in the working dress of a stone-mason, whom he recognized as being
one of the master-mason's staff, came running out of the bushes. His face, too, was white, and his eyes were big with excitement. And
recognizing Bryce, he halted, panting. "What is it, Varner?" asked Bryce calmly. "Something happened?" The man swept his hand across his forehead as if he were dazed, and then
jerked his thumb over his shoulder. "A man!" he gasped. "Foot of St. Wrytha's Stair there, doctor. Dead--or
if not dead, near it. I saw it!" Bryce seized Varner's arm and gave it a shake. "You saw--what?" he demanded. "Saw him--fall. Or rather--flung!" panted Varner. "Somebody--couldn't
see who, nohow--flung him right through yon doorway, up there. He fell
right over the steps--crash!" Bryce looked over the tops of the yews and
cypresses at the doorway in the clerestory to which Varner pointed--a
low, open archway gained by the half-ruinous stair. It was forty feet at
least from the ground. "You saw him--thrown!" he exclaimed. "Thrown--down there? Impossible,
man!" "Tell you I saw it!" asserted Varner doggedly. "I was looking at one
of those old tombs yonder--somebody wants some repairs doing--and the
jackdaws were making such a to-do up there by the roof I glanced up at
them. And I saw this man thrown through that door--fairly flung through
it! God!--do you think I could mistake my own eyes?" "Did you see who flung him?" asked Bryce. "No; I saw a hand--just for one second, as it might be--by the edge of
the doorway," answered Varner. "I was more for watching him! He sort
of tottered for a second on the step outside the door, turned over and
screamed--I can hear it now!--and crashed down on the flags beneath." "How long since?" demanded Bryce. "Five or six minutes," said Varner. "I rushed to him--I've been doing
what I could. But I saw it was no good, so I was running for help--"

Bryce pushed him towards the bushes by which they were standing. "Take me to him," he said. "Come on!" Varner turned back, making a way through the cypresses. He led Bryce to
the foot of the great wall of the nave. There in the corner formed by
the angle of nave and transept, on a broad pavement of flagstones, lay
the body of a man crumpled up in a curiously twisted position. And with
one glance, even before he reached it, Bryce knew what body it was--that
of the man who had come, shyly and furtively, to Ransford's door. "Look!" exclaimed Varner, suddenly pointing. "He's stirring!" Bryce, whose gaze was fastened on the twisted figure, saw a slight
movement which relaxed as suddenly as it had occurred. Then came
stillness. "That's the end!" he muttered. "The man's dead! I'll
guarantee that before I put a hand on him. Dead enough!" he went on, as
he reached the body and dropped on one knee by it. "His neck's broken." The mason bent down and looked, half-curiously, half-fearfully, at the
dead man. Then he glanced upward--at the open door high above them in
the walls. "It's a fearful drop, that, sir," he said. "And he came down with such
violence. You're sure it's over with him?" "He died just as we came up," answered Bryce. "That movement we saw was
the last effort--involuntary, of course. Look here, Varner!--you'll have
to get help. You'd better fetch some of the cathedral people--some of
the vergers. No!" he broke off suddenly, as the low strains of an organ
came from within the great building. "They're just beginning the morning
service--of course, it's ten o'clock. Never mind them--go straight to
the police. Bring them back--I'll stay here." The mason turned off towards the gateway of the Close, and while
the strains of the organ grew louder, Bryce bent over the dead man,
wondering what had really happened. Thrown from an open doorway in the
clerestory over St. Wrytha's Stair?--it seemed almost impossible! But a
sudden thought struck him: supposing two men, wishing to talk in privacy
unobserved, had gone up into the clerestory of the Cathedral--as
they easily could, by more than one door, by more than one stair--and
supposing they had quarrelled, and one of them had flung or pushed
the other through the door above--what then? And on the heels of that
thought hurried another--this man, now lying dead, had come to the
surgery, seeking Ransford, and had subsequently gone away, presumably
in search of him, and Bryce himself had just seen Ransford, obviously
agitated and pale of cheek, leaving the west porch; what did it all
mean? what was the apparently obvious inference to be drawn? Here was
the stranger dead--and Varner was ready to swear that he had seen
him thrown, flung violently, through the door forty feet above. That
was--murder! Then--who was the murderer? Bryce looked carefully and narrowly around him. Now that Varner had gone
away, there was not a human being in sight, nor anywhere near, so far as
he knew. On one side of him and the dead man rose the grey walls of nave
and transept; on the other, the cypresses and yews rising amongst the
old tombs and monuments. Assuring himself that no one was near, no eye
watching, he slipped his hand into the inner breast pocket of the dead
man's smart morning coat. Such a man must carry papers--papers would
reveal something. And Bryce wanted to know anything--anything that would
give information and let him into whatever secret there might be between
this unlucky stranger and Ransford. But the breast pocket was empty; there was no pocket-book there; there
were no papers there. Nor were there any papers elsewhere in the other
pockets which he hastily searched: there was not even a card with a name
on it. But he found a purse, full of money--banknotes, gold, silver--and
in one of its compartments a scrap of paper folded curiously, after the
fashion of the cocked-hat missives of another age in which envelopes had
not been invented. Bryce hurriedly unfolded this, and after one glance
at its contents, made haste to secrete it in his own pocket. He had only
just done this and put back the purse when he heard Varner's voice, and
a second later the voice of Inspector Mitchington, a well-known police
official. And at that Bryce sprang to his feet, and when the mason and
his companions emerged from the bushes was standing looking thoughtfully
at the dead man. He turned to Mitchington with a shake of the head. "Dead!" he said in a hushed voice. "Died as we got to him. Broken--all
to pieces, I should say--neck and spine certainly. I suppose Varner's
told you what he saw." Mitchington, a sharp-eyed, dark-complexioned man, quick of movement,
nodded, and after one glance at the body, looked up at the open doorway
high above them. "That the door?" he asked, turning to Varner. "And--it was open?" "It's always open," answered Varner. "Least-ways, it's been open, like
that, all this spring, to my knowledge." "What is there behind it?" inquired Mitchington. "Sort of gallery, that runs all round the nave," replied Varner. "Clerestory gallery--that's what it is. People can go up there and walk
around--lots of 'em do--tourists, you know. There's two or three ways up
to it--staircases in the turrets." Mitchington turned to one of the two constables who had followed him. "Let Varner show you the way up there," he said. "Go quietly--don't
make any fuss--the morning service is just beginning. Say nothing to
anybody--just take a quiet look around, along that gallery, especially
near the door there--and come back here." He looked down at the dead man
again as the mason and the constable went away. "A stranger, I should
think, doctor--tourist, most likely. But--thrown down! That man Varner
is positive. That looks like foul play." "Oh, there's no doubt of that!" asserted Bryce. "You'll have to go
into that pretty deeply. But the inside of the Cathedral's like a
rabbit-warren, and whoever threw the man through that doorway no doubt
knew how to slip away unobserved. Now, you'll have to remove the body to
the mortuary, of course--but just let me fetch Dr. Ransford first. I'd like some other medical man than myself to see him before he's
moved--I'll have him here in five minutes." He turned away through the bushes and emerging upon the Close ran across
the lawns in the direction of the house which he had left not twenty
minutes before. He had but one idea as he ran--he wanted to see Ransford
face to face with the dead man--wanted to watch him, to observe him,
to see how he looked, how he behaved. Then he, Bryce, would
know--something. But he was to know something before that. He opened the door of the
surgery suddenly, but with his usual quietness of touch. And on the
threshold he paused. Ransford, the very picture of despair, stood just
within, his face convulsed, beating one hand upon the other. CHAPTER IV. THE ROOM AT THE MITRE


In the few seconds which elapsed before Ransford recognized Bryce's
presence, Bryce took a careful, if swift, observation of his late
employer. That Ransford was visibly upset by something was plain enough
to see; his face was still pale, he was muttering to himself, one
clenched fist was pounding the open palm of the other hand--altogether,
he looked like a man who is suddenly confronted with some fearful
difficulty. And when Bryce, having looked long enough to satisfy his
wishes, coughed gently, he started in such a fashion as to suggest that
his nerves had become unstrung. "What is it?--what are you doing there?" he demanded almost fiercely. "What do you mean by coming in like that?" Bryce affected to have seen nothing. "I came to fetch you," he answered. "There's been an accident in
Paradise--man fallen from that door at the head of St. Wrytha's Stair. I
wish you'd come--but I may as well tell you that he's past help--dead!" "Dead! A man?" exclaimed Ransford. "What man? A workman?" Bryce had already made up his mind about telling Ransford of the
stranger's call at the surgery. He would say nothing--at that time at
any rate. It was improbable that any one but himself knew of the call;
the side entrance to the surgery was screened from the Close by a
shrubbery; it was very unlikely that any passer-by had seen the man call
or go away. No--he would keep his knowledge secret until it could be
made better use of. "Not a workman--not a townsman--a stranger," he answered. "Looks like a
well-to-do tourist. A slightly-built, elderly man--grey-haired." Ransford, who had turned to his desk to master himself, looked round
with a sudden sharp glance--and for the moment Bryce was taken aback. For he had condemned Ransford--and yet that glance was one of apparently
genuine surprise, a glance which almost convinced him, against his
will, against only too evident facts, that Ransford was hearing of the
Paradise affair for the first time. "An elderly man--grey-haired--slightly built?" said Ransford. "Dark
clothes--silk hat?" "Precisely," replied Bryce, who was now considerably astonished. "Do you
know him?" "I saw such a man entering the Cathedral, a while ago," answered
Ransford. "A stranger, certainly. Come along, then." He had fully recovered his self-possession by that time, and he led
the way from the surgery and across the Close as if he were going on
an ordinary professional visit. He kept silence as they walked rapidly
towards Paradise, and Bryce was silent, too. He had studied Ransford
a good deal during their two years' acquaintanceship, and he knew
Ransford's power of repressing and commanding his feelings and
concealing his thoughts. And now he decided that the look and start
which he had at first taken to be of the nature of genuine astonishment
were cunningly assumed, and he was not surprised when, having reached
the group of men gathered around the body, Ransford showed nothing but
professional interest. "Have you done anything towards finding out who this unfortunate
man is?" asked Ransford, after a brief examination, as he turned to
Mitchington. "Evidently a stranger--but he probably has papers on him." "There's nothing on him--except a purse, with plenty of money in it,"
answered Mitchington. "I've been through his pockets myself: there isn't
a scrap of paper--not even as much as an old letter. But he's evidently
a tourist, or something of the sort, and so he'll probably have stayed
in the city all night, and I'm going to inquire at the hotels." "There'll be an inquest, of course," remarked Ransford mechanically. "Well--we can do nothing, Mitchington. You'd better have the body
removed to the mortuary." He turned and looked up the broken stairway
at the foot of which they were standing. "You say he fell down that?" he
asked. "Whatever was he doing up there?" Mitchington looked at Bryce. "Haven't you told Dr. Ransford how it was?" he asked. "No," answered Bryce. He glanced at Ransford, indicating Varner, who had
come back with the constable and was standing by. "He didn't fall," he
went on, watching Ransford narrowly. "He was violently flung out of that
doorway. Varner here saw it." Ransford's cheek flushed, and he was unable to repress a slight start. He looked at the mason. "You actually saw it!" he exclaimed. "Why, what did you see?" "Him!" answered Varner, nodding at the dead man. "Flung, head and heels,
clean through that doorway up there. Hadn't a chance to save himself, he
hadn't! Just grabbed at--nothing!--and came down. Give a year's wages if
I hadn't seen it--and heard him scream." Ransford was watching Varner with a set, concentrated look. "Who--flung him?" he asked suddenly. "You say you saw!" "Aye, sir, but not as much as all that!" replied the mason. "I just saw
a hand--and that was all. But," he added, turning to the police with a
knowing look, "there's one thing I can swear to--it was a gentleman's
hand! I saw the white shirt cuff and a bit of a black sleeve!" Ransford turned away. But he just as suddenly turned back to the
inspector. "You'll have to let the Cathedral authorities know, Mitchington," he
said. "Better get the body removed, though, first--do it now before the
morning service is over. And--let me hear what you find out about his
identity, if you can discover anything in the city." He went away then, without another word or a further glance at the dead
man. But Bryce had already assured himself of what he was certain was
a fact--that a look of unmistakable relief had swept across Ransford's
face for the fraction of a second when he knew that there were no papers
on the dead man. He himself waited after Ransford had gone; waited until
the police had fetched a stretcher, when he personally superintended
the removal of the body to the mortuary outside the Close. And there a
constable who had come over from the police-station gave a faint hint as
to further investigation. "I saw that poor gentleman last night, sir," he said to the inspector. "He was standing at the door of the Mitre, talking to another
gentleman--a tallish man." "Then I'll go across there," said Mitchington. "Come with me, if you
like, Dr. Bryce." This was precisely what Bryce desired--he was already anxious to acquire
all the information he could get. And he walked over the way with the
inspector, to the quaint old-world inn which filled almost one side
of the little square known as Monday Market, and in at the courtyard,
where, looking out of the bow window which had served as an outer bar
in the coaching days, they found the landlady of the Mitre, Mrs.
Partingley. Bryce saw at once that she had heard the news. "What's this, Mr. Mitchington?" she demanded as they drew near across
the cobble-paved yard. "Somebody's been in to say there's been an
accident to a gentleman, a stranger--I hope it isn't one of the two
we've got in the house?" "I should say it is, ma'am," answered the inspector. "He was seen
outside here last night by one of our men, anyway." The landlady uttered an expression of distress, and opening a side-door,
motioned them to step into her parlour. "Which of them is it?" she asked anxiously. "There's two--came together
last night, they did--a tall one and a short one. Dear, dear me!--is it
a bad accident, now, inspector?" "The man's dead, ma'am," replied Mitchington grimly. "And we want to
know who he is. Have you got his name--and the other gentleman's?" Mrs. Partingley uttered another exclamation of distress and
astonishment, lifting her plump hands in horror. But her business
faculties remained alive, and she made haste to produce a big visitors'
book and to spread it open before her callers. "There it is!" she said, pointing to the two last entries. "That's the
short gentleman's name--Mr. John Braden, London. And that's the
tall one's--Mr. Christopher Dellingham--also London. Tourists, of
course--we've never seen either of them before." "Came together, you say, Mrs. Partingley?" asked Mitchington. "When was
that, now?" "Just before dinner, last night," answered the landlady. "They'd
evidently come in by the London train--that gets in at six-forty, as you
know. They came here together, and they'd dinner together, and spent the
evening together. Of course, we took them for friends. But they didn't
go out together this morning, though they'd breakfast together. After
breakfast, Mr. Dellingham asked me the way to the old Manor Mill, and
he went off there, so I concluded. Mr. Braden, he hung about a bit,
studying a local directory I'd lent him, and after a while he asked me
if he could hire a trap to take him out to Saxonsteade this afternoon. Of course, I said he could, and he arranged for it to be ready at
two-thirty. Then he went out, and across the market towards the
Cathedral. And that," concluded Mrs. Partingley, "is about all I know,
gentlemen." "Saxonsteade, eh?" remarked Mitchington. "Did he say anything about his
reasons for going there?" "Well, yes, he did," replied the landlady. "For he asked me if I thought
he'd be likely to find the Duke at home at that time of day. I said I
knew his Grace was at Saxonsteade just now, and that I should think the
middle of the afternoon would be a good time." "He didn't tell you his business with the Duke?" asked Mitchington. "Not a word!" said the landlady. "Oh, no!--just that, and no more. But--here's Mr. Dellingham." Bryce turned to see a tall, broad-shouldered, bearded man pass the
window--the door opened and he walked in, to glance inquisitively at the
inspector. He turned at once to Mrs. Partingley. "I hear there's been an accident to that gentleman I came in with last
night?" he said. "Is it anything serious? Your ostler says--"

"These gentlemen have just come about it, sir," answered the landlady. She glanced at Mitchington. "Perhaps you'll tell--" she began. "Was he a friend of yours, sir?" asked Mitchington. "A personal friend?" "Never saw him in my life before last night!" replied the tall man. "We
just chanced to meet in the train coming down from London, got talking,
and discovered we were both coming to the same place--Wrychester. So--we came to this house together. No--no friend of mine--not even an
acquaintance--previous, of course, to last night. Is--is it anything
serious?" "He's dead, sir," replied Mitchington. "And now we want to know who he
is." "God bless my soul! Dead? You don't say so!" exclaimed Mr. Dellingham. "Dear, dear! Well, I can't help you--don't know him from Adam. Pleasant,
well-informed man--seemed to have travelled a great deal in foreign
countries. I can tell you this much, though," he went on, as if a sudden
recollection had come to him; "I gathered that he'd only just arrived in
England--in fact, now I come to think of it, he said as much. Made some
remark in the train about the pleasantness of the English landscape,
don't you know?--I got an idea that he'd recently come from some country
where trees and hedges and green fields aren't much in evidence. But--if
you want to know who he is, officer, why don't you search him? He's sure
to have papers, cards, and so on about him." "We have searched him," answered Mitchington. "There isn't a paper, a
letter, or even a visiting card on him." Mr. Dellingham looked at the landlady. "Bless me!" he said. "Remarkable! But he'd a suit-case, or something of
the sort--something light--which he carried up from the railway station
himself. Perhaps in that--"

"I should like to see whatever he had," said Mitchington. "We'd better
examine his room, Mrs. Partingley." Bryce presently followed the landlady and the inspector upstairs--Mr.
Dellingham followed him. All four went into a bedroom which looked
out on Monday Market. And there, on a side-table, lay a small leather
suit-case, one which could easily be carried, with its upper half thrown
open and back against the wall behind. The landlady, Mr. Dellingham and Bryce stood silently by while the
inspector examined the contents of this the only piece of luggage in
the room. There was very little to see--what toilet articles the visitor
brought were spread out on the dressing-table--brushes, combs, a case
of razors, and the like. And Mitchington nodded side-wise at them as he
began to take the articles out of the suit-case. "There's one thing strikes me at once," he said. "I dare say you
gentlemen notice it. All these things are new! This suit-case hasn't
been in use very long--see, the leather's almost unworn--and those
things on the dressing-table are new. And what there is here
looks new, too. There's not much, you see--he evidently had
no intention of a long stop. An extra pair of trousers--some
shirts--socks--collars--neckties--slippers--handkerchiefs--that's about
all. And the first thing to do is to see if the linen's marked with name
or initials." He deftly examined the various articles as he took them out, and in the
end shook his head. "No name--no initials," he said. "But look here--do you see, gentlemen,
where these collars were bought? Half a dozen of them, in a box. Paris! There you are--the seller's name, inside the collar, just as in England. Aristide Pujol, 82, Rue des Capucines. And--judging by the look
of 'em--I should say these shirts were bought there, too--and the
handkerchiefs--and the neckwear--they all have a foreign look. There may
be a clue in that--we might trace him in France if we can't in England. Perhaps he is a Frenchman." "I'll take my oath he isn't!" exclaimed Mr. Dellingham. "However long
he'd been out of England he hadn't lost a North-Country accent! He was
some sort of a North-Countryman--Yorkshire or Lancashire, I'll go bail. No Frenchman, officer--not he!" "Well, there's no papers here, anyway," said Mitchington, who had now
emptied the suit-case. "Nothing to show who he was. Nothing here, you
see, in the way of paper but this old book--what is it--History of
Barthorpe." "He showed me that in the train," remarked Mr. Dellingham. "I'm
interested in antiquities and archaeology, and anybody who's long in my
society finds it out. We got talking of such things, and he pulled out
that book, and told me with great pride, that he'd picked it up from
a book-barrow in the street, somewhere in London, for one-and-six. I
think," he added musingly, "that what attracted him in it was the
old calf binding and the steel frontispiece--I'm sure he'd no great
knowledge of antiquities." Mitchington laid the book down, and Bryce picked it up, examined the
title-page, and made a mental note of the fact that Barthorpe was a
market-town in the Midlands. And it was on the tip of his tongue to
say that if the dead man had no particular interest in antiquities and
archaeology, it was somewhat strange that he should have bought a book
which was mainly antiquarian, and that it might be that he had so
bought it because of a connection between Barthorpe and himself. But he
remembered that it was his own policy to keep pertinent facts for his
own private consideration, so he said nothing. And Mitchington presently
remarking that there was no more to be done there, and ascertaining from
Mr. Dellingham that it was his intention to remain in Wrychester for
at any rate a few days, they went downstairs again, and Bryce and the
inspector crossed over to the police-station. The news had spread through the heart of the city, and at the
police-station doors a crowd had gathered. Just inside two or three
principal citizens were talking to the Superintendent--amongst them was
Mr. Stephen Folliot, the stepfather of young Bonham--a big, heavy-faced
man who had been a resident in the Close for some years, was known to be
of great wealth, and had a reputation as a grower of rare roses. He was
telling the Superintendent something--and the Superintendent beckoned to
Mitchington. "Mr. Folliot says he saw this gentleman in the Cathedral," he said. "Can't have been so very long before the accident happened, Mr. Folliot,
from what you say." "As near as I can reckon, it would be five minutes to ten," answered Mr.
Folliot. "I put it at that because I'd gone in for the morning service,
which is at ten. I saw him go up the inside stair to the clerestory
gallery--he was looking about him. Five minutes to ten--and it must have
happened immediately afterwards." Bryce heard this and turned away, making a calculation for himself. It
had been on the stroke of ten when he saw Ransford hurrying out of the
west porch. There was a stairway from the gallery down to that west
porch. What, then, was the inference? But for the moment he drew
none--instead, he went home to his rooms in Friary Lane, and shutting
himself up, drew from his pocket the scrap of paper he had taken from
the dead man. CHAPTER V. THE SCRAP OF PAPER


When Bryce, in his locked room, drew that bit of paper from his pocket,
it was with the conviction that in it he held a clue to the secret of
the morning's adventure. He had only taken a mere glance at it as he
withdrew it from the dead man's purse, but he had seen enough of what
was written on it to make him certain that it was a document--if such a
mere fragment could be called a document--of no ordinary importance. And now he unfolded and laid it flat on his table and looked at it
carefully, asking himself what was the real meaning of what he saw. There was not much to see. The scrap of paper itself was evidently a
quarter of a leaf of old-fashioned, stoutish notepaper, somewhat yellow
with age, and bearing evidence of having been folded and kept flat in
the dead man's purse for some time--the creases were well-defined,
the edges were worn and slightly stained by long rubbing against the
leather. And in its centre were a few words, or, rather abbreviations of
words, in Latin, and some figures:

          In Para. Wrycestr. juxt. tumb. Ric. Jenk. ex cap. xxiii. xv. Bryce at first sight took them to be a copy of some inscription but his
knowledge of Latin told him, a moment later, that instead of being an
inscription, it was a direction. And a very plain direction, too!--he
read it easily. In Paradise, at Wrychester, next to, or near, the tomb
of Richard Jenkins, or, possibly, Jenkinson, from, or behind, the head,
twenty-three, fifteen--inches, most likely. There was no doubt that
there was the meaning of the words. What, now, was it that lay behind
the tomb of Richard Jenkins, or Jenkinson, in Wrychester Paradise?--in
all probability twenty-three inches from the head-stone, and fifteen
inches beneath the surface. That was a question which Bryce immediately
resolved to find a satisfactory answer to; in the meantime there were
other questions which he set down in order on his mental tablets. They
were these:

 1.  Who, really, was the man who had registered at the
     Mitre under the name of John Braden? 2. Why did he wish to make a personal call on the
     Duke of Saxonsteade? 3. Was he some man who had known Ransford in time
     past--and whom Ransford had no desire to meet again? 4. Did Ransford meet him--in the Cathedral? 5. Was it Ransford who flung him to his death down
     St. Wrytha's Stair? 6. Was that the real reason of the agitation in which
     he, Bryce, had found Ransford a few moments after
     the discovery of the body? There was plenty of time before him for the due solution of these
mysteries, reflected Bryce--and for solving another problem which might
possibly have some relationship to them--that of the exact connection
between Ransford and his two wards. Bryce, in telling Ransford that
morning of what was being said amongst the tea-table circles of the old
cathedral city, had purposely only told him half a tale. He knew,
and had known for months, that the society of the Close was greatly
exercised over the position of the Ransford menage. Ransford, a
bachelor, a well-preserved, active, alert man who was certainly of no
more than middle age and did not look his years, had come to Wrychester
only a few years previously, and had never shown any signs of forsaking
his single state. No one had ever heard him mention his family or
relations; then, suddenly, without warning, he had brought into his
house Mary Bewery, a handsome young woman of nineteen, who was said
to have only just left school, and her brother Richard, then a boy of
sixteen, who had certainly been at a public school of repute and was
entered at the famous Dean's School of Wrychester as soon as he came
to his new home. Dr. Ransford spoke of these two as his wards, without
further explanation; the society of the Close was beginning to want
much more explanation. Who were they--these two young people? Was Dr.
Ransford their uncle, their cousin--what was he to them? In any case,
in the opinion of the elderly ladies who set the tone of society in
Wrychester, Miss Bewery was much too young, and far too pretty, to be
left without a chaperon. But, up to then, no one had dared to say as
much to Dr. Ransford--instead, everybody said it freely behind his back. Bryce had used eyes and ears in relation to the two young people. He had
been with Ransford a year when they arrived; admitted freely to their
company, he had soon discovered that whatever relationship existed
between them and Ransford, they had none with anybody else--that
they knew of. No letters came for them from uncles, aunts, cousins,
grandfathers, grandmothers. They appeared to have no memories or
reminiscences of relatives, nor of father or mother; there was a curious
atmosphere of isolation about them. They had plenty of talk about what
might be called their present--their recent schooldays, their youthful
experiences, games, pursuits--but none of what, under any circumstances,
could have been a very far-distant past. Bryce's quick and attentive
ears discovered things--for instance that for many years past Ransford
had been in the habit of spending his annual two months' holiday with
these two. Year after year--at any rate since the boy's tenth year--he
had taken them travelling; Bryce heard scraps of reminiscences of tours
in France, and in Switzerland, and in Ireland, and in Scotland--even as
far afield as the far north of Norway. It was easy to see that both boy
and girl had a mighty veneration for Ransford; just as easy to see that
Ransford took infinite pains to make life something more than happy and
comfortable for both. And Bryce, who was one of those men who
firmly believe that no man ever does anything for nothing and that
self-interest is the mainspring of Life, asked himself over and over
again the question which agitated the ladies of the Close: Who are
these two, and what is the bond between them and this sort of
fairy-godfather-guardian? And now, as he put away the scrap of paper in a safely-locked desk,
Bryce asked himself another question: Had the events of that morning
anything to do with the mystery which hung around Dr. Ransford's wards? If it had, then all the more reason why he should solve it. For Bryce
had made up his mind that, by hook or by crook, he would marry Mary
Bewery, and he was only too eager to lay hands on anything that would
help him to achieve that ambition. If he could only get Ransford into
his power--if he could get Mary Bewery herself into his power--well and
good. Once he had got her, he would be good enough to her--in his way. Having nothing to do, Bryce went out after a while and strolled round to
the Wrychester Club--an exclusive institution, the members of which
were drawn from the leisured, the professional, the clerical, and the
military circles of the old city. And there, as he expected, he found
small groups discussing the morning's tragedy, and he joined one of
them, in which was Sackville Bonham, his presumptive rival, who was
busily telling three or four other young men what his stepfather, Mr.
Folliot, had to say about the event. "My stepfather says--and I tell you he saw the man," said Sackville, who
was noted in Wrychester circles as a loquacious and forward youth; "he
says that whatever happened must have happened as soon as ever the old
chap got up into that clerestory gallery. Look here!--it's like this. My stepfather had gone in there for the morning service--strict old
church-goer he is, you know--and he saw this stranger going up the
stairway. He's positive, Mr. Folliot, that it was then five minutes to
ten. Now, then, I ask you--isn't he right, my stepfather, when he says
that it must have happened at once--immediately? "Because that man, Varner, the mason, says he saw the man fall before
ten. What?" One of the group nodded at Bryce. "I should think Bryce knows what time it happened as well as anybody,"
he said. "You were first on the spot, Bryce, weren't you?" "After Varner," answered Bryce laconically. "As to the time--I could fix
it in this way--the organist was just beginning a voluntary or something
of the sort." "That means ten o'clock--to the minute--when he was found!" exclaimed
Sackville triumphantly. "Of course, he'd fallen a minute or two before
that--which proves Mr. Folliot to be right. Now what does that prove? Why, that the old chap's assailant, whoever he was, dogged him along
that gallery as soon as he entered, seized him when he got to the open
doorway, and flung him through! Clear as--as noonday!" One of the group, a rather older man than the rest, who was leaning
back in a tilted chair, hands in pockets, watching Sackville Bonham
smilingly, shook his head and laughed a little. "You're taking something for granted, Sackie, my son!" he said. "You're
adopting the mason's tale as true. But I don't believe the poor man was
thrown through that doorway at all--not I!" Bryce turned sharply on this speaker--young Archdale, a member of a
well-known firm of architects. "You don't?" he exclaimed. "But Varner says he saw him thrown!" "Very likely," answered Archdale. "But it would all happen so quickly
that Varner might easily be mistaken. I'm speaking of something I know. I know every inch of the Cathedral fabric--ought to, as we're always
going over it, professionally. Just at that doorway, at the head of St.
Wrytha's Stair, the flooring of the clerestory gallery is worn so smooth
that it's like a piece of glass--and it slopes! Slopes at a very steep
angle, too, to the doorway itself. A stranger walking along there might
easily slip, and if the door was open, as it was, he'd be shot out and
into space before he knew what was happening." This theory produced a moment's silence--broken at last by Sackville
Bonham. "Varner says he saw--saw!--a man's hand, a gentleman's hand," insisted
Sackville. "He saw a white shirt cuff, a bit of the sleeve of a coat. You're not going to get over that, you know. He's certain of it!" "Varner may be as certain of it as he likes," answered Archdale, almost
indifferently, "and still he may be mistaken. The probability is that
Varner was confused by what he saw. He may have had a white shirt cuff
and the sleeve of a black coat impressed upon him, as in a flash--and
they were probably those of the man who was killed. If, as I suggest,
the man slipped, and was shot out of that open doorway, he would execute
some violent and curious movements in the effort to save himself in
which his arms would play an important part. For one thing, he would
certainly throw out an arm--to clutch at anything. 