



Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and PG
Distributed Proofreaders











                           THE ASHIEL MYSTERY
                           A DETECTIVE STORY


                          BY MRS. CHARLES BRYCE




_"It is the difficulty of the Police Romance, that the reader is always a
man of such vastly greater ingenuity than the writer._"

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON. CHAPTER I


When Sir Arthur Byrne fell ill, after three summers at his post in the
little consulate that overlooked the lonely waters of the Black Sea, he
applied for sick leave. Having obtained it, he hurried home to scatter
guineas in Harley Street; for he felt all the uneasy doubts as to his
future which a strong man who has never in his life known what it is to
have a headache is apt to experience at the first symptom that all is not
well. Outwardly, he pretended to make light of the matter. "Drains, that's what it is," he would say to some of the passengers to
whom he confided the altered state of his health on board the boat which
carried him to Constantinople. "As soon as I get back to a civilized
sewage system I shall be myself again. These Eastern towns are all right
for Orientals; and what is your Muscovite but an Oriental, in all
essentials of hygiene? But they play the deuce with a European who has
grown up in a country where people still indulge in a sense of smell." And if anyone ventured to sympathize with him, or to express regret at
his illness, he would snub him fiercely. But for all that he felt
convinced, in his own mind, that he had been attacked by some fatal
disease. He became melancholy and depressed; and, if he did not spend his
days in drawing up his last will and testament, it was because such a
proceeding--in view of the state of his banking account--would have
partaken of the nature of a farce. Having a sense of humour, he was
little disposed, just then, to any action whose comic side he could not
conveniently ignore. When he arrived in London, however, he was relieved to find that the
specialists whom he consulted, while they mostly gave him his money's
worth of polite interest, did not display any anxiety as to his
condition. One of them, indeed, went so far as to mention a long name,
and to suggest that an operation for appendicitis would be likely to do
no harm; but, on being cross-examined, confessed that he saw no reason to
suspect anything wrong with Sir Arthur's appendix; so that the young man
left the consulting-room in some indignation. He remembered, as soon as the door had closed behind him, that he had
forgotten to ask the meaning of the long name; and, being reluctant to
set eyes again on the doctor who had mystified him with it, went to
another and demanded to know what such a term might signify. "Is--is it--dangerous?" he stammered, trying in vain to appear
indifferent. Sir Ronald Tompkins, F.R.C.S., etc. etc., let slip a smile; and then,
remembering his reputation, changed it to a look of grave sympathy. "No," he murmured, "no, no. There is no danger. I should say, no
immediate danger. Still you did right, quite right, in coming to me. Taken in time, and in the proper way, this delicacy of yours will, I have
no hesitation in saying, give way to treatment. I assure you, my dear Sir
Arthur, that I have cured many worse cases than yours. I will write you
out a little prescription. Just a little pill, perfectly pleasant to the
taste, which you must swallow when you feel this alarming depression and
lack of appetite of which you complain; and I am confident that we shall
soon notice an improvement. Above all, my dear Sir, no worry; no anxiety. Lead a quiet, open-air life; play golf; avoid bathing in cold water;
avoid soup, potatoes, puddings and alcohol; and come and see me again
this day fortnight. Thank you, yes, two guineas. _Good_-bye." He pressed Sir Arthur's hand, and shepherded him out of the room. His patient departed, impressed, soothed and comforted. After the two weeks had passed, and feeling decidedly better, he
returned. Sir Ronald on this occasion was absolutely cheerful. He expressed himself
astonished at the improvement, and enthusiastic on the subject of the
excellence of his own advice. He then broke to Sir Arthur the fact that
he was about to take his annual holiday. He was starting for Norway the
next day, and should not be back for six weeks. "But what shall I do while you are away?" cried his patient, aghast. "You have advanced beyond my utmost expectations," replied the doctor,
"and the best thing for you now will be to go out to Vichy, and take a
course of the waters there. I should have recommended this in any case. My intended departure makes no difference. Let me earnestly advise you to
start for France to-morrow." Sir Arthur had by this time developed a blind faith in Sir Ronald
Tompkins and did not dream of ignoring his suggestion. He threw over all
the engagements he had made since arriving in England; packed his trunks
once more; and, if he did not actually leave the country until two or
three days later, it was only because he was not able to get a sleeping
berth on the night express at such short notice. The end of the week saw him installed at Vichy, the most assiduous and
conscientious of all the water drinkers assembled there. It was on the veranda of his hotel that he made the acquaintance of
Mrs. Meredith. She was twenty-five, rich, beautiful and a widow, her husband having been
accidentally killed within a few months of their marriage. After a year
or so of mourning she had recovered her spirits, and led a gay life in
English society, where she was very much in request. Sir Arthur had seen few attractive women of late, the ladies of Baku
being inclined to run to fat and diamonds, and he thought Lena Meredith
the most lovely and the most wonderful creature that ever stepped out of
a fairy tale. From the very moment he set eyes on her he was her devoted slave, and
after the first few days a more constant attendant than any shadow--for
shadows at best are mere fair-weather comrades. He seldom saw the lady
alone, for she had with her a small child, not yet a year old, of which
she was, as it seemed to Sir Arthur, inordinately fond; and whether she
were sitting under the trees in the garden of the hotel, or driving
slowly along the dusty roads--as was her habit each afternoon--the baby
and its nurse were always with her, and by their presence put an
effective check to the personalities in which he was longing to indulge. It would have taken more than a baby to discourage Sir Arthur, however:
he cheerfully included the little girl in his attentions; and, as time
went on, became known to the other invalids in the place by the nickname
of "the Nursemaid." Mrs. Meredith took his homage as a matter of course. She was used to
admiration, though she was not one of those women to whom it is
indispensable. She considered it one of the luxuries of life, and held
that it is more becoming than diamonds and a better protection against
the weather than the most expensive furs. At first she looked upon the
obviously stricken state of Sir Arthur with amusement, combined with a
good deal of gratification that some one should have arisen to entertain
her in this dull health resort; but gradually, as the weeks passed, her
point of view underwent a change. Whether it was the boredom of the cure,
or whether she was touched by the unselfish devotion of her admirer, or
whether it was due merely to the accident that Sir Arthur was an
uncommonly good-looking young man and so little conscious of the fact,
from one cause or another she began to feel for him a friendliness which
grew quickly more pronounced; so that at the end of a month, when he
found her, for the first time walking alone by the lake, and proposed to
her inside the first two minutes of their encounter, she accepted him
almost as promptly, and with very nearly as much enthusiasm. "I want to talk to you about the child, little Juliet," she said, a day
or two later. "Or rather, though I want to talk about her, perhaps I had
better not, for I can tell you almost nothing that concerns her." "My dear," said Sir Arthur, "you needn't tell me anything, if you
don't like." "But that's just the tiresome part," she returned, "I should like you to
know everything, and yet I must not let you know. She is not mine, of
course, but beyond that her parentage must remain a secret, even from
you. Yet this I may say: she is the child of a friend of mine, and there
is no scandal attached to her birth, but I have taken all responsibility
as to her future. Are you, Arthur, also prepared to adopt her?" "Darling, I will adopt dozens of them, if you like," said her infatuated
betrothed. "Juliet is a little dear, and I am very glad we shall always
have her." In England, the news of Lena Meredith's engagement caused a flutter of
excitement and disappointment. It had been hoped that she would make a
great match, and she received many letters from members of her family and
friends, pointing out the deplorable manner in which she was throwing
herself away on an impecunious young baronet who occupied an obscure
position in the Consular Service. She was begged to remember that the
Duke of Dachet had seemed distinctly smitten when he was introduced to
her at the end of the last season; and told that if she would not
consider her own interests it was unnecessary that she should forget
those of her younger unmarried sisters. At shooting lodges in the North, and in country houses in the South,
young men were observed to receive the tidings with pained surprise. More than one of them had given Mrs. Meredith credit for better taste
when it came to choosing a second husband; more than one of them had
felt, indeed, that she was the only woman in the world with an eye
discerning enough to appreciate his own valuable qualities at their true
worth. Could the fact be that she had overlooked those rare gifts? For a
week or so depression sat in many a heart unaccustomed to its presence;
and young ladies, in search of a husband, found, here and there, that
one turned to them whom they had all but given up as hopelessly
indifferent to their charms. Unconcerned by the lack of enthusiasm aroused by her decision, Lena
Meredith married Sir Arthur Byrne, and in the course of a few months
departed with him to his post on the Black Sea; where the baby Juliet and
her nurse formed an important part of the consular household. The years passed happily. Sir Arthur was moved and promoted from one
little port to another a trifle more frequented by the ships of his
country, and after a year or so to yet another still larger; so that,
while nothing was too good for Juliet in the eyes of her adopted mother,
and to a lesser extent in those of her father, it happened that she knew
remarkably little of her own land, though few girls were more familiar
with those of other nations. Nor were their wanderings confined to
Europe: Africa saw them, and the southern continent of America; and it
was in that far country that the happy days came to an end, for poor Lady
Byrne caught cold one bitter Argentine day, and died of pneumonia before
the week was out. Sir Arthur was heart-broken. He packed Juliet off to a convent school
near Buenos Ayres, and shut himself up in his consulate, refusing to meet
those who would have offered their sympathy, and going from his room to
his office, and back again, like a man in a dream. Not for more than a year did Juliet see again the only friend she had now
left in the world; and it was then she heard for the first time that he
was not really her father, and that the woman she had called "Mother" had
had no right to that name. She was fifteen years old when this blow fell
on her; and she had not yet reached her sixteenth birthday when Sir
Arthur was transferred back to Europe. "Your home must always be with me, Juliet," he had said, when he broke to
her his ignorance of her origin. "I have only you left now." But though he was kind, and even affectionate to her, he showed no real
anxiety for her society. She was sent to a school in Switzerland as soon
as they landed in Europe; and, while she used to fancy that at the
beginning of the holidays he was glad to see her return, she was much
more firmly convinced that at the end of them he was at least equally
pleased to see her depart. She was nineteen before he realized that she could not be kept at school
for ever; and when he considered the situation, and saw himself, a man
scarcely over forty, saddled with a grown-up girl, who was neither his
own daughter nor that of the woman he had loved, and to whom he had sworn
to care for the child as if she were indeed his own, it must be admitted
that his heart failed him. It was not that he had any aversion to Juliet
herself. He had been fond of the child, and he liked the girl. It was the
awkwardness of his position that filled him with a kind of despair. "If only somebody would marry her!" he thought, as he sat opposite to her
at the dinner-table, on the night that she returned for the last time
from school. The thought cheered him. Juliet, he noticed for the first time, had
become singularly pretty. He engaged a severe Frenchwoman of mature age
as chaperon, and made spasmodic attempts to take his adopted daughter
into such society as the Belgian port, where he was consul at this time,
could afford. It was not a large society; nor did eligible young men figure in it in
any quantity. Those there were, were foreigners, to whom the question of
a _dot_ must be satisfactorily solved before the idea of matrimony would
so much as occur to them. Juliet had no money. Lady Byrne had left her fortune to her husband, and
rash speculations on his part had reduced it to a meagre amount, which he
felt no inclination to part with. Two or three years went by, and she
received no proposals. Sir Arthur's hopes of seeing her provided for grew
faint, and he could imagine no way out of his difficulties. He himself
spent his leave in England, but he never took the girl with him on those
holidays. He had no wish to be called on to explain her presence to such
of his friends as might not remember his wife's whim; and, though she
passed as his daughter abroad, she could not do that at home. Juliet, for her part, was not very well content. She could hardly avoid
knowing that she was looked on as an incubus, and she saw that her
father, as she called him, dreaded to be questioned as to their
relationship. She lived a simple life; rode and played tennis with young
Belgians of her own age; read, worked, went to such dances and
entertainments as were given in the little town, and did not, on the
whole, waste much time puzzling over the mystery that surrounded her
childhood. But when her friends asked her why she never went to England
with Sir Arthur, she did not know what answer to make, and worried
herself in secret about it. Why did he not take her? Because he was ashamed of her? But why was he
ashamed? Her mother--she always thought of Lady Byrne by that name--had
said she was the daughter of a friend of hers. So that she must at least
be the child of people of good family. Was not that enough? She was already twenty-three when Sir Arthur married again. The lady was
an American: Mrs. Clarency Butcher, a good-looking widow of about
thirty-five, with three little girls, of whom the eldest was fifteen. She
had not the enormous wealth which is often one of her countrywomen's most
pleasing attributes, but she was moderately well off and came of a good
Colonial family. Having lived for several years in England, she had grown
to prefer the King's English to the President's, and had dropped, almost
completely, the accent of her native country. She was extremely well
educated, and talked three other languages with equal correctness, her
first husband having been attached to various European legations. Altogether, she was a charming and attractive woman, and there were many
who envied Sir Arthur for the second time in his life. It was not, perhaps, her fault that she did not take very kindly to
Juliet. The girl resented the place once occupied by her dead mother
being filled by any newcomer; and was not, it is to be feared, at
sufficient pains to hide her feelings on the point. And the second Lady
Byrne was hardly to be blamed if she remembered that in a few years she
would have three daughters of her own to take out, and felt that a fourth
was almost too much of a good thing. Besides, there was no getting over the fact that she was no relation
whatever, and was on the other hand a considerable drain on the family
resources, all of which Lady Byrne felt entirely equal to disbursing
alone and unassisted. Finally, her presence led to disagreements between
Sir Arthur and his wife. The day came on which Lady Byrne could not resist drawing Juliet's
attention to her unfortunate circumstances. In a heated moment, induced
by the girl's refusal to meet her half-way when she was conscious of
having made an unusual effort to be friendly, she pointed out to Juliet
that it would be more becoming in her to show some gratitude to people on
whose charity she was living, and on whom she had absolutely no claim of
blood at all. The interview ended by Juliet flying to Sir Arthur, and begging, while
she wept on his shoulder, to be allowed to go away and work for her
living; though where and how she proposed to do this she did not specify. Sir Arthur had a bad quarter of an hour. His conscience, the knowledge of
the extent to which he shared his second wife's feelings, the remembrance
of the vows he had made on the subject to his first wife, these and the
old, if not very strong, affection he had for Juliet, combined to stir
in him feelings of compunction which showed themselves in an outburst of
irritability. He scolded Juliet; he blamed his wife. "Why," he asked them both, "can two women not live in the same house
without quarrelling? Is it impossible for a wretched man ever to have a
moment's peace?" In the end, he worked himself into such a passion that Lady Byrne and
Juliet were driven to a reconciliation, and found themselves defending
each other against his reproaches. After this they got on better together. CHAPTER II


One hot summer day, a few months after the marriage, Juliet, returning to
the consulate after a morning spent in very active exercise upon a tennis
court, was met on the doorstep by Dora, the youngest of the Clarency
Butchers, who was awaiting her approach in a high state of excitement. "Hurry up, Juliet," she cried, as soon as she could make herself
heard. "You'll never guess what there is for you. Something you don't
often get!" "What is it?" said Juliet, coming up the steps. "Guess!" "A present?" "No; at least I suppose not; but there may be one inside." "Inside? Oh, then it's a parcel?" asked Juliet good-humouredly. She felt a mild curiosity, tempered by the knowledge that many things
provided a thrill for the ten-year-old Dora, which she, from the advanced
age of twenty-three, could not look upon as particularly exciting. "No, not a parcel," cried Dora, dancing round her. "It's a letter. There now!" "Then why do you say it's something I don't often get?" asked Juliet
suspiciously; "I often get letters. It's an invitation to the Gertignes'
dance, I expect." "No, no, it isn't. It's a letter from England. You don't often get one
from there, now, do you? You never did before since we've been here. I
always examine your letters, you know," said Dora, "to see if they look
as if they came from young men. So does Margaret. We think it's time you
got engaged." Margaret was the next sister. "It's very good of you to take such an interest in my fate," Juliet
replied, as she pulled off her gloves and went to the side-table for the
letter. As a matter of fact she was a good deal excited now; for what the
child said was true enough. She might even have gone further, and said
that she had never had a letter from England, except while Sir Arthur was
there on leave. It was a large envelope, addressed in a clerk's handwriting, and she came
to the conclusion, as she tore it open, that it must be an advertisement
from some shop. "DEAR MADAM,--We shall esteem it a favour if you can make it convenient
to call upon us one day next week, upon a matter of business connected
with a member of your family. It is impossible to give you further
details in a letter; but if you will grant us the interview we venture to
ask, we may go so far as to say that there appears to us to be a
reasonable probability of the result being of advantage to yourself. Trusting that you will let us have an immediate reply, in which you will
kindly name the day and hour when we may expect to see you.--We are,
yours faithfully,

"FINDLAY & INGE, _Solicitors_." The address was a street in Holborn. Juliet read the letter through, and straightway read it through again,
with a beating heart. What did it mean? Was it possible she was going to
find her own family at last? She was recalled to the present by the voice of Dora, whom she now
perceived to be reading the letter over her shoulder with
unblushing interest. "Say," said Dora, "isn't it exciting? 'Something to your advantage!' Just
what they put in the agony column when they leave you a fortune. I bet
your long-lost uncle in the West has kicked the bucket, and left you all
his ill-gotten gains. Mark my words. You'll come back from England a
lovely heiress. I do wish the others would come in. There's no one in the
house, except Sir Arthur." "Where is he?" said Juliet, putting the sheet of paper back into the
envelope and slipping it under her waistband. "You know, Dora, it's not
at all a nice thing to read other people's letters. I wonder you aren't
ashamed of yourself. I'm surprised at you." "I shouldn't have read it if you'd been quicker about telling me what was
in it," retorted Dora. "It's not at all a nice thing to put temptation in
the way of a little girl like me. Do you suppose I'm made of cast iron?" She departed with an injured air, and Juliet went to look for the consul. "What is it?" he asked, as she put the envelope into his hand. "A letter
you want me to read? Not a proposal, eh?" He smiled at her as he unfolded
the large sheet of office paper. "Hullo, what's this?" He read it through carefully. "Why, Juliet," he said, when he had finished, "this is very interesting,
isn't it? It looks as if you were going to find out something about
yourself, doesn't it? After all these years! Well, well." "You think I must go, then," she said a little doubtfully. "Go? Of course I should go, if I were you. Why not?" "You don't think it is a hoax?" "No, no; I see no reason to suppose such a thing. I know the firm of
Findlay & Ince quite well by name and reputation." "Oh, I hope they will tell me who I am!" cried Juliet. "Have you no idea
at all, father?" "No, my dear, you know I have not. Besides, I promised Lena I would never
ask. You are the child of a friend of hers. That is all I know. I think
she scarcely realized how hard it would be for you not to know more when
you grew up. I often think that if she had lived she would have told you
before now." "If you promised her not to ask, I won't ask either," said Juliet
loyally. "But I hope they'll tell me. It will be different, won't it, if
they tell me without my asking?" "I think you might ask," said Sir Arthur. "It is absurd that you should
be bound by a promise that I made. And you may be sure of one thing. Your
asking, or your not asking, won't make any odds to Findlay & Ince. If
they mean to tell you, they will; and, if they don't, you're not likely
to get it out of them." "And when shall I go?" cried Juliet. "They say they want me to answer
immediately, you know." "Oh well, I don't know. In a few days. You will hardly be ready to start
to-morrow, will you?" "I could be ready, easily," said Juliet. "You're in a great hurry to get away from us," said Sir Arthur, with a
rather uneasy laugh. "Not from you." Juliet put her arm through his. "I could never find
another father half as nice as the one I've got. But you could do very
well without so many daughters, you know." She smiled at him mockingly. "You're like the old woman who lived in a shoe. You ought to set up a
school for young ladies." "I don't believe I shall be able to get on without my eldest daughter,"
he replied, half-serious. "Still I think it would be better for you if
your real parents have decided to own up to you. At all events, if they
do not turn out desirable, I shall still be here, I hope; so I don't see
how you can lose anything by taking this chance of finding out what you
can about them." At this point Lady Byrne came into the room, and the news had to be
retold for her benefit; the letter was produced again, and she joined
heartily in the excitement it had caused. "You had better start on Monday," she said to Juliet. "That will give you
two days to pack, and to write to an hotel for rooms. Are you going to
take her, Arthur?" she added, turning to her husband. "I would, like a shot," he replied, "but I can't possibly get away next
week. I've got a lot of work on hand just now. I suppose, my dear," he
suggested doubtfully, "that you wouldn't be able to run over with her?" Lady Byrne declared that it was impossible for her to do so: she had
engagements, she said, for every day of the following week, which it was
out of the question to break. Had Sir Arthur forgotten that they
themselves were having large dinner-parties on Tuesday and Friday? What
she would do without Juliet to help her in preparing for them, she did
not know, but at least it was obvious that some one must be there to
receive his guests. No, Juliet would have to go alone. She was really old
enough to be trusted by herself for three days, and there was no need,
that she could see, for her to be away longer. "She can go on Monday, see the lawyers on Tuesday, and come back on
Wednesday," said Lady Byrne. "The helplessness of young girls is the one
thing I disapprove of in your European system of education. It is much
better that they should learn to manage their own affairs; and Juliet is
not such a ninny as you seem to think." "I shall be perfectly all right by myself," Juliet protested. Sir Arthur did not like it. "Supposing she is detained in London," he said. "What should detain her," demanded his wife, "unless it is the discovery
of her parents? And, if she finds them, I presume they will be capable of
looking after her. In any case, she can write, or cable to us when she
has seen the solicitors, and it is no use providing for contingencies
that will probably never arise." So at last it was decided. A letter was written and dispatched to Messrs.
Findlay & Ince, saying that Miss Byrne would have pleasure in calling
upon them at twelve o'clock on the following Tuesday; and Juliet busied
herself in preparations for her journey. On Monday morning she left Ostend, in the company of her maid. It was a glorious August day. On shore the heat was intense, and it was a
relief to get out of the stifling carriages of the crowded boat train,
and to breathe the gentle air from the sea that met them as they crossed
the gangway on to the steamer. Juliet enjoyed every moment of the
journey; and would have been sorry when the crossing was over if she had
not been so eager to set foot upon her native soil. She leant upon the rail in the bows of the ship, watching the white
cliffs grow taller and more distinct, and felt that now indeed she
understood the emotions with which the heart of the exile is said to
swell at the sight of his own land. She wondered if the sight of their
country moved other passengers on the boat as she herself was moved, and
made timid advances to a lady who was standing near her, in her need of
some companion with whom to share her feeling. "Have you been away from England a long time," she asked her. "I have been abroad during a considerable period," replied the person she
addressed, a stern-looking Scotchwoman who did not appear anxious to
enter into conversation. From her severe demeanour Juliet imagined she might be a governess going
for a holiday. "You must be glad to be going home," she ventured. "It's a far cry north to my home," said the Scotchwoman, thawing
slightly. "I'm fearing I will not be seeing it this summer. I'll be
stopping in the south with some friends. The journey north is awful'
expensive." "I'm sorry you aren't going home," Juliet sympathized, "but it will be
nice to see the English faces at Dover, won't it? There may even be a
Scotchman among the porters, you know, by some chance." "No fear," said her neighbour gloomily. "They'll be local men, I have
nae doubt. Though whether they are English or Scots," she added, "I'll
have to give them saxpence instead of a fifty-centime bit; which is one
of the bonniest things you see on the Continent, to my way of thinking." Juliet could get no enthusiasm out of her; and, look which way she might,
she could not see any reflection on the faces of those around her of the
emotions which stirred in her own breast. It had been a rough crossing,
in spite of the cloudless sky and broiling sunshine, and most of the
passengers had been laid low by the rolling of the vessel. They displayed
anxiety enough to reach land; but, as far as she could see, what land it
was they reached was a matter of indifference to them. No doubt, she
thought, when the ship stopped and they felt better, they would be more
disposed to a sentimentality like hers. She found her maid--who had been one of the most sea-sick of those
aboard--and assisted her ashore, put her into a carriage and
ministered to her wants with the help of a tea-basket containing the
delicious novelty of English bread and butter. In half an hour's time
they were steaming hurriedly towards London. She was to lodge at a
small hotel in Jermyn Street; and on that first evening even this
seemed perfect to her. The badness of the cooking was a thing she
refused to notice; and the astonishing hills and valleys of the bed
caused in her no sensation beyond that of surprise. She was young,
strong and healthy, and there was no reason that trifling discomforts
of this kind should affect her enjoyment. To the shortcomings of the
bed, indeed, she shut her eyes in more senses than one, for she was
asleep three minutes after her head touched the pillow, nor did she
wake till her maid roused her the next morning. She got up at once and looked out of the window. It was a fine day again;
over the roofs of the houses opposite she could see a blue streak of sky. Already the air had lost the touch of freshness which comes, even to
London in August, during the first hours of the morning; and the heat in
the low-ceilinged room on the third floor which Juliet occupied for the
sake of economy, was oppressive in spite of the small sash windows being
opened to their utmost capacity. But Juliet only laughed to herself with
pleasure at the brilliancy of the day. She felt that the weather was
playing up to the occasion, as became this important morning of her life. For that it was important she did not doubt. She was going to hear
tremendous news that day; make wonderful discoveries about her birth;
hear undreamt-of things. Of this she felt absolutely convinced, and it
would not have astonished her to find herself claimed as daughter by any
of the reigning families of Europe. She was prepared for anything, or so
she said to herself, however astounding; and, that being so, she was
excited in proportion. Anyone could have told her that, by this attitude
of mind towards the future, she was laying up for herself disappointment
at the least, if not the bitterest disillusions; but there was no one to
throw cold water on her hopes, and she filled the air with castles of
every style of architecture that her fancy suggested, without any
hindrance from doubt or misgiving. She dressed quickly, in the gayest humour, but with even more care than
she usually bestowed upon her appearance; a subject to which she always
gave the fullest attention. "Which dress will Mademoiselle wear?" the maid asked her. "Why, my prettiest, naturally," she replied. "What, the white one that Mademoiselle wore for the marriage of Monsieur,
her papa?" inquired Therese, scandalized at the idea of such a precious
garment being put on before breakfast. "That very one," Juliet assured her, undaunted; and was arrayed in it, in
spite of obvious disapproval. After breakfast they went out, and, inquiring their way to Bond Street,
flattened their noses against the shop windows to their mutual
satisfaction. They had it almost to themselves, for there were not many people left in
that part of London; but more than one head was turned to gaze at the
pretty girl in the garden-party dress, who stood transfixed before shop
after shop. This amusement lasted till half-past eleven, when they
returned to the hotel for Juliet to give the final pats to her hair, and
to retilt her hat to an angle possibly more becoming, before she started
to keep her appointment with the solicitors. The next twenty minutes were
spent in cross-examining the hotel porter as to the time it would take to
drive to her destination, and, having decided to start at ten minutes to
twelve, in wondering whether the quarter of an hour which had still to
elapse would ever come to an end. At three minutes to twelve she rang the bell of the office of Messrs.
Findlay & Ince. CHAPTER III


A gloomy little clerk climbed down from a high stool where he sat
writing, and opened the door. "Oh yes, Miss Juliet Byrne," he said when Juliet had told him her name. "Mr. Findlay is expecting you. Will you walk upstairs, Miss Byrne,
please. I think you have an appointment for twelve o'clock? This way, if
you please." He led the way up a steep and narrow flight of stairs, which rose out of
the black shadows at the end of the passage. "Ladies find these stairs rather dark, I'm afraid," he remarked
pleasantly, as he held open a door and ushered Juliet and her maid into
an empty room. "Will you kindly wait here," he continued. "Mr. Findlay is
engaged for the moment. You are a leetle before your time, I believe." He
pulled out his watch and examined it closely. "Not _quite_ the hour yet,"
he repeated, and closed it with a snap. "But Mr. Findlay will see you as
soon as he is disengaged." With a flourish of his handkerchief he withdrew, shutting the door
behind him. Juliet sat down on a hard chair covered with green leather, and told her
maid to take another. Her spirits were damped. The sight of Mr. Nicol, as
the clerk was named, often had that effect upon persons who saw him for
the first time; indeed he was found to be a very useful check on
troublesome clients, who arrived full of determination to have their own
way, and were often so cowed by their preliminary interview with Nicol as
to feel it a privilege and a relief subsequently to be bullied by Mr.
Ince, or persuaded by Mr. Findlay into the belief that what they had
previously decided on was the last thing advisable to do. Mr. Findlay frequently remarked to Mr. Ince, when his partner's easily
roused temper was more highly tried than usual by some imbecile mistake
of the clerk's, that Nicol might have faults as a clerk and as a man, but
that, as a buffer, he was the nearest approach to perfection obtainable
in this world of makeshifts. To which Mr. Ince would reply with point and fluency that fenders could
be had by the dozen from any shipping warehouse, at a lower cost than one
week's salary of Nicol's would represent, and would be far more efficient
in the office. Still he did not suggest dismissing the man. Juliet, as she sat and looked round the musty little waiting-room, felt
that here was an end of her dreams of the resplendent family she was to
find pining to take her to its heart. She felt certain that she could
never have any feelings in common with people who could employ a firm of
solicitors which in its turn was served by the man who had received her. Romance and the clerk could never, she thought, meet under one roof. And
such a roof! The room in which she sat was so dark, so gloomy, so bare
and cheerless, that Juliet began to wonder whether she would not have
been wiser not to have come. This was not a place, surely, which fond
parents would choose for a long-deferred meeting with their child, after
years of separation. She walked to the window, but the only view was of a
blank wall, and that so close that she could have touched it by leaning
out. No wonder the room was dark, even at midday in August. The walls
were lined with bookshelves, where heavy volumes, all dealing with the
same subject, that of law, stood shoulder to shoulder in stout bindings
of brown leather. There was a fireplace of cracked and dirty marble with an engraving hung
over it, representing the coronation of Queen Victoria. A gas stove
occupied the grate, and a gas bracket stuck out from the wall on either
side of the picture. On the small round mahogany table that stood in the middle of the room
lay a Bible, and a copy of the _St. James's Gazette_, which was dated a
week back. Juliet took it up and read an account of a cricket match
without much enthusiasm. Then she flung it down and wandered about the
room once more; but she had exhausted all its possibilities; and though
she took a volume entitled _Causes Celebres_ from the shelf, and turned
its pages hopefully, she put it back with a grimace at its dullness and a
sort of surprise at finding anything drier than the cricket. She had waited half an hour, when the door opened and the face of Nicol
was introduced round the corner of it. "Will you please come this way," he said. Telling her maid to stay where she was, Juliet followed him. He opened
the other door on the landing, and announced her in a loud voice as, with
a quickened pulse, she passed him, and entered the room. There were two men standing by the hearth. One of them came forward to
receive her. "How do you do, Miss Byrne," he said; "I am glad you were able to come. I am Jeremy Findlay, at your service." Mr. Findlay was a man of moderate height, with a long pointed nose which
he was in the habit of putting down to within an inch or two of his desk
when he was looking for any particular paper, for he was very short
sighted. It rather conveyed the impression that he was poking about with
it, and that he hunted for questionable clauses or illegalities in a
document, much as a pig might hunt for truffles in a wood. For the rest,
he was middle-aged, with hair nearly white, and small grey whiskers. He
beamed at Juliet through gold-rimmed eyeglasses. "Let me introduce my friend," he said, mumbling something. Juliet did not catch the name, but she supposed that this was Mr. Ince. The other man stepped forward and shook hands, but said nothing. He was a
thin, pallid creature, rather above the average height, and had the
drooping shoulders of a scholar. His face, which was long and narrow,
looked pale and emaciated, and though his blue eyes had a kindly twinkle
it seemed to Juliet that they burned with a feverish brightness. His nose
was long and slightly hooked, and beneath it the mouth was hidden by a
heavy red moustache; while his hair, though not of so bright a colour,
had a reddish tinge about it. He appeared to be about fifty years of age,
but this was due to a look of tiredness habitual to his expression, and,
in part, to actual bad health. In reality he was younger. "Pray take this chair, Miss Byrne," Mr. Findlay was saying. "We are
anxious to have a little conversation with you. I am sure you quite
understand that we should not have asked you to come all the way from
Belgium unless your presence was of considerable importance. How
important it is I really hardly know myself, but I repeat that I would
not have urged you to take so long a journey if I had not had serious
reason to think that it was desirable for your own sake that you should
do so. I may say at once that the matter is a family one; but before
going further I must ask your permission to put one or two questions to
you, which I hope you will believe are not prompted by any feeling of
idle curiosity on my part." He paused, and Juliet murmured some words of acquiescence. Mr. Findlay
took off his eyeglasses, glared at them, replaced them, and ran his nose
over the surface of the papers on his writing-table. "Ah, here it is!" he exclaimed triumphantly, pouncing on a folded sheet
and lifting it to his eyes. "Just a few notes," he explained. "We wrote you care of Sir Arthur Byrne," he resumed; "are you a member of
his family?" Here was a disturbing question for Juliet. She had imagined, until this
instant, that she was on the point of being told who her family was, and
now this man was asking for information from her. Tears of disappointment
would not be kept from her eyes. "I am a member of Sir Arthur's household," she stammered. "Are you not his daughter, then?" asked Mr. Findlay. "No, I am not really," Juliet replied. "Then may I ask what relation you are to him?" said the lawyer. "I am his adopted daughter," said Juliet. "I have always called him
'Father.'" "Are you not any relation at all?" pursued Mr. Findlay. "I believe not." "Then, Miss Byrne, I hope you will not think it an impertinent question
if I ask, who are you?" "I don't know," acknowledged poor Juliet. "I was hoping you would tell me
that. I thought, I imagined, that that was why you sent for me." "You astonish me," said Mr. Findlay. "Do you mean to say that your family
has never made any attempt to communicate with you?" "No, never." "And that Sir Arthur Byrne has never told you anything as to your birth? Surely you must have questioned him about it?" "He has told me all he knows," said Juliet, "but that amounts to
nothing." "Indeed; that is very strange. He must have had dealings with the people
you were with before he adopted you. He must at least know their name?" "I don't know," said Juliet. "He doesn't know either, I am sure. It
wasn't Sir Arthur who adopted me. It was the lady he married. A Mrs.
Meredith. She is dead." "But he must have heard about you from her," insisted Mr. Findlay. "He
would not have taken a child into his household without knowing anything
at all about it." "His wife told him that I was the daughter of a friend of hers, and
begged him not to ask her any more about me. He was very devoted to her,
and he did as she wished. He has been most kind to me; but I am sure he
would be as glad as I should be to discover my relations. I am dreadfully
disappointed that you don't know anything about them. We all thought I
was going to find my family at last." Juliet's voice quavered a little. She had built too much on this
interview. "I am really extremely sorry not to be able to give you any information,"
Mr. Findlay said. He turned towards the other man with an interrogative glance, and was met
by a nod of the head, at which he leant back in his chair, crossed his
legs and folded his hands upon them, with the expression of some one who
has played his part in the game, and now retires in favour of another
competitor. The pale man moved his chair a little forward and took up the
conversation. "Are you really quite certain that Sir Arthur Byrne has told you all
he knows?" he said earnestly, fixing on Juliet a look at once grave
and eager. "Yes," she answered. "I can see that he is as puzzled as I am. And he
would be glad enough to find a way to get rid of me," she added bitterly. "I thought you said you were attached to him," said the stranger in
surprise, "and that he had been very kind to you?" "Yes," said Juliet, "he has, and I am as fond of him as possible. But he
has three stepdaughters now; he has married again, you know. And he is
not very well off. I am a great expense, besides being an extra girl. I
don't blame him for thinking I am one too many." There was a long pause, during which Juliet was conscious of being
closely scrutinized. "I think I may be able to give you news of your family," said the pale
man unexpectedly. "That is, if you are the person I think you are
likely to be." "Oh," exclaimed Juliet, "can you really?" "Well, it is possible," admitted the other. "I can't say for
certain yet." "Oh, do, do tell me!" cried the girl. "Out of the question, at present," he replied firmly. "I must first
satisfy myself as to whose child you are, and on that point you appear
able to give me no assistance. You must wait till I can find out
something further about this matter of your adoption. And even then,"
he added, "it is not certain if I can tell you. You must understand
that, though certain family secrets have been placed in my possession,
it does not depend upon myself whether or not I shall ultimately reveal
them to you." Juliet's face fell for a moment, but she refused to allow herself to be
discouraged. "There is a chance for me, anyhow!" she exclaimed. "How I hope you
will be allowed to tell me in the end! But why," she went on, turning
to Mr. Findlay, "did you make me think you knew nothing at all about
me. I suppose the family secrets your partner speaks of are the
secrets of my family?" "My dear young lady," said Mr. Findlay, "Lord Ashiel is not my partner. On the contrary, he is an old client of ours, and it was at his request
that we wrote to you as we did. We know no more about your affairs than
you have told us yourself." "Oh," murmured Juliet, confused at her mistake. "I thought you were Mr.
Ince," she apologized; "I am so sorry." "Not very flattering to poor Ince I'm afraid," said Lord Ashiel, smiling
at her. "He's ten years younger than I am, I'm sorry to say, and I would
change places with him very willingly. Now, if you had mistaken me for
Nicol, that undertaker clerk of Findlay's, who always looks as if he's
been burying his grandmother, I should have been decidedly hurt. What in
the world do you keep that fellow in the office for, Findlay? To frighten
away custom?" Mr. Findlay laughed. "He's a more useful person than you imagine," he said. "Though I must say
Ince agrees with you, and is always at me about the poor man. Some day I
hope you will both see his sterling qualities." "I am afraid you must think I have given you a great deal of trouble for
very little reason," Lord Ashiel said to Juliet. "But perhaps there will
be more result than at present can seem clear to you. I may go so far as
to say that I hope so most sincerely. But, if the secret of which I spoke
just now is ever to be confided to you, it will be necessary for you and
me to know each other a little better. I have a proposal to make to you,
which I fear you may think our acquaintance rather too short and
unconventional to justify." He paused with a trace of embarrassment, and Juliet wondered what could
be coming. "It is not convenient for me to stay in London just now," he went on
after a minute, "and I am sure you must find it very disagreeable at this
time of the year; and yet it is very important that I should see more of
you. It is, in fact, part of the conditions under which I may be able to
reveal these family secrets of yours to you. That is to say, if they
should turn out to be indeed yours. I came up from the Highlands last
night. I have a place on the West Coast, where at this moment I have a
party of people staying with me for shooting. My sister is entertaining
them in my absence, but I must get back to my duties of host. What I want
to suggest is that you should pay us a visit at Inverashiel." "Thank you very much," said Juliet doubtfully. "I should love to, but--I
don't know whether my father would allow me." "Your father?" exclaimed Lord Ashiel and Mr. Findlay in one breath. "Sir Arthur Byrne, I mean," she corrected herself. "You might telegraph to him," urged Lord Ashiel. "And I, myself, will
write. You might mention my sister to him. I think he used to know her. Mrs. John Haviland. But, indeed, it is very important that you should
come, more important than you think, perhaps." He seemed extraordinarily anxious, now, lest she should refuse. "Perhaps," suggested Mr. Findlay, "Miss Byrne would like to think over
the idea, and let you know later in the day." "A very good plan," said Lord Ashiel. "Yes, of course you would like to
think it over. Will you telephone to me at the Carlton after lunch? Thanks so much. Good-bye for the present." He seized his hat and stick and darted to the door. "You talk to her,
Findlay!" he cried, and disappeared. Juliet and Mr. Findlay were left confronting one another. "That will be the best plan," the lawyer repeated. "Think it over, Miss
Byrne. I am sure you would enjoy the visit to Scotland. Inverashiel is a
most interesting old place, both historically and for the sake of its
beautiful scenery. A week or two of Highland air could not fail to be of
benefit to your health, even if nothing further came of it, so to speak." "I should love it," Juliet said again. "But, Mr. Findlay, I don't know
Lord Ashiel, or hardly know him. How can I go off and stay with someone I
never met before to-day?" "The circumstances are unusual," said the lawyer. "I fancy Lord Ashiel is
anxious to lose no time. He is in bad health, poor fellow. I am afraid he
will worry himself a good deal if you cannot make up your mind to go." "You see," said Juliet, troubled, "I know nothing about him. I don't know
what my father--I mean, Sir Arthur would say." "I am sure your father would have no objection whatever to your making
friends with Lord Ashiel," Mr. Findlay assured her. "He is one of the
most respectable, the most domesticated of peers. Not very cheerful
company, perhaps, but no one in the world can justly say a word against
him in any way. He has had a sad time lately; his wife and only child
died within a month of each other, only two or three years ago. They had
been married quite a short time. Since then, his sister, Mrs. Haviland,
keeps house for him; but he does not entertain much, I am told, except
during the autumn in Scotland. You need have no hesitation in accepting
this invitation, Miss Byrne. I am a married man, and the father of a
family, and I should only be too delighted if one of my daughters had
such an opportunity." "Well," said Juliet, "I think I will risk it, and go. I am old enough to
take care of myself, in any case." This she said haughtily, with her nose
in the air. And then, with a sudden drop to her usual manner, she
exclaimed in a tone of gaiety, "What fun it will be!" "I am sure you will not regret your decision," repeated Mr. Findlay, as
she got up to go. "You won't forget to let Lord Ashiel know, will you?" "No, I will telephone to him at once. But I will telegraph home too,
of course." Excitement over this new plan had almost dispelled the earlier
disappointment, and if Juliet's spirits, as she drove back to Jermyn
Street, were not quite as overflowingly high as when she had started
out, they were good enough to make her smile to herself and to every one
she met during the rest of the day, and to hum gay little tunes when no
one was near, and altogether to feel very happy and pleased and
possessed by the conviction that something delightful was about to
happen. She sent off her telegram to Sir Arthur, spending some time over
it, and spoiling a dozen telegraph forms, before she could find
satisfactory words in which to convey her plans with an appearance of
deference to authority. Then she called up the Carlton Hotel on the
telephone, and was much put out when she heard that Lord Ashiel was not
staying there, or even expected. It was the hall porter of her hotel who came to the rescue, by
suggesting that she should try the Carlton Club, of which she had never
before heard. From the quickness with which Lord Ashiel answered her, he might have
been sitting waiting at the end of the wire, and he expressed great
pleasure at her acceptance of his invitation. Indeed, she could hear from
the tone of his voice that his gratification was no mere empty form. It
was arranged that she should travel down on the following night, Lord
Ashiel promising to engage a sleeping berth for her on the eight o'clock
train. He himself was going North that same evening. He had just been
writing a letter to Sir Arthur Byrne, he told her. He hoped she had some
thick dresses with her; she would want them in Scotland. "I am afraid I haven't," she said. "I only expected to stay in London for
a day or two, you know." "Well," said the voice at the end of the telephone, "perhaps you can get
a waterproof or something, between this and to-morrow night. I am afraid
I don't know the names of any ladies' tailors, but there are lots about,"
he concluded vaguely. "I suppose I had better," said Juliet doubtfully. "I wonder if the
shops here will trust me. The fact is, I haven't got very much extra
money. I think perhaps I'd better wait a day or two till I can have
some more sent me." "My dear child," came the answer in horrified tones, "you must on no
account put off coming. Of course you are not prepared for all this extra
expense. You must allow me to be your banker. I insist upon it. Your
family, in whose confidence I happen to be, would never forgive me if I
allowed you to continue to be dependent on Sir Arthur Byrne." "It is very kind of you," Juliet began. "But suppose I turn out to be
some one different. You know, you said--"

"If you do, you shall repay me," he replied. "In the meantime I will
send you round a small sum to do your shopping with. Let me see, where
are you staying?" An hour later a bank messenger arrived with an envelope containing L100
in notes. Juliet had never seen so much money in her life, and thought it
far too much. "I shall be sure to lose it," was her first thought. Her
second was to deposit it with the proprietor of the hotel; after which
she felt safer. Then, in huge delight, she sallied forth again with her
maid, the alluring memory of some of the shop windows into which she had
gazed that morning calling to her loudly; she had never thought to look
at those fascinating garments from the other side of the glass. Intoxicating hours followed, in which a couple of tweed dresses were
purchased that seemed as if they must have been made on purpose for her;
nor were thick walking shoes, and country hats, and other accessories
neglected. By evening her room was strewn with cardboard boxes, and on
Wednesday more were added, so that a trunk to pack them in had to be
bought as well. The shops were very empty; Juliet had the entire
attention of the shop people, and revelled in her purchases. Time flew,
and she was quite sorry, as she drove to Euston on the following evening,
to think that she was leaving this fascinating town of London. CHAPTER IV


On Tuesday afternoon, when Juliet, having hung up the telephone through
which she had been conversing with Lord Ashiel, hurried out to see what
Bond Street could provide her with, a little man was sitting writing in a
luxuriously furnished room in a flat in Whitehall. He was small and thin,
and possessed a pair of extraordinarily bright and intelligent brown
eyes, which saw a good deal more of what happened around him than perhaps
any other eyes within a radius of a mile from where he sat. He was, in
other words, observant to a very high degree; and, what was more
remarkable, he knew how to use his powers of observation. There was not a
criminal in the length and breadth of the country who did not wonder
uneasily whether he had really left the scene of his crime as devoid of
clues as he imagined, when he heard that the celebrated detective,
Gimblet, had visited the spot in pursuit of his investigations. For this was the man, who, in a few years, had unravelled more apparently
insoluble mysteries, and caused the arrest of more hitherto evasive
scoundrels, than his predecessors had managed to secure in a decade. The
name of Gimblet was known and detested wherever a coiner carried on his
forbidden craft, or a blackmailer concocted his cowardly plans; burglars
and forgers cursed freely when he was mentioned, and there was hardly an
illicit trade in the country which had not suffered at one time or
another from his inquisitive habit of interesting himself in other
people's affairs. Scotland Yard officials were never too proud to call
upon him for help, and many a difficulty he had helped them out of,
though he refused an offer of a regular post in the Criminal
Investigation Department, preferring to be at liberty to choose what
cases he would take up. Above all things he loved the strange and
inexplicable. Gimblet had not always been a detective. Indeed, he often
smiled to himself when he thought of the extraordinary confidence which
the public now elected to repose in him. No one was more conscious than himself that he was far from being
infallible; in fact, his admirers appeared to him to be wilfully blind to
that elementary truth; so that when he failed to bring a case to a
successful issue people were apt to show an amount of disappointment that
he, for his part, thought very unreasonable. It was, perhaps, in the
nature of things that the puzzles he solved correctly received so much
more publicity than was given to his mistakes; but he often could not
avoid wishing that less were expected of him, and that his reputation had
not grown so tropically on what he could but consider insufficient
nourishment. In early days, after leaving Oxford, he had gone into an architect's
office and had flourished there; till one day an accident had turned his
energies in the direction they had since taken. A crime had been committed during the erection of a house he was
building, and, when the police were at a loss to know how to account for
the somewhat peculiar circumstances, the young architect, going his
ordinary rounds of inspection, had seen in a flash that there was
something unusual in the disposal of a portion of the building material;
which observation, with certain deductions following thereon, had led to
the detection and arrest of the criminal. From that time on he had been
more and more drawn to the fascination of tracing events to their
causes, when these appeared connected with deeds of violence and fraud,
till of late years he had completely dropped the study of the carrying
powers of wood and stone for the more interesting lessons to be derived
from the contemplation of the strange vagaries indulged in by his fellow
human beings. He kept, however, a strong taste for art and all that appertained to it;
more especially he was devoted to the collection of old and rare
bric-a-brac. There was not a curiosity shop in London that did not know
him, and he was equally happy when he had discovered some dust-hidden
treasure in the back regions of a secondhand furniture shop, or when he
was engaged in running to earth some human vermin who up till then had
lain snug in his own particular back region of crime, straining his ears,
in a mixture of contempt and anxiety, as the sounds of the hunt went by. Having finished his letter, Gimblet put his stylo in his pocket, and
turned round to look at the clock. "Twenty minutes to four," he said half-aloud. "I wish to goodness people
would keep their appointments punctually, or else not come at all." Five more minutes passed, and he got up and went into the hall. "Higgs," he called, and his faithful servant and general factotum came
out of the pantry. "I am going out," said his master, taking up his straw hat. "If anyone
calls, say I could not wait any longer. Ah, there's the front-door bell. Just see who it is." He retreated to his sitting-room while Higgs went to the door of the
flat. A minute or two later Lord Ashiel was ushered in. "I'm very sorry I'm late," said he, as the door closed behind him, "but
you know what kept me." "Not the young lady, surely," said Gimblet; "you were to see her at
twelve o'clock this morning, weren't you?" "Yes, but she telephoned to me after lunch. By Jove, Gimblet, I believe
you have got hold of the right girl this time." Lord Ashiel's tone was
enthusiastic. "If she turns out to be half as nice as she looks, I shall
be ever grateful to you for routing her out." "Indeed, I am very glad to hear it," replied the detective. "And do you
observe a resemblance in her to your family; do you feel satisfied that
she is your daughter?" "I can't say I do see much likeness," Lord Ashiel confessed rather
reluctantly. "I thought at one moment, when she smiled, that she was like
her mother; but otherwise she did not strike me as resembling either of
us, I am sorry to say." "Did she know her history at all?" asked Gimblet. "Did she claim you
as father?" "No, she had never heard of me, as far as I could make out. And she
assured me that Sir Arthur Byrne has no idea whose child she is." "That certainly seems very improbable," Gimblet commented. "Yes, it does. Still, I feel sure she was speaking the truth. Why,
indeed, should she not do so? It seems that Byrne has married again, and
that his wife has already three daughters of her own; so, as she says, he
would probably be glad enough to get the fourth one off his hands, as
they are not well off." "Yes," said Gimblet. "I knew that. No, there seems no reason why Sir
Arthur Byrne should not have told her about you if he knew she was your
child. What is odd, is that he should not have known it." "He had promised his first wife not to make any inquiries, it seems,"
said Lord Ashiel. "Well, he is an uncommon kind of man if he kept that promise,"
Gimblet remarked. "He was devoted to his first wife, this girl told me," said Lord Ashiel. "You never knew Lena Meredith, Gimblet, or you would not be surprised
that people kept their promises to her. She was my wife's friend, as I
told you, and I only saw her once, but I don't think I shall ever forget
her. It was just after my wife's death, and I was too heart-broken to
take much notice of anyone, but she was the sort of woman who sticks in
your memory, and I can quite understand a man being infatuated about her,
even to the point of curbing his curiosity for a lifetime on any subject
she wished him to leave alone. I went to see her, you know, about the
baby. I remember, as if it was yesterday, how I told her the whole story. I told her how I had met Juliana two years before, and how, from the
first, we had both known we should never care for anyone else. I told her
about my old grandfather, from whom I had such great expectations, and
who wouldn't hear of my marrying anyone except the cousin, still in the
schoolroom, whom he had picked out as my future wife. "It was his wish that we should be married when I was twenty-five and
the girl eighteen; but I was not yet twenty-two, so that there were at
least three years of grace before he could begin to try and impose his
design upon us. And he was old and ill, and I had heard that the doctors
didn't give him more than a year or two, at most, to live. I thought
that if Juliana and I were married secretly he would die before the
question of my marriage had time to become one of practical politics;
and I persuaded her to agree to a private marriage, which we would
announce to the world as soon as my eccentric old grandfather was safely
out of it. There was no possible obstacle to our marriage except the old
man's domineering temper. Juliana Sandfort was my superior in every
possible sense, worldly or otherwise; but I came of a good family, was
to inherit an old name and title, and a more than sufficient fortune so
long as I kept on the right side of the old Lord, and we both knew that
there was no objection to be feared from her relations or from any other
one of mine. In short, much as she disliked doing things in that
hole-and-corner sort of way, and ashamed as I was at heart of asking her
to, we neither of us could see much actual harm in the idea, and we were
married accordingly at a registry office in London. Everything would
have been well, and all would have gone as we hoped, but for the one
unforeseen and horrible calamity. My wife died six months before my
grandfather, on the day her baby was born." Lord Ashiel paused, and sat gazing before him, over Gimblet's shoulder. There was a look on his face which showed that for the moment he was
blind to the scene that lay in front of him, and that he saw in place of
the bureau which stood opposite to him, and of the Oriental china which
was the detective's special pride, and on which his eyes seemed to be
fixed, some vision of the past which was far more real than the
unsubstantial present. Presently he went on talking in a reflective
undertone:

"All this I told Mrs. Meredith, and a great deal besides, for I was still
in the first violence of bitter, self-reproachful grief. I wanted to be
rid of the child, the cause of the catastrophe, whom I hated as
vehemently as I had loved its mother, and I begged Mrs. Meredith to help
me to dispose of it in such a fashion that, to me at least, the little
one should be to all intents and purposes as dead as she was. Babies, I
knew, had not a very strong hold on life, and I hoped, as a matter of
fact, that it might really die, but this I did not dare to say aloud. Mrs. Meredith was kind to me. I remember well how good and sympathetic
she was. She had heard most of the story from Juliana, whose friend she
was, and it was at her house that the child was born. We had confided in
no one else. She sat silently for a while after I had finished what I had
to say, till at last she turned to me and tried to persuade me to alter
my intention of disowning the baby. But I repeated doggedly that unless
she had some alternative way to suggest of getting rid of it, I meant to
leave the little girl at the door of one of the foundling hospitals, and
that I would take her that very night. "At length, seeing that I was resolved, she said she thought she could
manage better than that. She had a friend, she said, an elderly Russian
lady, who was a widow and childless. This lady was anxious to adopt a
little English girl, and had lately written to ask her to find her a baby
whom she could bring up as her own child. There was no reason why
Juliana's baby should not be the one. She would write at once and suggest
it. I was greatly relieved at this idea. Although I had been determined
to do as I proposed, whatever opposition I might meet with, my conscience
had not been willing to let me leave my child on a doorstep without
protesting, and, little though I heeded its condemnation, I was glad to
be able to get my own way and at the same time to silence the voice of my
inward critic. "The plan seemed simplicity itself. My wife, as I have told you, had no
parents living. Her brothers and sisters, who were all married and
living in different parts of the country, had been led to believe that
her death was the result of an accident. Mrs. Meredith had even managed
to prevail on the doctor to lend himself to this fiction; for, my
grandfather being yet alive, there was still every reason not to declare
our marriage, while there seemed to be none in favour of doing so, and I
shrank from the questionings and scenes which publicity now would not
fail to bring upon me. Before I left Mrs. Meredith we had agreed that
she should at once communicate with her Russian friend, whose name I
refused to let her tell me. "I have told you before to-day, Gimblet, of all that has happened since. How I took passionately to books as a refuge from my sorrow; how, at my
grandfather's suggestion, I had been by way of working for the
Diplomatic Service; of how I now worked in good earnest, and in course
of time, and after my grandfather's death, found myself attached to our
embassy at Petersburg. During the two years I spent there I made the
acquaintance of Countess Romaninov. One day when I was talking to her
she happened to mention that she had once known an English lady, Mrs.
Meredith, and I came to the conclusion that the little girl who lived
with her must be none other than my own child. As you know, I could not
stand living in the same town as she did, and for that, and for other
reasons, I left the Diplomatic Service and returned to England, where I
have lived a quiet life on my place in Scotland ever since. Eight years
ago, as you know, I married for the second time, and after a few years
of comparative happiness, found myself again a widower, my second wife
and her child dying within a few months of each other, when my boy was
only four years old. "It is more than a year, now," continued Lord Ashiel, after a pause,
"since the girl Julia Romaninov came to my sister in London, with a
letter of introduction from our ambassador in Russia. It was not until my
sister invited her down to Scotland that I heard anything about her. Not,
in fact, till the day before she arrived, for I always tell my sister to
ask any girls she pleases to Inverashiel, and she very seldom bothers me
about it. You can imagine my feelings when I heard that Julia Romaninov
was expected within a few hours, and had indeed already started from
London. It was too late to try and stop her, and my first impulse was
flight. But on second thoughts I changed my mind, and stayed. Time had
dulled the feelings with which I had contemplated her share in the
tragedy that attended her birth, and I was not without a certain
curiosity to see this young creature for whose existence I was
responsible. "I waited; she came; she stayed six weeks. You know the result. My sister
liked her; my nephews, my other guests, every one, except myself, was
charmed with her. And I, for some reason, could never stand the girl. I
told myself over and over again that it was mere prejudice; the remains
of the violent opposition I felt towards her when she was unknown to me;
a survival, unconscious and unwilling, of the hatred I had allowed myself
to nourish for the baby of a day old, which had made it impossible that
she and I should inhabit the same town when she was no more than a child
in pinafores. But I could not reason myself out of my dislike, and it
culminated a few weeks ago when I found that my sister was anxious to
have her with us in the North again this autumn. As you remember, I came
to you, and told you the facts. I made you understand how repulsive it
was to me to think that this girl might be my child, and begged you to
sift the matter as far as was possible, and to find out if there were not
a chance that I was mistaken in thinking it was Countess Romaninov who
had been Lena Meredith's friend." "Yes," said Gimblet, "and all I could discover at first was that the two
ladies had indeed been acquainted. It is difficult to get at the truth
when both of them have been dead for so many years, and when you will not
allow me so much as to hint that you feel any interest in the matter. People are shy of answering questions relating to the private affairs of
their friends when they think they are prompted by idle curiosity, and in
this case it seems very doubtful whether anyone even knows the answers. But in the course of my inquiries I soon discovered the fact that Mrs.
Meredith herself had adopted a child, and it certainly seems more than
possible that it may have been yours and her friend's. As far as I can
find out, both these young ladies are of about the same age, but no one
seems to know exactly when either of them first appeared on the scene. If
we can only get hold of the nurses! But at present I can find no trace of
them, and you won't let me advertise." "Gimblet, I shall be ever grateful to you," repeated Lord Ashiel. "I had
no idea that Mrs. Meredith had adopted a child. I never saw her again, as
I have told you, and only heard vaguely that she had married and was
living abroad. I purposely avoided asking for news of her. I wished to
forget everything that was past. As if that had been possible!" "I hoped," said Gimblet, "that you would have seen some strong likeness
in this young lady to yourself, or to your first wife. That would have
clinched the matter to all intents and purposes. But, as things are, I
shouldn't build too much on the hope that she is your daughter. It may
turn out to be the girl adopted by Countess Romaninov." "I hope not, I hope not," said Lord Ashiel earnestly. "I have got her to
promise to come to Scotland, and in a few days I may get some definite
clue as to which of them it is. It is a very odd coincidence that both
the girls bear names so much like that of my poor wife's." He paused
reflectively, and then added, "In the meantime you will go on with your
inquiries, will you not?" "I will," said Gimblet. "And I hope for better luck." A silence followed. Lord Ashiel half rose to go, then sat down again. Evidently he had something more to say, but hesitated to say it. At
last he spoke:

"When I was at St. Petersburg, twenty years ago, I was aroused to a
state of excitement and indignation by the social and political evils
which were then so much in evidence to the foreigner who sojourned in the
country of the Czars. I was young and impressionable, impulsive and
unbalanced in my judgments, I am afraid; at all events I resented certain
seeming injustices which came to my notice, and my resentment took a
practical and most foolish form. To be short, I was so ill-advised as to
join a secret society, and have done nothing but regret it ever since." "I can well understand your regretting it," said the detective. "People
who join those societies are apt to find themselves let in for a good
deal more than they bargained for." "It was so, at all events so far as I am concerned," said Lord Ashiel, "I
had, you may be sure, only the wildest idea of what serious and extremely
unpleasant consequences my unreflecting action would entail. Withdrawal
from these political brotherhoods is to all intents and purposes a
practical impossibility; but, in a sense, I withdrew from all
participation in its affairs as soon as I realized to what an extent the
theories of its leaders, as to the best means to adopt by which to
rectify the injustices we all agreed in deploring, differed from my own
ideas on the subject. And I should not have been able to withdraw, even
in the negative way I did, if accident had not put into my hand a weapon
of defence against the tyranny of the Society." Lord Ashiel paused hesitatingly, and Gimblet murmured encouragingly:

"And that was?" "No," said Lord Ashiel, after a moment's silence, "I must not tell you
more. We are, I know, to all appearances, safe from eavesdroppers or
interruption; but, if a word of what I know were to leak out by some
incredible agency, my life would not be worth a day's purchase. As it is,
I am alarmed; I believe these people wish for my death. In fact, there is
no doubt on that subject. But they dare not attempt it openly. I have
told them that if I should die under suspicious circumstances of any
sort, the weapon I spoke of will inevitably be used to avenge my death,
and they know me to be a man of my word. For all these years that threat
has been my safeguard, but now I am beginning to think that they are
trying other means of getting me out of the way." "It is a pity," said Gimblet, "that you do not speak to me more openly. I
think it is highly probable, from what I know of the methods resorted to
by Nihilists in general, that you may be in very grave danger. Indeed, I
strongly advise you to report the whole matter to the police." "I wish I could tell you everything," said Lord Ashiel, "but even if I
dared, you must remember that I am sworn to secrecy, and I cannot see
that because I have, by doing so, placed myself in some peril, that on
that account I am entitled to break my word. No, I cannot tell you any
more, but in spite of that, I want you to do me a service." "I am afraid I can't help you without fuller knowledge," said Gimblet. "What do you think I can do?" "You can do this," said Lord Ashiel. He put his hand in his pocket and
Gimblet heard a crackling of paper. "I am thinking out a hiding-place
for some valuable documents that are in my possession, and when I have
decided on it I will write to you and explain where I have put them,
using a cipher of which the key is enclosed in an envelope I have here
in my pocket, and which I will leave with you when I go. Take charge of
it for me, and in the course of the next week or so I will send you a
cipher letter describing where the papers are concealed. Do not read it
unless the occasion arises. I can trust you not to give way to
curiosity, but if anything happens to me, if I die a violent death, or
equally if I die under the most apparently natural circumstances, I want
you to promise you will investigate those circumstances; and, if
anything should strike you as suspicious in connection with what I have
told you, you will be able to interpret my cipher letter, find the
document I have referred to, and act on the information it contains. Will you undertake to do this for me?" "I will, certainly," Gimblet answered readily, "but I hope the occasion
will not arise. I beg you to break a vow which was extorted from you by
false representations and which cannot be binding on you. Do confide
fully in me; I do not at all like the look of this business." "No, no," replied Lord Ashiel, smiling. "You must let me be the judge of
whether my word is binding on me or not. As you say, I hope nothing will
happen to justify my perhaps uncalled-for nervousness. In any case it
will be a great comfort and relief to me to know that, if it does, the
scoundrels will not go unpunished." "They shall not do that," said Gimblet fervently. "You can make your mind
easy on that score, at least. But I advise you to send your documents to
the bank. They will be safer there than in any hiding-place you can
contrive." "I might want to lay my hand upon them at any moment," said Lord
Ashiel, "and I admit I don't like parting with my only weapon of
defence. Still, I dare say you are right really, and I will think it
over. But mind, I don't want you to take any steps unless, you can
satisfy yourself that these people have a hand in my death. Please be
very careful to make certain of that. My health is not good, and grows
worse. I may easily die without their interference; but I suspect that,
if they do get me, they will manage the affair so that it has all the
look of having been caused by the purest misadventure. That is what I
fear. Not exactly murder; certainly no violent open assault. But we are
all liable to suffer from accidents, and what is to prevent my meeting
with a fatal one? That is more the line they will adopt, if, as I
imagine, they have decided on my death." "If ever there were a case in which prevention is better than cure," said
Gimblet, "I think you will own that we have it here. If I had some hint
of the quarter from which you expect danger, I might at least suggest
some rudimentary precautions. What kind of 'accident' do you imagine
likely to occur?" "That I can't tell," replied Lord Ashiel. "I only know that these enemies
of mine are resourceful people, who are apt to make short work of anyone
whose existence threatens their safety or the success of their designs. I
am, by your help, taking a precaution to ensure that I shall not die
unavenged. They must be taught that murder cannot be committed in this
country with impunity. And I am very careful not to trust myself out of
England. If I crossed the Channel it would be to go to my certain death. Otherwise I should have gone myself to see Sir Arthur Byrne. But in this
island the man who kills even so unpopular a person as a member of the
House of Lords does not get off with a few years' imprisonment, as he may
in some of the continental countries; and the Nihilists, for the most
part, know that as well as I do." Gimblet followed Lord Ashiel into the hall with the intention of showing
him out of the flat, but the sudden sound of the door bell ringing made
him abandon this courtesy and retreat to shelter. He did not wish to be denied all possibility of refusing an interview to
some one he might not want to see. So it was Higgs who opened the door and ushered out the last visitor, at
the same time admitting the newcomer. This proved to be a small, slight woman dressed in deepest black and
wearing the long veil of a widow, who was standing with her back to the
door, apparently watching the rapid descent of the lift which had brought
her to the landing of No. 7. She did not move when the door behind her opened, and Lord Ashiel,
emerging from it in a hurry to catch the lift before it vanished, nearly
knocked her down. She gave a startled gasp and stepped hastily to one
side into the dark shadows of the passage as he, muttering an apology,
darted forward to the iron gateway and applied his finger heavily to the
electric bell-push. But the liftboy had caught sight of him with the tail
of his eye, and was already reascending. His anxiety allayed, Lord Ashiel turned again to express his regrets to
the lady he had inadvertently collided with, but she had disappeared into
the flat, of which Higgs was even then closing the door. Ashiel stepped into the lift and sat down rather wearily on the
leather-covered seat. Although, to some extent, the relief of having unburdened his mind of
secrets that had weighed upon it for so many years produced in him a
certain lightness of heart to which he had long been a stranger, yet
the very charm of the impression made upon him by Juliet Byrne, during
his first meeting with her that morning, led him to suspect uneasily
that his hopes of her proving to be his child were due rather to the
pleasure it gave him to anticipate such a possibility than to any more
logical reason. He was so entirely engrossed in an honest endeavour to adjust correctly
the balance of probabilities, as to remain unconscious that the lift had
stopped at the ground floor, and it was not until the boy who was in
charge had twice informed him of the fact, that he roused himself with an
effort and left the building. Still absorbed in his speculations and anxieties, he walked rapidly away,
and, having narrowly escaped destruction beneath the wheels of more than
one taxi, wandered down Northumberland Avenue on to the Embankment. He
crossed to the farther side, turned mechanically to the right and walked
obliviously on. It was not until he came nearly to Westminster Bridge that he remembered
the cipher that he had prepared for Gimblet, and that he had, after all,
finally left without giving it to him. It was still in his pocket, and
the discovery roused him from his abstraction. He took a taxi and drove back to the flats. A motor which had been
standing before the door when he had come out was still there when he
returned; so that, thinking it probably belonged to the lady he had met
on the landing, and guessing that if so the detective was still occupied
with her, he did not ask to see him again, but handed the envelope over
to Higgs when he opened the door, with strict injunctions to take it
immediately to his master. CHAPTER V


The lady, whose visit to Gimblet dovetailed so neatly with the departure
of his other client on that summer afternoon, was unknown to him. He had scarcely re-entered the room and resumed his accustomed seat by
the window when Higgs announced her. "A lady to see you, sir." The lady was already in the doorway. She must have followed Higgs from
the hall, and now stood, hesitating, on the threshold. "What name?" breathed Gimblet; but Higgs only shook his head. The detective went forward and spoke to his visitor. "Please come in," he said. "Won't you sit down?" And he pushed a chair towards her. "Thank you," said the lady, taking the seat he offered. "I hope I do not
disturb you; but I have come on business," she added, as the door closed
behind Higgs. "Yes?" said Gimblet interrogatively. "You will forgive me, but I didn't
catch your name when my man announced you." "He didn't say it," she replied. "I had not told him. I am sure you would
not remember my name, and it is of no consequence at present." "As you wish," said the detective. But he wondered who this unknown woman could be. When she said he would
not remember her name, did she mean to imply that he had once been
acquainted with it? If so, she was right in thinking that he did not
recognize her now; but, if she did not choose to raise the thick crape
veil that hid her face, she could hardly expect him to do so. He wondered whether she kept her veil lowered with the intention of
preventing his recognizing her, or whether in truth she were anxious not
to expose grief-swollen features to an unsympathetic gaze. Her voice, which was low and sorrowful, though at the same time curiously
resonant, seemed to suggest that she was in great trouble. She spoke, he
fancied, with a trace of foreign accent. For the rest, all that he could tell for certain about her was that she
was short and slender, with small feet, and hands, from which she was now
engaged in deliberately withdrawing a pair of black suede gloves. He watched her in silence. He always preferred to let people tell their
stories at their own pace and in their own way, unless they were of those
who plainly needed to be helped out with questions. And about this woman there was no suspicion of embarrassment; her whole
demeanour spoke of calmness and self-possession. "I believe," she said at last, "that you are a private detective. I come
to ask for your help in a matter of some difficulty. Some papers of the
utmost importance, not only to me but to others, are in the possession of
a person who intends to profit by the information contained in them to do
myself and my friends an irreparable injury. You can imagine how anxious
we are to obtain them from him." "Do I understand that this person threatens you with blackmail?" asked Gimblet. The lady hesitated. "Something of the kind," she replied after a moment's pause. "And you have so far given in to his demands?" "Yes," admitted the visitor. "Up till now we have been obliged to
submit." "Has he proposed any terms on which he will be willing to return you the
papers?" asked the detective. "No," she replied. "I do not think any terms are possible." "How did this person obtain possession of the papers?" Gimblet asked
after a moment. "Did he steal them from you?" "No." "From your friends?" She hesitated. "No--not exactly." "From whom, then?" asked Gimblet in surprise. "I suppose they were yours
in the first place?" "He has always had them," she said reluctantly; "but they must not
remain his." "Do you mean they are his own?" exclaimed Gimblet. "In that case it is
you who propose to steal them!" "No," replied the strange lady calmly. "I want you to do that." "I'm sorry," said Gimblet; "that is not in my line of business. I'm
afraid you made a mistake in coming to me. I cannot undertake your
commission." "Money is no object; we shall ask you to name your own price," urged
his visitor. But the detective shook his head. "It is a matter of life and death," she said, and her voice betrayed an
agitation which could not have been inferred from her motionless shrouded
figure. "If you refuse to help me, not one life, but many, will be
endangered." "If you can offer me convincing proof of that," said Gimblet, "I might
feel it my duty to help you. I don't say I should, but I might. In any
case I can do nothing unless you are perfectly open and frank with me. Expect no assistance from me unless you tell me everything, and then only
if I think it right to give it." For the first time she showed some signs of confusion. The hand upon her
lap moved restlessly and she turned her head slowly towards the window as
if in search of suitable words. But she did not speak or rise, though she
gradually fidgeted round in her chair till she faced the writing-table;
and so sat, with her head leaning on her hand, in silent consideration. It was clear she did not like Gimblet's terms; and after a few minutes
had passed in a silence as awkward as it was suggestive he pushed back
his chair and stood up. He hoped she would take the hint and bring an
unprofitable and embarrassing interview to an end. But she did not appear to notice him, and still sat lost in her
own thoughts. Suddenly the door opened and Higgs appeared. Gimblet looked at him with questioning disapproval. It was an inflexible rule of his that when engaged with a client he was
not to be disturbed. Higgs, well acquainted with this rule, hovered doubtfully in the
doorway, displaying on the salver he carried the blue, unaddressed
envelope Lord Ashiel had told him to deliver at once. "It's a note, sir," he murmured hesitatingly. "The gentleman who was with
you a little while ago came back with it. He asked me to be sure and
bring it in at once." He avoided Gimblet's reproachful eye and stammered uneasily:

"Put it down on that table and go," said the detective. He indicated a
little table by the door, and Higgs hastily placed the letter on it and
fled, with the uncomfortable sensation of having been sternly reproved. As a matter of fact Gimblet would have shown more indignation if he
had not at heart felt rather glad of the interruption. His visitor had
decidedly outstayed her welcome; and, though she stirred his curiosity
sufficiently to make him wish he could induce her to raise her veil
and let him see what manner of woman it was who had the effrontery to
come and make him such unblushing proposals, he far more urgently
desired to see the last of her. She was wasting his time and annoying
him into the bargain. As the door shut behind the servant he made a step towards her. "If, madam, there is nothing else you wish to consult me about," he
began, taking out his watch with some ostentation--"I am a busy man--"

The lady gave a little laugh, low and musical. "I will not detain you longer," she said, also rising from her chair. "I
am afraid I have cut into your afternoon, but you will still have time
for a game if you hurry." She laughed again, and moved over to the writing-table, where, among a
litter of papers and writing materials, a couple of golf balls were
acting as letter weights. A putter lay on the chair in front of the desk,
and she took it up and swung it to and fro. "A nice club," she remarked. "Where do you play, as a rule? There are so
many good links near London; so convenient. Well, I mustn't keep you." She laid down the putter and fingered the balls for a moment. "Where have
I put my gloves?" she said then, looking around to collect her
belongings. Gimblet was slightly put out at her inference that his plea of business
was merely an excuse to dismiss her in order that he might go off and
play golf. Heaven knew it was no affair of hers whether he played golf
that day or not! But as a matter of fact he had no intention of leaving
the flat that afternoon, and had merely been practising a shot or two on
the carpet after lunch before Lord Ashiel's arrival. Still it was true
that he had made business a pretext for getting rid of her, and this made
the injustice of the widow's further inference ruffle him more than it
might have if she had been entirely in the wrong. He was the most
courteous of men, and that anyone should suspect him of unnecessary
rudeness distressed him. He made no reply, however, in spite of the temptation to defend himself;
but stooped to pick up a diminutive black suede glove which his visitor
had dropped when she took up the putter. She thanked him and put it on, depositing, while she did so, her other
glove, her handkerchief, sunshade and a small brown-paper parcel upon the
writing-table at her side. Gimblet did not appreciate seeing these articles heaped upon his
correspondence. Without any comment he removed them, and stood holding
them silently till she should be ready. She took them from him soon, with a little inclination of the head which
he felt was accompanied by a smile of thanks, though through the thick
crape it was impossible to do more than guess at any expression. She drew on her other glove and held out her hand again. "My purse?" she said. "Will you not give me that too? Where have you put
it? And then I must really go." "I haven't seen any purse," said Gimblet. "Yes, yes!" she cried. "A black silk bag! It has my purse inside it. I
had it, I am sure." She turned quickly back to the chair she had been sitting in, and taking
up the cushion, shook it and peered beneath it. "What can I have done with it? All my money is in it." Gimblet glanced round the room. He did not remember having noticed any
bag, and he was an observant person. She had probably left it in a cab. Women were always doing these things. Witness the heaped shelves at
Scotland Yard. "Perhaps you put it down in the hall?" he suggested. "I am sure I had it when I came in here," she repeated in an agitated
voice. "But it might be worth while just to look in the hall," she added
doubtfully, and moved towards the door. Gimblet opened it for her gladly; but she came to a standstill in
the doorway. "There is nothing there, you see;" she said dolefully. "Oh, what
shall I do!" Gimblet looked over her shoulder. The hall was shadowy, with the
perpetual twilight of the halls of London flats, but he fancied he
could perceive a darker shadow lying beside his hat on the table near
the entrance. "Is that it? On the table?" he asked. "Where? I don't see anything," murmured the lady; and indeed it was
unlikely that she could distinguish anything in such a light from
behind her veil. "On the table by my hat," repeated Gimblet; and as she still did not
move, he made a step forward into the hall. Yes, it was her bag, beyond a doubt. A silken thing of black brocade,
embroidered with scattered purple pansies. Gimblet picked it up and turned back to his visitor. After a second's
hesitation she had followed him into the hall and was coming towards him,
groping her way rather blindly through the gloom. "Oh, thanks, thanks!" she exclaimed. "How stupid of me to have left it
there. Thank you again. My precious bag! I am so glad you have found it." She took the bag eagerly from him. "I am afraid I have been a nuisance,
and disturbed you to no purpose. You must forgive my mistake. But now I
will not keep you any longer. Good-bye." She showed no further disposition to loiter; and Gimblet rang the bell
for the lift and saw her depart with a good deal of satisfaction. In spite of her extremely hazy ideas on the subject of other people's
property, there was, he admitted, something attractive about her. Still
he was very glad she had gone. He returned to his room, taking up and pocketing Lord Ashiel's envelope
as he passed the little table by the door. He did it mechanically, for his mind was occupied with a question which
must be immediately decided. Was it, or was it not, worth while to have the woman who had just left
him followed and located, and her identity ascertained? Gimblet disliked leaving small problems unsolved, however insignificant
they appeared. On the whole, he thought he might as well find out who she
was, and he turned back into the hall and called for Higgs. If she were to be caught sight of again before leaving the house there
was not a moment to lose. But Higgs did not reply, and on Gimblet's
opening the pantry door he found it empty. Unknown to him, the moment the
lady had departed Higgs had gone upstairs to the flat above to have a
word with a friend. The detective seized his hat and ran downstairs, but he was too late. The widow lady, the porter told him, had gone away two or three minutes
ago in the motor that had been waiting for her. No, he hadn't noticed the
number of the car. Neither had he seen Higgs. Gimblet shrugged his shoulders as he went upstairs again. After all, the
matter was of no great consequence. The widow was a cool hand, certainly, he thought, to come to him and
propose he should steal for her what she wanted; but the fact of her
having done so made it on the whole improbable that she was a thief, or
she would not have had need of him. She was certainly a person of
questionable principles, and it seemed likely that in one way or another
a theft would be committed through her agency, if not by herself, as
soon as the opportunity presented itself. She was, in fact, a woman on
whom the police might do worse than keep an eye; but, reflected Gimblet,
he was not the police, and the dishonesty of this scheming widow was
really no concern of his. As he reached his door, a postman was leaving
it, and two or three letters had been pushed through the flap. He let
himself in and took them out of the box. They were not of great
importance. A bill, an appeal for a subscription to some charity, a
couple of advertisements and the catalogue of a sale of pictures in
which he was interested. He turned over the leaves slowly, holding the
pamphlet sideways from time to time to look at the photographs which
illustrated some of the principal lots. Presently he turned and went back into his room. He sat down in his
favourite arm-chair near the window, where he habitually passed so much
time gazing out on to the smooth surface of the river, and fell to
ruminating on the problem presented by Lord Ashiel's story. For a long while he sat on, huddled in the corner of an arm-chair, his
elbows on the arm, his chin resting on his hand, and in his eyes the look
of one who wrestles with obscure and complicated problems of mental
arithmetic. From time to time, but without relaxing his expression of
concentrated effort, he stretched out long artistic fingers to a box on
the table, took from it a chocolate, and transferred it mechanically to
his mouth. He always ate sweets when he had a problem on hand. He was
trying to think of some means by which his client could be protected from
the mysterious danger that threatened him; that it was a very real
danger, Gimblet accepted without question; he had only seen Lord Ashiel
twice in his life, but it was quite enough to make him certain that here
was a man whom it would take a great deal to alarm. This was no boy
crying "wolf" for the sake of making a stir. But the more he thought, the more he saw that there was nothing to be
done. A word to the police would suffice, no doubt, to precipitate
matters; for, if the Nihilist Society which threatened Lord Ashiel
contemplated his destruction, a hint that he might be already taking
reciprocal measures would not be likely to make them feel more mercifully
towards him. It was obvious that Ashiel would look with suspicion upon
any Russian who might approach him, but Gimblet determined to write him a
line of warning against foreigners of any description. Still, these
societies sometimes had Englishmen amongst their members, and ways of
enforcing obedience upon their subordinates which made any decision they
might come to as good as carried out almost as soon as it was uttered. The detective's cogitations were disturbed by Higgs, who had returned,
and now brought him in some tea. He poured himself out half a cup, which
he filled up with Devonshire cream. He had a peculiar taste in food, and
was the despair of his excellent cook, but on this occasion he ate none
of the cakes and bread and butter she had provided, the chocolates having
rather taken the edge off his appetite. From where he sat he could see, through the open window, the broad grey
stretches of the river, with a barge going swiftly down on the tide;
brown sails turned to gleaming copper by the slanting rays from the West. 