



Produced by Douglas B. Killings





THE NIBELUNGENLIED

By An Unknown Author

Translated by Daniel B. Shumway


Originally written in Middle High German (M.H.G.), sometime around 1200
A.D., although this dating is by no means certain. Author unknown.

The text of this edition is based on that published as "The
Nibelungenlied", translated by Daniel B. Shumway (Houghton-Mifflin Co.,
New York, 1909).

PREPARER'S NOTE: In order to make this electronic edition easier to use,
the preparer has found it necessary to re-arrange the endnotes of Mr.
Shumway's edition, collating them with the chapters themselves and
substituting page references with footnote references. The preparer
takes full responsibility for these changes.--DBK.




SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY:

OTHER TRANSLATIONS--

Hatto, A.T. (Trans.): "Nibelungenlied" (Penguin Classics, London, 1962).
Prose translation.

Ryder, Frank G. (Trans.): "The Song of the Nibelungs" (Wayne State
University Press, Detroit, 1962). Verse translation.

RECOMMENDED READING--

Anonymous: "Kudrun", Translated by Marion E. Gibbs & Sidney Johnson
(Garland Pub., New York, 1992).

Anonymous: "Volsungasaga", Translated by William Morris and Eirikr
Magnusson (Walter Scott Press, London, 1888; Reissued by the Online
Medieval and Classical Library as E-Text #29, 1997).

Saxo Grammaticus: "The First Nine Books of the Danish History",
Translated by Oliver Elton (London, 1894; Reissued by the Online
Medieval and Classical Library as E-Text OMACL #28, 1997).





PREFACE

This work has been undertaken in the belief that a literal translation
of as famous an epic as the "Nibelungenlied" would be acceptable to the
general reading public whose interest in the story of Siegfried has
been stimulated by Wagner's operas and by the reading of such poems as
William Morris' "Sigurd the Volsung". Prose has been selected as the
medium of translation, since it is hardly possible to give an accurate
rendering and at the same time to meet the demands imposed by rhyme
and metre; at least, none of the verse translations made thus far have
succeeded in doing this. The prose translations, on the other hand,
mostly err in being too continuous and in condensing too much, so that
they retell the story instead of translating it. The present translator
has tried to avoid these two extremes. He has endeavored to translate
literally and accurately, and to reproduce the spirit of the original,
as far as a prose translation will permit. To this end the language has
been made as simple and as Saxon in character as possible. An exception
has been made, however, in the case of such Romance words as were in use
in England during the age of the romances of chivalry, and which would
help to land a Romance coloring; these have been frequently employed.
Very few obsolete words have been used, and these are explained in the
notes, but the language has been made to some extent archaic, especially
in dialogue, in order to give the impression of age. At the request of
the publishers the Introduction Sketch has been shorn of the apparatus
of scholarship and made as popular as a study of the poem and its
sources would allow. The advanced student who may be interested in
consulting authorities will find them given in the introduction to the
parallel edition in the Riverside Literature Series. A short list of
English works on the subject had, however, been added.

In conclusion the translator would like to thank his colleagues, C.G.
Child and Cornelius Weygandt, for their helpful suggestions in starting
the work, and also to acknowledge his indebtedness to the German edition
of Paul Piper, especially in preparing the notes. --DANIEL BUSSIER
SHUMWAY,

Philadelphia, February 15, 1909.




INTRODUCTORY SKETCH

There is probably no poem of German literature that has excited such
universal interest, or that has been so much studied and discussed, as
the "Nibelungenlied". In its present form it is a product of the age
of chivalry, but it reaches back to the earliest epochs of German
antiquity, and embraces not only the pageantry of courtly chivalry,
but also traits of ancient Germanic folklore and probably of Teutonic
mythology. One of its earliest critics fitly called it a German "Iliad",
for, like this great Greek epic, it goes back to the remotest times and
unites the monumental fragments of half-forgotten myths and historical
personages into a poem that is essentially national in character, and
the embodiment of all that is great in the antiquity of the race. Though
lacking to some extent the dignity of the "Iliad", the "Nibelungenlied"
surpasses the former in the deep tragedy which pervades it, the tragedy
of fate, the inevitable retribution for crime, the never-dying struggle
between the powers of good and evil, between light and darkness.

That the poem must have been exceedingly popular during the Middle Ages
is evinced by the great number of Manuscripts that have come down to us.
We possess in all twenty-eight more or less complete MSS., preserved
in thirty-one fragments, fifteen of which date from the thirteenth and
fourteenth centuries. Of all these MSS., but nine are so well preserved
that, in spite of some minor breaks, they can be considered complete. Of
this number three, designated respectively as A, B, C, are looked upon
as the most important for purposes of textual criticism, and around them
a fierce battle has been waged, which is not even yet settled. (1) It
is now generally conceded that the longest MS., C, is a later redaction
with many additional strophes, but opinions are divided as to whether
the priority should be given to A or B, the probabilities being that B
is the more original, A merely a careless copy of B.

In spite of the great popularity of the "Nibelungenlied", the poem was
soon forgotten by the mass of the people. With the decay of courtly
chivalry and the rise of the prosperous citizen class, whose ideals and
tastes lay in a different direction, this epic shared the fate of many
others of its kind, and was relegated to the dusty shelves of monastery
or ducal libraries, there to wait till a more cultured age, curious
as to the literature of its ancestors, should bring it forth from
its hiding places. However, the figures of the old legend were not
forgotten, but lived on among the people, and were finally embodied in a
popular ballad, "Das Lied vom Hurnen Segfrid", which has been preserved
in a print of the sixteenth century, although the poem itself is thought
to go back at least to the thirteenth. The legend was also dramatized by
Hans Sachs, the shoemaker poet of Nuremberg, and related in prose form
in a chap book which still exists in prints of the eighteenth century.
The story and the characters gradually became so vague and distorted,
that only a trained eye could detect in the burlesque figures of the
popular account the heroes of the ancient Germanic Legend.

The honor of rediscovering the "Nibelungenlied" and of restoring it to
the world of literature belongs to a young physician by the name of J.H.
Obereit, who found the manuscript C at the castle of Hohenems in the
Tirol on June 29, 1755; but the scientific study of the poem begins with
Karl Lachmann, one of the keenest philological critics that Germany
has ever produced. In 1816 he read before the University of Berlin
his epoch-making essay upon the original form of the "Nibelungenlied".
Believing that the poem was made up of a number of distinct ballads
or lays, he sought by means of certain criteria to eliminate all parts
which were, as he thought, later interpolations or emendations. As a
result of this sifting and discarding process, he reduced the poem
to what he considered to have been its original form, namely, twenty
separate lays, which he thought had come down to us in practically the
same form in which they had been sung by various minstrels.

This view is no longer held in its original form. Though we have every
reason to believe that ballads of Siegfried the dragon killer, of
Siegfried and Kriemhild, and of the destruction of the Nibelungs existed
in Germany, yet these ballads are no longer to be seen in our poem. They
formed merely the basis or source for some poet who thought to revive
the old heroic legends of the German past which were familiar to his
hearers and to adapt them to the tastes of his time. In all probability
we must assume two, three, or even more steps in the genesis of the
poem. There appear to have been two different sources, one a Low German
account, quite simple and brief, the other a tradition of the Lower
Rhine. The legend was perhaps developed by minstrels along the Rhine,
until it was taken and worked up into its present form by some Austrian
poet. Who this poet was we do not know, but we do know that he was
perfectly familiar with all the details of courtly etiquette. He seems
also to have been acquainted with the courtly epics of Heinrich von
Veldeke and Hartman von Ouwe, but his poem is free from the tedious and
often exaggerated descriptions of pomp, dress, and court ceremonies,
that mar the beauty of even the best of the courtly epics. Many
painstaking attempts have been made to discover the identity of the
writer of our poem, but even the most plausible of all these theories
which considers Kurenberg, one of the earliest of the "Minnesingers",
to be the author, because of the similarity of the strophic form of our
poem to that used by him, is not capable of absolute proof, and
recent investigations go to show that Kurenberg was indebted to
the "Nibelungen" strophe for the form of his lyric, and not the
"Nibelungenlied" to him. The "Nibelungen" strophe is presumably much
older, and, having become popular in Austria through the poem, was
adopted by Kurenberg for his purposes. As to the date of the poem, in
its present form it cannot go back further than about 1190, because of
the exactness of the rhymes, nor could it have been written later
than 1204, because of certain allusions to it in the sixth book of
"Parzival", which we know to have been written at this date. The two
Low German poems which probably form the basis of our epic may have been
united about 1150. It was revised and translated into High German and
circulated at South German courts about 1170, and then received its
present courtly form about 1190, this last version being the immediate
source of our manuscripts.

The story of Siegfried, his tragic death, and the dire vengeance visited
upon his slayers, which lies at the basis of our poem, antedates the
latter by many centuries, and was known to all nations whose languages
prove by their resemblance to the German tongue their original identity
with the German people. Not only along the banks of the Rhine and the
Danube and upon the upland plains of Southern Germany, but also along
the rocky fjords of Norway, among the Angles and Saxons in their new
home across the channel, even in the distant Shetland Islands and on the
snow-covered wastes of Iceland, this story was told around the fires at
night and sung to the harp in the banqueting halls of kings and nobles,
each people and each generation telling it in its own fashion and adding
new elements of its own invention. This great geographical distribution
of the legend, and the variety of forms in which it appears, make it
difficult to know where we must seek its origin. The northern version is
in many respects older and simpler in form than the German, but still it
is probable that Norway was not the home of the saga, but that it took
its rise in Germany along the banks of the Rhine among the ancient
tribe of the Franks, as is shown by the many geographical names that are
reminiscent of the characters of the story, such as a Siegfried "spring"
in the Odenwald, a Hagen "well" at Lorsch, a Brunhild "bed" near
Frankfort, and the well-known "Drachenfels", or Dragon's Rock, on the
Rhine. It is to Norway, however, that we must go for our knowledge
of the story, for, singularly enough, with the exception of the
"Nibelungenlied" and the popular ballad, German literature has preserved
almost no trace of the legend, and such as exist are too late and too
corrupt to be of much use in determining the original features of the
story.

Just when the legend emigrated to Skandinavia we do not know, but
certainly at an early date, perhaps during the opening years of the
sixth century. It may have been introduced by German traders, by slaves
captured by the Northmen on their frequent marauding expeditions, or,
as Mogk believes, may have been taken by the Heruli on their return
to Norway after their defeat by the Langobardi. By whatever channel,
however, the story reached the North, it became part and parcel of
Skandinavian folklore, only certain names still pointing to the original
home of the legend. In the ninth century, when Harald Harfagr changed
the ancient free constitution of the land, many Norwegians emigrated
to Iceland, taking with them these acquired legends, which were better
preserved in this remote island because of the peaceful introduction
of Christianity, than on the Continent, where the Church was more
antagonistic to the customs and legends of the heathen period.

The Skandinavian version of the Siegfried legend has been handed down
to us in five different forms. The first of these is the poetic or
older "Edda", also called Saemund's "Edda", as it was assigned to the
celebrated Icelandic scholar Saemundr Sigfusson. The "Codex Regius", in
which it is preserved, dates from the middle of the thirteenth century,
but is probably a copy of an older manuscript. The songs it contains
were written at various times, the oldest probably in the first half of
the ninth century, the latest not much before the date of the earliest
manuscript. Most of them, however, belong to the Viking period, when
Christianity was already beginning to influence the Norwegians, that
is, between the years 800 and 1000. They are partly heroic, partly
mythological in character, and are written in alliterative strophes
interspersed with prose, and have the form of dialogues. Though the
legends on which these songs are based were brought from Norway, most of
them were probably composed in Iceland. Among these songs, now, we find
a number which deal with the adventures of Siegfried and his tragic end.

The second source of the Siegfried story is the so-called
"Volsungasaga", a prose paraphrase of the "Edda" songs. The MS. dates
from the beginning of the thirteenth century, but the account was
probably written a century earlier. The adventures of Siegfried and his
ancestors are here related in great detail and his ancestry traced back
to Wodan. Although a secondary source, as it is based on the "Edda", the
"Volsungasaga" is nevertheless of great importance, since it supplies a
portion of the "Codex Regius" which has been lost, and thus furnishes us
with the contents of the missing songs.

The third source is the prose "Edda", sometimes called the "Snorra
Edda", after the famous Icelander Snorri Sturluson (1178-1241),to whom
it was ascribed. The author was acquainted with both the poetic "Edda"
and the "Volsungasaga", and follows these accounts closely. The younger
"Edda" is not really a tale, but a book of poetics; it relates, however,
the Siegfried saga briefly. It is considered an original source, since
it evidently made use of songs that have not come down to us, especially
in the account of the origin of the treasure, which is here told more
in detail and with considerable differences. The "Nornagestsaga" or
"Nornageststhattr", the story of "Nornagest", forms the fourth source of
the Siegfried story. It is really a part of the Olaf saga, but contains
the story of Sigurd and Gunnar (the Norse forms of Siegfried and
Gunther), which an old man Nornagest relates to King Olaf Tryggvason,
who converted the Norwegians to Christianity. The story was written
about 1250 to illustrate the transition from heathendom to the Christian
faith. It is based on the "Edda" and the "Volsungasaga", and is
therefore of minor importance as a source.

These four sources represent the early introduction of the Siegfried
legend into Skandinavia. A second introduction took place about the
middle of the thirteenth century, at the time of the flourishing of
the Hanseatic League, when the story was introduced together with other
popular German epics. These poems are products of the age of chivalry,
and are characterized by the romantic and courtly features of this
movement. The one which concerns us here, as the fifth source of the
Siegfried story, is the so-called "Thidreksaga", which celebrates
the adventures of the famous legendary hero, Dietrich of Berne,
the historical Theodorich of Ravenna. In as far as it contains the
adventures of the Nibelungs, it is also called the "Niflungasaga". The
"Thidreksaga" was written about 1250 by a Norwegian who, as he himself
tells us, heard the story from Germans in the neighborhood of Bremen
and Munster. Since it is thus based on Saxon traditions, it can be
considered an independent source of the legend, and, in fact, differs
from the earlier Norse versions in many important details. The author
was acquainted, however, with the older versions, and sought to
compromise between them, but mostly followed his German authorities.

The story, as given in the older Norse versions, is in most respects
more original than in the "Nibelungenlied". It relates the history of
the treasure of the Nibelungs, tracing it back to a giant by the name of
"Hreithmar", who received it from the god "Loki" as a compensation for
the killing of the former's son "Otur", whom Loki had slain in the form
of an otter. Loki obtained the ransom from a dwarf named "Andwari",
who in turn had stolen it from the river gods of the Rhine. Andwari
pronounces a terrible curse upon the treasure and its possessors, and
this curse passes from Loki to the Giant Hreithmar, who is murdered when
asleep by his two sons "Fafnir" and "Regin". The latter, however, is
cheated out of the coveted prize by Fafnir, who carries it away to the
"Gnita" heath, where he guards it in the form of a dragon.

This treasure, with its accompanying curse, next passes into the hands
of a human being named Sigurd (the Norse form of Siegfried, as we have
seen), a descendant of the race of the Volsungs, who trace their history
back to Wodan and are especially favored by him. The full story of
Siegfried's ancestry is far too long to relate here, and does not
especially concern us, as it has little or no influence on the later
development of the story. It is sufficient for our purpose to know that
Siegfried was the son of Siegmund, who was slain in battle before the
birth of his son. Sigurd was carefully reared by his mother "Hjordis"
and the wise dwarf Regin, who taught him the knowledge of runes and
of many languages. (2) At the suggestion of Regin, Sigurd asks for and
receives the steed "Grani" from the king, and is then urged by his tutor
to help him obtain the treasure guarded by the latter's brother Fafnir.
Sigurd promises, but first demands a sword. Two, that are given him by
Regin, prove worthless, and he forges a new one from the pieces of his
father's sword, which his mother had preserved. With this he easily
splits the anvil and cuts in two a flake of wool, floating down the
Rhine. He first avenges the death of his father, and then sets off with
Regin to attack the dragon Fafnir. At the advice of the former Sigurd
digs a ditch across the dragon's peth and pierces him from below with
his sword, as the latter comes down to drink. In dying the dragon warns
Sigurd against the treasure and its curse, and against Regin, who, he
says, is planning Sigurd's death, intending to obtain the treasure for
himself.

When Regin sees the dragon safely dead, he creeps from his place of
concealment, drinks of the blood, and, cutting out the heart, begs
Sigurd to roast it for him. While doing so, Sigurd burns his fingers,
and, putting them in his mouth, understands at once the language of the
birds and hears them say that Sigurd himself should eat the heart and
then he would be wiser than all other men. They also betray Regin's evil
designs, and counsel the lad to kill his tutor. This Sigurd then does,
cutting off Regin's head, drinking the blood of both brothers, and
eating Fafnir's heart. (3) On the further advice of the birds Sigurd
first fetches the treasure from the cave, and then journeys to the
mountain "Hindarfjall", where he rescues the sleeping Valkyrie,
"Sigrdrifu" ("Brynhild", "Brunhild"), who, stung by the sleep thorn
of Wodan, and clad in full armor, lies asleep within a castle that is
surrounded by a wall of flame. With the help of his steed Grani, Sigurd
succeeds in penetrating through the fire to the castle. The sleeping
maiden awakes when he cuts the armor from her with his sword, for it
was as tight as if grown fast to the flesh. She hails her deliverer
with great joy, for she had vowed never to marry a man who knew fear. At
Sigurd's request she teaches him many wise precepts, and finally pledges
her troth to him. He then departs, after promising to be faithful to her
and to remember her teachings.

On his journeyings Sigurd soon arrives at the court of "Giuki" (the
Norse form of the German "Gibicho", "Gibich"), a king whose court lay on
the lower Rhine. Giuki has three sons, "Gunnar", "Hogni", and "Guthorm",
and a daughter "Gudrun", endowed with great beauty. The queen bears
the name of Grimhild, and is versed in magic, but possessed of an evil
heart. (4) Sigurd is received with great honor, for his coming had been
announced to Gudrun in dreams, which had in part been interpreted to her
by Brynhild. The mother, knowing of Sigurd's relations to the latter,
gives him a potion which produces forgetfulness, so that he no longer
remembers his betrothed, and accepts the hand of Gudrun, which the king
offers him at the queen's request. The marriage is celebrated with
great pomp, and Sigurd remains permanently attached to Giuki's court,
performing with the others many deeds of valor.

Meanwhile Grimhild urges her son Gunnar to sue for the hand of Brynhild.
Taking with him Sigurd and a few others, Gunnar visits first Brynhild's
father "Budli", and then her brother-in-law "Heimir", from both of whom
he learns that she is free to choose whom she will, but that she will
marry no one who has not ridden through the wall of flame. With this
answer they proceed to Brynhild's castle, where Gunnar is unable to
pierce the flames, even when seated on Sigurd's steed. Finally Sigurd
and Gunnar change forms, and Sigurd, disguised as Gunnar, rides through
the wall of fire, announces himself to Brynhild as Gunnar, the son of
Giuki, and reminds her of her promise to marry the one who penetrated
the fire. Brynhild consents with great reluctance, for she is busy
carrying on a war with a neighboring king. Sigurd then passes three
nights at her side, placing, however, his sword Gram between them, as
a bar of separation. At parting he draws from her finger the ring, with
which he had originally pledged his troth to her, and replaces it with
another, taken from Fafnir's hoard. Soon after this the marriage of
Gunnar and Brynhild is celebrated with great splendor, and all return to
Giuki's court, where they live happily for some time.

One day, however, when the ladies go down to the river to take a bath,
Brynhild will not bathe further down stream than Gudrun, that is, in the
water which flows from Gudrun to her, (5) giving as the reason, that her
father was mightier and her husband braver, since he had ridden through
the fire, while Sigurd had been a menial. Stung at this, Gudrun retorts
that not Gunnar but Sigurd had penetrated the flames and had taken from
her the fateful ring "Andvaranaut", which she then shows to her rival in
proof of her assertion. Brynhild turns deathly pale, but answers not
a word. After a second conversation on the subject had increased the
hatred of the queens, Brynhild plans vengeance. Pretending to be ill,
she takes to her bed, and when Gunnar inquires what ails her, she asks
him if he remembers the circumstances of the wooing and that not he but
Sigurd had penetrated the flames. She attempts to take Gunnar's life, as
she had pledged her troth to Sigurd, and is thereupon placed in chains
by Hogni. Seven days she sleeps, and no one dares to wake her. Finally
Sigurd succeeds in making her talk, and she tells him how cruelly she
has been deceived, that the better man had been destined for her, but
that she had received the poorer one. This Sigurd denies, for Giuki's
son had killed the king of the Danes and also Budli's brother, a great
warrior. Moreover, although he, Sigurd, had ridden through the flames,
he had not become her husband. He begs her therefore not to harbor a
grudge against Gunnar.

Brynhild remains unconvinced, and plans Sigurd's death, and threatens
Gunnar with the loss of dominion and life, if he will not kill Sigurd.
After some hesitation, Gunnar consents, and, calling Hogni, informs
him that he must kill Sigurd, in order to obtain the treasure of the
Rhinegold. Hogni warns him against breaking his oath to Sigurd, when it
occurs to Gunnar, that his brother Gutthorm had sworn no oath and might
do the deed. Both now proceed to excite the latter's greed, and give him
wolf's and snake meat to eat to make him savage. Twice Gutthorm makes
the attempt, as Sigurd lies in bed, but is deterred by the latter's
penetrating glance. The third time he finds Sigurd asleep, and pierces
him with his sword. Sigurd, awakening at the pain, hurls his own sword
after his murderer, fairly cutting him in two. He then dies, protesting
his innocence and designating Brynhild as the instigator of his murder.
Brynhild at first laughs aloud at Gudrun's frantic grief, but later her
joy turns into sorrow, and she determines to share Sigurd's death. In
vain they try to dissuade her; donning her gold corselet, she pierces
herself with a sword and begs to be burned on Sigurd's funeral pyre. In
dying she prophesies the future, telling of Gudrun's marriage to "Atli"
and of the death of the many men which will be caused thereby.

After Brynhild's death Gudrun in her sorrow flees to the court of King
"Half" of Denmark, where she remains seven years. Finally Grimhild
learns of the place of her daughter's concealment, and tries to bring
about a reconciliation with Gunnar and Hogni. They offer her much
treasure, if she will marry Atli. At first she refuses and thinks only
of revenge, but finally she consents and the marriage is celebrated in
Atli's land. After a time Atli, who is envious of Gunnar's riches, for
the latter had taken possession of Sigurd's hoard, invites him to his
court. A man named "Vingi", who was sent with the invitation, changes
the runes of warning, which Gudrun had given him, so that they, too,
read as an invitation. The brothers determine to accept the invitation,
and, though warned by many dreams, they set out for Atli's court, which
they reach in due time. Vingi now breaks forth into exultations, that he
has lured them into a snare, and is slain by Hogni with a battle axe.

As they ride to the king's hall, Atli and his sons arm themselves for
battle, and demand Sigurd's treasure, which belongs by right to Gudrun.
Gunnar refuses to surrender it, and the fight begins, after some
exchange of taunting words. Gudrun tries at first to reconcile the
combatants, but, failing, arms herself and fights on the side of her
brothers. The battle rages furiously with great loss on both sides,
until nearly all of the Nibelungs are killed, when Gunnar and Hogni
are forced to yield to the power of numbers and are captured and bound.
Gunnar is asked, if he will purchase his life with the treasure. He
replies that he first wishes to see Hogni's bleeding heart. At first the
heart of a slave is cut out and brought to him, but Gunnar recognizes it
at once as that of a coward. Then they cut out Hogni's heart, who laughs
at the pain. This Gunnar sees is the right one, and is jubilant, for now
Atli shall never obtain the treasure, as Gunnar alone knows where it is
hid. In a rage Atli orders Gunnar to be thrown to the snakes. Though
his hands are bound, Gunnar plays so sweetly with his toes on the harp,
which Gudrun has sent him, that all the snakes are lulled to sleep, with
the exception of an adder, which stings him to the heart, so that he
dies.

Atli now walks triumphantly over the dead bodies, and remarks to Gudrun
that she alone is to blame for what has happened. She refuses his offers
of peace and reconciliation, and towards evening kills her two sons
"Erp" and "Eitil", and serves them at the banquet, which the king gives
for his retainers. When Atli asks for his sons, he is told that he had
drunk their blood mixed with wine and had eaten their hearts. That night
when Atli is asleep, Gudrun takes Hogni's son "Hniflung", who desires
to avenge his father, and together they enter Atli's room and thrust a
sword through his breast. Atli awakes from the pain, only to be told
by Gudrun that she is his murderess. When he reproaches her with thus
killing her husband, she answers that she cared only for Sigurd. Atli
now asks for a fitting burial, and on receiving the promise of this,
expires. Gudrun carries out her promise, and burns the castle with
Atli and all his dead retainers. Other Edda songs relate the further
adventures of Gudrun, but they do not concern us here, as the
"Nibelungenlied" stops with the death of the Nibelungs.

This in brief is the story of Siegfried, as it has been handed down to
us in the Skandinavian sources. It is universally acknowledged that
this version, though more original than the Gorman tradition, does not
represent the simplest and most original form of the tale; but what the
original form was, has long been and still is a matter of dispute. Two
distinctly opposite views are held, the one seeing in the story the
personification of the forces of nature, the other, scouting the
possibility of a mythological interpretation, seeks a purely human
origin for the tale, namely, a quarrel among relatives for the
possession of treasure. The former view is the older, and obtained
almost exclusively at one time. The latter has been gaining ground of
recent years, and is held by many of the younger students of the legend.
According to the mythological view, the maiden slumbering upon the
lonely heights is the sun, the wall of flames surrounding her the
morning red ("Morgenrote"). Siegfried is the youthful day who is
destined to rouse the sun from her slumber. At the appointed time he
ascends, and before his splendor the morning red disappears. He awakens
the maiden; radiantly the sun rises from its couch and joyously greets
the world of nature. But light and shade are indissolubly connected; day
changes of itself into night. When at evening the sun sinks to rest
and surrounds herself once more with a wall of flames, the day again
approaches, but no longer in the youthful form of the morning to arouse
her from her slumber, but in the sombre shape of Gunther, to rest at her
side. Day has turned into night; this is the meaning of the change of
forms. The wall of flame vanishes, day and sun descend into the realm of
darkness. Under this aspect the Siegfried story is a day myth; but under
another it is a myth of the year. The dragon is the symbol of winter,
the dwarfs of darkness. Siegfried denotes the bright summer, his sword
the sunbeams. The youthful year grows up in the dark days of winder.
When its time has come, it goes forth triumphantly and destroys
the darkness and the cold of winter. Through the symbolization the
abstractions gain form and become persons; the saga is thus not a mere
allegory, but a personification of nature's forces. The treasure may
have entered the saga through the widespread idea of the dragon as the
guardian of treasure, or it may represent the beauty of nature which
unfolds when the season has conquered. In the last act of the saga,
Siegfried's death, Wilmanns, the best exponent of this view, sees again
a symbolic representation of a process of nature. According to him it
signifies the death of the god of the year in winter. In the spring he
kills the dragon, in the winter he goes weary to his rest and is foully
slain by the hostile powers of darkness. Later, when this act was
connected with the story of Gunther's wooing Brunhild, the real meaning
was forgotten, and Siegfried's death was attributed to the grief and
jealousy of the insulted queen.

Opposed now to the mythological interpretation is the other view already
spoken of, which denies the possibility of mythological features, and
does not seek to trace the legend beyond the heroic stage. The best
exponent of this view is R. C. Boer, who has made a remarkable attempt
to resolve the story into its simplest constituents. According to him
the nucleus of the legend is an old story of the murder of relatives
("Verwandienmord"), the original form being perhaps as follows. Attila
(i.e., the enemy of Hagen under any name) is married to Hagen's sister
Grimhild or Gudrun. He invites his brother-in-law to his house, attacks
him in the hope of obtaining his treasure, and kills him. According
to this view Hagen was originally the king, but later sinks to a
subordinate position through the subsequent connection of the story with
the Burgundians. It is of course useless to hunt for the date of such
an episode in history. Such a murder could have frequently occurred, and
can be localized anywhere. Very early we find this Hagen story united
with the Siegfried legend. If the latter is mythological, then we have
a heterogeneous combination, a mythical legend grafted on a purely human
one. This Boer thinks unlikely, and presents a number of arguments to
disprove the mythical character of the Siegfried story, into which
we cannot enter here. He comes, however, to the conclusion, that the
Siegfried tale is likewise purely human, and consisted originally of the
murder of relatives, that is, a repetition of the Hagen title. Siegfried
is married to Hagen's sister, and is killed by his brother-in-law
because of his treasure. The kernel of the legend is, therefore, the
enmity between relatives, which exists in two forms, the one in which
the son-in-law kills his father-in-law, as in the "Helgi" saga, the
other in which Hagen kills his son-in-law and is killed by him, too, as
in the "Hilde" saga. The German tradition tries to combine the two by
introducing the new feature, that Kriemhild causes the death of her
relatives, in order to avenge her first husband. Boer is of the opinion
that both the Norse and the German versions have forgotten the original
connection between the two stories, and that this connection was nothing
more nor less than the common motive of the treasure. The same treasure,
which causes Hagen to murder Siegfried, causes his own death in turn
through the greed of Attila. There was originally, according to Boer, no
question of revenge, except the revenge of fate, the retribution which
overtakes the criminal. This feeling for the irony of fate was lost
when the motive, that Hagen kills Siegfried because of his treasure,
was replaced by the one that he does it at the request of Brunhild. This
leads Boer to the conclusion, that Brunhild did not originally belong to
the Siegfried story, but to the well-known fairy tale of Sleeping Beauty
("Erlosungsmurchen"), which occurs in a variety of forms. The type is
that of a hero who rescues a maiden from a magic charm, which may take
the form of a deep sleep, as in the case of Sleeping Beauty, or of being
sewed into a garment, as in No. 111 of Grimm's fairy tales. By the union
of the two stories, i.e., the Hagen-Siegfried saga with the Sleeping
Beauty tale, Siegfried stands in relation to two women; on the one hand
his relation to Sigrdrifa-Brynhild, the maiden whom he rescues on the
rock, on the other his marriage with Grimhild-Gudrun and his consequent
death. This twofold relation had to be disposed of, and since his
connection with Grimhild was decisive for his fate, his relation to
Brunhild had to be changed. It could not be entirely ignored, for it
was too well known, therefore it was given a different interpretation.
Siegfried still rescues a maiden from the rock, not for himself,
however, but for another. The exchange of forms on the part of
Siegfried and Gunther is a reminiscence of the older form. It gives the
impression, that Siegfried, and yet not Siegfried, won the bride. This
alteration probably took place when the Burgundians were introduced into
the legend. With this introduction an unlocalized saga of unknown heroes
of ancient times became one of events of world-wide importance; the fall
of a mighty race was depicted as the result of Siegfried's death. To
render this plausible, it was necessary on the one hand to idealize
the hero, so that his death should appear as a deed of horror demanding
fearful vengeance, and on the other, to make the king of the Burgundians
an active participator in Siegfried's death, for otherwise it would not
seem natural, that the whole race should be exterminated for a crime
committed by the king's brother or vassal. As the role of Brunhild's
husband had become vacant, and as Gunther had no special role, it was
natural that it should be given to him. Boer traces very ingeniously
the gradual development of this exchange of roles through the various
sources.

Another method of explaining away Siegfried's relation to two women is
to identify them, and this has been done by the Seyfrid ballad. Here the
hero rescues Kriemhild from the power of the dragon, marries her,
and then is later killed by her brothers through envy and hatred. As
Brunhild and Kriemhild are here united in one person, there is no need
of a wooing for the king, nor of vengeance on the part of Brunhild,
accordingly the old motive of greed (here envy) reappears.

As to the fight with the dragon, Boer believes that it did not
originally belong to the saga, for in none of the sources except the
popular ballad is the fight with the dragon connected with the release
of Brunhild. If the Siegfried-Hagen story is purely human, then the
dragon cannot have originally belonged to it, but was later introduced,
because of the widespread belief in the dragon as the guardian of
treasure, and in order to answer the question as to the provenience of
the hoard. This is, however, only one answer to the question. Another,
widespread in German legends, is that the treasure comes from the
Nibelungs, that is, from the dwarfs. Many identify the dwarfs and the
dragon, but this finds no support in the sources, for here the dwarfs
and Fafnir are never confused. The "Nibelungenlied" describes an
adventure with each, but the treasure is only connected with the dwarfs.
The "Thidreksaga" knows only the dragon fight but not the dwarfs, as is
likewise the case with the Seyfrid ballad. Only in the Norse sources
do we find a contamination. The story of Hreithmar and his sons, who
quarrel about the treasure, resembles that of Schilbung and Nibelung in
the "Nibelungenlied", and probably has the same source. One of the sons,
because of his guarding the treasure, is identified with the dragon,
and so we read that Fafnir becomes a dragon, after gaining the treasure.
Originally, however, he was not a dragon, but a dwarf. These two
independent forms can be geographically localized. The dwarf legend is
the more southern; it is told in detail in the "Nibelungenlied". The
dragon legend probably originated in the Cimbrian peninsula, where the
"Beowulf" saga, in which the dragon fight plays such an important part,
likewise arose.

There thus stand sharply opposed to each other two theories, one seeing
in the Siegfried saga a personification of natural forces, the other
tracing it back to a purely human story of murder through greed. It may
be, that the true form of the original saga lies half way between
these two views. The story of the fall of the Nibelungs, that is, their
killing at Etzel's court, may go back to the tale of the murder of
relatives for money. On the other hand it is hard to believe that the
Siegfried saga is nothing but a repetition of the Attila motive, for
this is too brief a formula to which to reduce the long legend of
Siegfried, with its many deeds. Even if we discard the mythological
interpretation, it is the tale of a daring hero, who is brought up in
the woods by a cunning dwarf. He kills a dragon and takes possession of
his hoard, then rescues a maiden, imprisoned upon a mountain, as in the
older Norse version and the popular ballad, or in a tower, as in the
"Thidreksaga", and surrounded either by a wall of fire, as in the
Norse, or by a large body of water, as in the "Nibelungenlied". After
betrothing himself to the maiden, he sets forth in search of further
adventures, and falls into the power of an evil race, who by their
magic arts lure him to them, cause his destruction, and then obtain
his treasure and the maiden for themselves. By her very name Sigrdrifa
belongs to Siegfried, just as Gunther and Gudrun-Grimhild belong
together, and it seems hardly possible that she should have entered the
story later, as Boer would have us believe. After all, it is largely a
matter of belief, for it is impossible to prove positively that mythical
elements did or did not exist in the original.

To the combined Siegfried-Nibelung story various historical elements
were added during the fifth century. At the beginning of this period the
Franks were located on the left bank of the Rhine from Coblenz downward.
Further up the river, that is, to the south, the Burgundians had
established a kingdom in what is now the Rhenish Palatinate, their
capital being Worms and their king "Gundahar", or "Gundicarius", as the
Romans called him. For twenty years the Burgundians lived on good terms
with the surrounding nations. Then, growing bolder, they suddenly
rose against the Romans in the year 436, but the rebellion was quietly
suppressed by the Roman general Aetius. Though defeated, the Burgundians
were not subdued, and the very next year they broke their oaths and
again sought to throw off the Roman yoke. This time the Romans called to
their aid the hordes of Huns, who had been growing rapidly in power and
were already pressing hard upon the German nations from the east. Only
too glad for an excuse, the Huns poured into the land in great numbers
and practically swept the Burgundian people from the face of the earth.
According to the Roman historians, twenty thousand Burgundians were
slain in this great battle of the Catalaunian Fields. Naturally this
catastrophe, in which a whole German nation fell before the hordes of
invading barbarians, produced a profound impression upon the Teutonic
world. The King Gundahar, the Gunther of the "Nibelungenlied", who also
fell in the battle, became the central figure of a new legend, namely,
the story of the fall of the Burgundians.

Attila is not thought to have taken part in the invasion, still, after
his death in 454, his name gradually came to be associated with the
slaughter of the Burgundians, for a legend operates mainly with types,
and as Attila was a Hun and throughout the Middle Ages was looked upon
as the type of a cruel tyrant, greedy for conquest, it was but natural
for him to play the role assigned to him in the legend. Quite plausible
is Boer's explanation of the entrance of Attila into the legend. The
"Thidreksaga" locates him in Seest in Westphalia. Now this province once
bore the haute of "Hunaland", and by a natural confusion, because of
the similarity of the names, "Huna" and "Huns", Attila, who is the
chief representative of Hunnish power, was connected with the legend
and located at Seest. This would show that the original extension of the
legend was slight, as Xanten, the home of Hagen, is but seventy miles
from Seest. The original form would then be that Hagen was slain by a
king of "Hunaland", then because history relates that the Burgundians
were slain by the Huns, the similarity of the names led to the
introduction of Attila and the identification of the Nibelungs with the
Burgundians. The fact, too, that the Franks rapidly took possession
of the district depopulated by the crushing defeat of the Burgundians
likewise aided the confusion, and thus the Franks became the natural
heirs of the legend concerning the death of Gunther, and so we read of
the fall of the Nibelungs, a name that is wholly Frankish in character.
This identification led also to Attila's being considered the avenger of
Siegfried's death. Poetic justice, however, demands that the slaughter
of the Burgundians at the hands of Attila be also avenged. The rumor,
that Attila's death was not natural, but that he had been murdered by
his wife Ildico ("Hildiko"), gave the necessary features to round out
the story. As Kriemhild was the sister of the Burgundian kings, it was
but natural to explain her killing of Attila, as described in the Norse
versions, by her desire to avenge her brothers.

In our "Nibelungenlied", however, it is no longer Attila, but Kriemhild,
who is the central figure of the tragedy. Etzel, as he is called here,
has sunk to the insignificant role of a stage king, a perfectly passive
observer of the fight raging around him. This change was brought about
perhaps by the introduction of Dietrich of Berne, the most imposing
figure of all Germanic heroic lore. The necessity of providing him
with a role corresponding to his importance, coupled with a growing
repugnance on the part of the proud Franks to acknowledge defeat at the
hands of the Huns, caused the person of Attila to dwindle in importance.
Gradually, too, the role played by Kriemhild was totally changed.
Instead of being the avenger of her brothers, as depicted in the Norse
versions, she herself becomes the cause of their destruction. Etzel
is not only innocent of any desire to harm the Nibelungs, but is even
ignorant of the revenge planned by his wife. This change in her role was
probably due to the feeling that it was incumbent upon her to avenge the
murder of Siegfried.

Our "Nibelungenlied" knows but little of the adventures of Siegfried's
youth as depicted in the Norse versions. The theme of the poem is no
longer the love of Sigurd, the homeless wanderer, for the majestic
Valkyrie Brunhild, but the love idyll of Siegfried, the son of the king
of the Netherlands, and the dainty Burgundian princess Kriemhild.
The poem has forgotten Siegfried's connection with Brunhild; it knows
nothing of his penetrating the wall of flames to awake and rescue her,
nothing of the betrothal of the two. In our poem Siegfried is carefully
reared at his father's court in the Netherlands, and sets out with great
pomp for the court of the Burgundians. In the Norse version he naturally
remains at Gunther's court after his marriage, but in our poem he
returns to the Netherlands with his bride. This necessitates the
introduction of several new scenes to depict his arrival home, the
invitation to the feast at Worms, and the reception of the guests on the
part of the Burgundians.

In the "Nibelungenlied" the athletic sports, as an obstacle to the
winning of Brunhild, take the place of the wall of flames of the older
Norse versions. Siegfried and Gunther no longer change forms, but
Siegfried dons the "Tarnkappe", which renders him invisible, so that
while Gunther makes the motions, Siegfried really does the work, a thing
which is rather difficult to imagine. The quarrel of the two queens is
likewise very differently depicted in the "Nibelungenlied" from what it
is in the Norse version. In the latter it takes place while the
ladies are bathing in the river, and is brought on by the arrogance of
Brunhild, who refuses to stand lower down the stream and bathe in the
water flowing from Gudrun to her. In the "Thidreksaga" it occurs in the
seclusion of the ladies' apartments, but in our poem it culminates in
front of the cathedral before the assembled court, and requires as its
background all the pomp and splendor of medieval chivalry. With a master
hand and a wonderful knowledge of female character, the author depicts
the gradual progress of the quarrel until it terminates in a magnificent
scene of wounded pride and malignant hatred. Kriemhild, as usual, plays
the more important part, and, while standing up for her rights, tries in
every way to conciliate Brunhild and not to hurt her feelings. At
last, however, stung by the taunts of the latter, she in turn loses her
patience, bursts out with the whole story of the twofold deception to
which Brunhild has been subjected, and then triumphantly sweeps into
the church, leaving her rival stunned and humiliated by the news she
has heard. In the Norse tradition the scene serves merely to enlighten
Brunhild as to the deception played upon her. In the "Nibelungenlied" it
becomes the real cause of Siegfried's death, for Brunhild plans to kill
Siegfried to avenge the public slight done to her. She has no other
reason, as Siegfried swears that there had been no deception. Brunhild
appeals to us much less in the "Nibelungenlied" than in the Norse
version. In the latter she feels herself deeply wronged by Siegfried's
faithlessness, and resolves on his death because she will not be the
wife of two men. In our poem she has no reason for wishing his death
except her wounded pride. In the "Nibelungenlied", too, she disappears
from view after Siegfried's death, whereas in the Norse tradition she
ascends his funeral pyre and dies at his side.

The circumstances of Siegfried's death are likewise totally different
in the two versions. In the Norse, as we have seen, he is murdered while
asleep in bed, by Gunnar's younger brother Gutthorm. In our poem he is
killed by Hagen, while bending over a spring to drink. This is preceded
by a scene in which Hagen treacherously induces Kriemhild to mark the
one vulnerable spot on Siegfried's body, on the plea of protecting
him. This deepens the tragedy, and renders Kriemhild's misery and
self-reproaches the greater. After Siegfried's burial his father,
who had also come to Worms with his son, vainly endeavors to persuade
Kriemhild to return with him to the Netherlands. Her refusal is
unnatural in the extreme, for she had reigned there ten years or
more with Siegfried, and had left her little son behind, and yet she
relinquishes all this and remains with her brothers, whom she knows to
be the murderers of her husband. This is evidently a reminiscence of
an earlier form in which Siegfried was a homeless adventurer, as in the
"Thidreksaga".

The second half of the tale, the destruction of the Nibelungs,
is treated of very briefly in the early Norse versions, but the
"Nibelungenlied", which knows so little of Siegfried's youth, has
developed and enlarged upon the story, until it overshadows the first
part in length and importance and gives the name to the whole poem.
The main difference between the two versions is that in the older
Norse tradition it is Attila who invites the Nibelungs to his court and
attacks them in order to gain possession of the treasure, while Gudrun
(Kriemhild) first tries to reconcile the warring parties, and, not
succeeding in this, snatches up a sword and fights on the side of
her brothers and later kills her husband as an act of revenge. In the
"Thidreksaga" and the "Nibelungenlied", however, she is the instigator
of the fight and the cause of her brothers' death, and finally suffers
death herself at the hands of Master Hildebrand, who is furious that
such noble heroes should fall at a woman's hand. The second part of
the poem is grewsome reading at best, with its weltering corpses and
torrents of blood. The horror is relieved only by the grim humor of
Hagen and by the charming scene at Rudeger's court, where the young
prince Giselher is betrothed to Rudeger's daughter. Rudeger is without
doubt the most tragic figure of this part. He is bound on the one hand
by his oath of allegiance to Kriemhild and on the other by ties of
friendship to the Burgundians. His agony of mind at the dilemma in which
Kriemhild's command to attack the Burgundians places him is pitiful.
Divided between love and duty, the conviction that he must fulfill his
vow, cost what it may, gradually forces itself upon him and he rushes to
his death in combat with his dearest friends.

Towering above all others in its gloomy grandeur stands the figure of
Hagen, the real hero of the second half of the poem. Fully aware that
he is going to his death, he nevertheless scorns to desert his
companions-in-arms, and awaits the fate in store for him with a stoicism
that would do honor to a Spartan. He calmly accepts the consequences of
his crime, and to the last mocks and scoffs at Kriemhild, until her fury
knows no bounds. No character shows so little the refining influences of
Christianity as does his. In all essential respects he is still the same
old gigantic Teuton, who meets us in the earliest forms of the legend.

As to the various minor characters, many of which appear only in the
"Nibelungenlied", space will not permit of their discussion here,
although they will be treated of briefly in the notes. Suffice it to
say, that the "Nibelungenlied" has introduced a number of effective
scenes for the purpose of bringing some of them, especially Folker and
Dankwart, into prominence. Among the best of these are, first, the night
watch, when Folker first plays the Burgundians to sleep with his violin,
and then stands guard with Hagen, thus preventing the surprise planned
by Kriemhild; further, the visit to the church on the following morning,
when the men of both parties clash; and lastly the tournament between
the Huns and the Burgundians, which gives the author an excellent chance
to show the prowess of the various heroes.

Let us pass now to the consideration of the strophic form of the
"Nibelungenlied". The two Danish ballads of "Grimhild's Revenge"
("Grimhild's Haevn"), which are based upon the first combination of
the Low German, i.e., Saxon, and the Rhenish traditions, prove that the
strophe is considerably older than the preserved redactions of our poem,
and that it was probably of Saxon origin. The metrical form goes back
most probably to the four-accented verse of the poet Otfrid of the ninth
century, although some have thought that Latin hymns, others that the
French epic verse, may have been of influence. The direct derivation
from Otfrid seems, however, the most plausible, as it accounts for the
importance of the caesura, which generally marks a pause in the
sense, as well as in the verse, and also for its masculine ending. The
"Nibelungen" strophe consists of four long lines separated by a caesura
into two distinct halves. The first half of each line contains four
accents, the fourth falling upon the last syllable. This last stress,
however, is not, as a rule as strong as the others, the effect being
somewhat like that of a feminine ending. On this account some speak of
three accents in the first half line, with a feminine ending. The fourth
stress is, however, too strong to be thus disregarded, but because of
its lighter character is best marked with a grave accent. The second
half of each line ends in a masculine rhyme. The first three lines have
each three stresses in the second half, while the second half of the
fourth line has four accents to mark the end of the strophe. This
longer fourth line is one of the most marked characteristics of the
"Nibelungen" strophe. The rhymes are arranged in the order of "a", "a",
"b", "b", though in a few isolated cases near the end of the poem but
one rhyme is used throughout the strophe.

The opening lines of the poem may serve to illustrate the strophic form
and scansion, and at the same time will give the reader an idea of the
Middle High German language in which the poem is written:

     Uns ist in alten maeren   wunders vil geseit
     von heleden lobebaeron,   von grozer arebeit,
     von froude und hochgeziten,   von weinen und von klagen,
     von kuener recken striten   muget ir nu wunder hoeren sagen.

     Ez wuochs in Burgonden   ein edel magedin,
     daz in allen landen   niht schoeners mohte sin,
     Kriemhild geheizen;   si wart ein scoene wip,
     darambe muosen degene   vil verliesen den lip.

     Der minneclichen meide   triuten wol gezam,
     ir muotten kuene recken,   niemen was ir gram,
     ane ma zen schoene   so was ir edel lip;
     der iunevrouwen tugende   zierten anderiu wip.

     Ir pilagen drie kilnege   edel unde rich,
     Ganther ande Geruot,   die recken lobelieh,
     und Giselher der iunge,   ein uz erwelter degen,
     diu frouwe was ir swester,   die fu'rsten hetens in ir
                                        pflegen.

     Die herren waren milte,   von arde hohe erborn,
     mit kraft unmazen kuene,   die recken uz erkorn,
     dazen Burgonden   so was ir lant genant,
     si framden starkiu wunder   sit in Etzelen lant.

     Ze Wormze bidem Rine   si wenden mit ir kraft,
     in diende von ir landen   stolziu ritterscaft
     mit lobelichen eren   unz an ir endes zit,
     sit sturben si inemerliche   von zweier edelen frouwen nit.

Some of the final rhymes with proper names, such as "Hagene": "degene"
(str. 84) or "Hagene": "tragene" (str. 300) appear to be feminine, but
it is really the final "e" that rhymes, and a scansion of the line in
question shows that the three accents are not complete without this
final "e". In this respect our poem differs from most of the Middle High
German poems, as this practice of using the final "e" in rhyme began to
die out in the twelfth century, though occasionally found throughout the
period. The rhymes are, as a rule, quite exact, the few cases of impure
rhymes being mainly those in which short and long vowels are rhymed
together, e.g. "mich": "rich" or "man": "han". Caesural rhymes are
frequently met with, and were considered by Lachmann to be the marks of
interpolated strophes, a view no longer held. A further peculiarity
of the "Nibelungen" strophe is the frequent omission of the unaccented
syllable in the second half of the last line of the strophe between the
second and third stresses. Examples of this will be found in the second,
third, and fifth strophes of the passage given above.

The language of the "Nibelungenlied" is the so-called Middle High
German, that is, the High German written and spoken in the period
between 1100 and 1500, the language of the great romances of chivalry
and of the "Minnesingers". More exactly, the poem is written in the
Austrian dialect of the close of the twelfth century, but contains many
archaisms, which point to the fact of its having undergone a number of
revisions.

In closing this brief study of the "Nibelungenlied", just a word or
two further with reference to the poem, its character, and its place in
German literature. Its theme is the ancient Teutonic ideal of "Treue"
(faithfulness or fidelity), which has found here its most magnificent
portrayal; faithfulness unto death, the loyalty of the vassal for his
lord, as depicted in Hagen, the fidelity of the wife for her husband,
as shown by Kriemhild, carried out with unhesitating consistency to the
bitter end. This is not the gallantry of medieval chivalry, which colors
so largely the opening scenes of the poem, but the heroic valor, the
death-despising stoicism of the ancient Germans, before which the
masters of the world, the all-conquering Romans, were compelled to bow.

In so far as the "Nibelungenlied" has forgotten most of the history of
the youthful Siegfried, and knows nothing of his love for Brunhild, it
is a torso, but so grand withal, that one hardly regrets the loss of
these integral elements of the old saga. As it is a working over of
originally separate lays, it is not entirely homogeneous, and contains
not a few contradictions. In spite of these faults, however, which a
close study reveals, it is nevertheless the grandest product of Middle
High German epic poetry, and deservedly the most popular poem of older
German literature. It lacks, to be sure, the grace of diction found in
Gottfried von Strassburg's "Tristan und Isolde", the detailed and often
magnificent descriptions of armor and dress to be met with in the epics
of Hartman von Ouwe; it is wanting in the lofty philosophy of Wolfram
von Eschenbach's "Parzival", and does not, as this latter, lead the
reader into the realms of religious doubts and struggles. It is imposing
through its very simplicity, through the grandeur of the story, which
it does not seek to adorn and decorate. It nowhere pauses to analyze
motives nor to give us a picture of inner conflict as modern authors are
fond of doing. Its characters are impulsive and prompt in action, and
when they have once acted, waste no time in useless regret or remorse.

It resembles the older "Spielmannsdichtung", or minstrel poetry, in the
terseness and vigor of its language and in the lack of poetic imagery,
but it is free from the coarseness and vulgar and grotesque humor of the
latter. It approaches the courtly epic in its introduction of the pomp
of courtly ceremonial, but this veneer of chivalry is very thin, and
beneath the outward polish of form the heart beats as passionately and
wildly as in the days of Herman, the Cheruscan chief. There are perhaps
greater poems in literature than the "Nibelungenlied", but few so
majestic in conception, so sublime in their tragedy, so simple in their
execution, and so national in their character, as this great popular
epic of German literature.


  ENDNOTES:
  (1)  A is a parchment MS. of the second half of the thirteenth
       century, now found in Munich.  It forms the basis of
       Lachmann's edition.  It is a parchment MS. of the middle of
       the thirteenth century, belonging to the monastery of St.
       Gall.  It has been edited by Bartsch, "Deutsche Klassiker
       des Mittelalters", vol. 3, and by Piper, "Deutsche National-
       Literatur", vol. 6.  C is a parchment MS., of the thirteenth
       century, now in the ducal library of Donauesehingen.  It is
       the best written of all the MSS., and has been edited by
       Zarncke.
  (2)  The "Thidreksaga" differs from the other Norse versions in
       having "Sigfrod", as he is called here, brought up in
       ignorance of his parents, a trait which was probably
       borrowed from the widespread "Genoveva" story, although
       thought by some to have been an original feature of our
       legend.
  (3)  The "Thidreksaga", which has forgotten the enmity of the
       brothers, and calls Sigurd's tutor "Mimr", tells the episode
       in somewhat different fashion.  The brothers plan to kill
       Sigurd, and the latter is attacked by the dragon, while
       burning charcoal in the forest.  After killing the monster
       with a firebrand, Sigurd bathes himself in the blood and
       thus become covered with a horny skin, which renders him
       invulnerable, save in one place between the shoulder blades,
       which he could not reach.  This bathing in the blood is also
       related in the Seyfrid ballad and in the "Nibelungenlied",
       with the difference, that the vulnerable spot is caused by a
       linden leaf falling upon him.
  (4)  The fact that all but one of these names alliterate, shows
       that the Norse version is here more original.  Gunnar is the
       same as Gunther (Gundaharius), Hogni as Hagen; Gutthorm
       (Godomar) appears in the German version as Gernot.  In this
       latter the father is called Danerat, the mother Uote, and
       the name Grimhild is transferred from the mother to the
       daughter.
  (5)  In the prose "Edda", in the water which drips from Gudrun's
       hair.




THE NIBELUNGENLIED (1)




ADVENTURE I (2)

Full many a wonder is told us in stories old, of heroes worthy of
praise, of hardships dire, of joy and feasting, of the fighting of bold
warriors, of weeping and of wailing; now ye may hear wonders told.

In Burgundy there grew so noble a maid that in all the lands none fairer
might there be. Kriemhild (3) was she called; a comely woman she became,
for whose sake many a knight must needs lose his life. Well worth the
loving was this winsome maid. Bold knights strove for her, none bare her
hate. Her peerless body was beautiful beyond degree; the courtly virtues
of this maid of noble birth would have adorned many another woman too.

Three kings, noble and puissant, did nurture her, Gunther (4) and
Gernot, (5) warriors worthy of praise, and Giselher, (6) the youth, a
chosen knight. This lady was their sister, the princes had her in their
care. The lordings were free in giving, of race high-born, passing bold
of strength were they, these chosen knights. Their realm hight Burgundy.
Great marvels they wrought hereafter in Etzel's (7) land. At Worms (8)
upon the Rhine they dwelt with all their power. Proud knights from out
their lands served them with honor, until their end was come. Thereafter
they died grievously, through the hate of two noble dames.

Their mother, a mighty queen, was called the Lady Uta, (9) their father,
Dankrat, (10) who left them the heritage after his life was over; a
mighty man of valor that he was, who won thereto in youth worship full
great. These kings, as I have said, were of high prowess. To them owed
allegiance the best of warriors, of whom tales were ever told, strong
and brave, fearless in the sharp strife. Hagen (11) there was of Troneg,
thereto his brother Dankwart, (12) the doughty; Ortwin of Metz (13);
Gere (14) and Eckewart, (15) the margraves twain; Folker of Alzei, (16)
endued with fullness of strength. Rumolt (17) was master of the kitchen,
a chosen knight; the lords Sindolt and Hunolt, liegemen of these three
kings, had rule of the court and of its honors. Thereto had they many
a warrior whose name I cannot tell. Dankwart was marshal; his nephew,
Ortwin, seneschal unto the king; Sindolt was cupbearer, a chosen knight;
Hunolt served as chamberlain; well they wot how to fill these lofty
stations. Of the forces of the court and its far-reaching might, of
the high worship (18) and of the chivalry these lords did ply with joy
throughout their life, of this forsooth none might relate to you the
end.

In the midst of these high honors Kriemhild dreamed a dream, of how she
trained a falcon, strong, fair, and wild, which, before her very eyes,
two eagles rent to pieces. No greater sorrow might chance to her in all
this world. This dream then she told to Uta her mother, who could not
unfold it to the dutiful maid in better wise than this: "The falcon
which thou trainest, that is a noble man, but thou must needs lose him
soon, unless so be that God preserve him."

"Why speakest thou to me of men, dear brother mine? I would fain ever be
without a warrior's love. So fair will I remain until my death, that I
shall never gain woe from love of man."

"Now forswear this not too roundly," spake the mother in reply. "If ever
thou shalt wax glad of heart in this world, that will chance through the
love of man. Passing fair wilt thou become, if God grant thee a right
worthy knight."

"I pray you leave this speech," spake she, "my lady. Full oft hath it
been seen in many a wife, how joy may at last end in sorrow. I shall
avoid them both, then can it ne'er go ill with me."

Thus in her heart Kriemhild forsware all love. Many a happy day
thereafter the maiden lived without that she wist any whom she would
care to love. In after days she became with worship a valiant here's
bride. He was the selfsame falcon which she beheld in her dream that her
mother unfolded to her. How sorely did she avenge this upon her nearest
kin, who slew him after! Through his dying alone there fell full many a
mother's son.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Nibelungenlied", the lay of the Nibelungs.  The ordinary
        etymology of this name is 'children of the mist'
        ("Nebelkinder", O.N. "Niflungar"), and it is thought to have
        belonged originally to the dwarfs.  Piper, I, 50, interprets
        it as 'the sons of Nibul'; Boer, II, 198, considers
        "Hniflungar" to be the correct Norse form and interprets it
        as 'the descendants of Hnaef' (O.E. "Hnaef", O.H.G.
        "Hnabi"), whose death is related in the "Finnsaga".
   (2)  "Adventure" (M.H.G. "aventiure", from O.F. "aventure", Lat.
        "adventura").  The word meant originally a happening,
        especially some great event, then the report of such an
        event.  Here it is used in the sense of the different cantos
        or "fitts" of the poem, as in the "Gudrun" and other M.H.G.
        epics.  Among the courtly poets it also frequently denotes
        the source, or is the personification of the muse of poetry.
   (3)  "Kriemhild" is the Upper German form of the Frankish
        "Grimhild".  In the MSS., the name generally appears with a
        further shifting as "Chriemhilt", as if the initial
        consonant were Germanic "k".  On the various forms of the
        name, which have never yet been satisfactorily explained,
        see Mullenhoff, ZsfdA. xii, 299, 413; xv, 313; and
        Bohnenberger, PB. Beit. xxiv, 221-231.
   (4)  "Gunther" is the historical "Gundahari", king of the
        Burgundians in the fifth century.
   (5)  "Gernot" was probably introduced by some minstrel in place
        of the historical "Godomar", who appears in the Norse
        version as "Gutthormr", though the names are not
        etymologically the same, as "Godomar" would be "Guthmarr" in
        Old Norse.
   (6)  "Giselher" is the historical "Gislaharius".  Although
        mentioned by the "Lex Burgundionum" as one of the Burgundian
        kings, he does not appear in the early Norse version, or in
        other poems dealing with these persons, such as the
        "Waltharius", the "Rabenschlacht", the "Rosengarten", etc.,
        and was probably introduced at a late date into the saga.
        Originally no role was ascribed to him, and not even his
        death is told.  He probably came from some independent
        source.
   (7)  "Etzel" is the German form for the historical "Attila"
        (Norse "Atli").  A discussion of his connection with the
        saga will be found in the introduction.
   (8)  "Worms" is the ancient "Borbetomagus", which in the first
        century B.C. was the chief city of the German tribe of the
        "Vangioni".  In the fifth century it was the capital of the
        Burgundian kingdom, but was destroyed by the Huns.  The
        Merovingians rebuilt it, and in the seventh century it
        became a bishopric where Charlemagne at times held his
        court.  It was later noted as the meeting-place of many
        imperial diets.  It remained a free city till 1801.  In the
        "Thidreksaga" the name is corrupted into "Wernize".
   (9)  "Uta" (M.H.G. "Uote").  The name means ancestress, and is
        frequently used for the mother of heroes.  The modern German
        form is "Ute", but in order to insure its being pronounced
        with two syllables, the form "Uta" was chosen.
   (10) "Dankrat" (M.H.G. "Dancrat") appears as the father only in
        the "Nibelungenlied" and poems dependent on it, e.g., the
        "Klage" and "Biterolf", elsewhere as "Gibiche" (Norse
        "Giuki").
   (11) "Hagen of Troneg".  Troneg is probably a corruption of the
        name of the Latin colony, "colonia Trajana", on the Lower
        Rhine, which as early as the fifth century was written as
        "Troja", giving rise to the legend that the Franks were
        descended from the ancient Trojans.  "Troja" was then
        further corrupted to "Tronje" and "Tronege".  Hagen was
        therefore originally a Frank and had no connection with the
        Burgundian kings, as the lack of alliteration also goes to
        show.  Boer thinks that not Siegfried but Hagen originally
        lived at Xanten (see note 3 to Adventure II), as this was
        often called Troja Francorum. When the Hagen story was
        connected with the Burgundians and Hagen became either their
        brother or their vassal, his home was transferred to Worms
        and Siegfried was located at Xanten, as he had no especial
        localization.  Thus Siegfried is never called Siegfried of
        Troneg, as is Hagen.  Other attempts to explain Troneg will
        be found in Piper, I, 48.
   (12) "Dankwart" is not an historical character nor one that
        belonged to the early form of the legend.  He may have come
        from another saga, where he played the principal role as
        Droege (ZsfdA. 48, 499) thinks.  Boer considers him to be
        Hagen's double, invented to play a part that would naturally
        fall to Hagen's share, were he not otherwise engaged at the
        moment.  In our poem he is called "Dancwart der snelle", a
        word that has proved a stumbling-block to translators,
        because in modern German it means 'speedy', 'swift'.  Its
        original meaning was, however, 'brave', 'warlike', although
        the later meaning is already found in M.H.G.  In all such
        doubtful cases the older meaning has been preferred, unless
        the context forbids, and the word 'doughty' has been chosen
        to translate it.
   (13) "Ortwin of Metz" appears also in the "Eckenlied",
        "Waltharius", and in "Biterolf".  He is most likely a late
        introduction (but see Piper, I, 44).  Rieger thinks that he
        belonged to a wealthy family "De Metis".  Though the "i" is
        long in the original, and Simrock uses the form "Ortewein"
        in his translation, the spelling with short "i" has been
        chosen, as the lack of accent tends to shorten the vowel in
        such names.
   (14) "Gere" is likewise a late introduction.  He is perhaps the
        historical Margrave Gere (965) of East Saxony, whom Otto the
        Great appointed as a leader against the Slavs.  See O. von
        Heinemann, "Markgraf Gero", Braunschweig, 1860, and Piper, L
        43.
   (15) "Eckewart" is also a late accession.  He is perhaps the
        historical margrave of Meissen (1002), the first of the
        name.  He, too, won fame in battle against the Slavs.
   (16) "Folker of Alzet" (M.H.G. "Volker von Alzeije"), the
        knightly minstrel, is hardly an historical personage, in
        spite of the fact that Alzey is a well-known town in Rhine
        Hesse on the Selz, eighteen miles southwest of Mainz.  The
        town has, to be sure, a violin in its coat of arms, as also
        the noble family of the same name.  It is most likely,
        however, that this fact caused Folker to be connected with
        Alzei.  In the "Thidreksaga" Folker did not play the role of
        minstrel, and it is probable that some minstrel reviser of
        our poem developed the character and made it the
        personification of himself.
   (17) "Rumolt", "Bindolt", and "Hunolt" have no historical basis
        and merely help to swell the retinue of the Burgundians.
   (18) "Worship".  This word has been frequently used here in its
        older meaning of 'worth', 'reverence', 'respect', to
        translate the M.H.G. "eren", 'honors'.




ADVENTURE II. Of Siegfried.

In the Netherlands there grew the child of a noble king (his father had
for name Siegemund, (1) his mother Siegelind), (2) in a mighty castle,
known far and wide, in the lowlands of the Rhine: Xanten, (3) men called
it. Of this hero I sing, how fair he grew. Free he was of every blemish.
Strong and famous he later became, this valiant man. Ho! What great
worship he won in this world! Siegfried hight this good and doughty
knight. Full many kingdoms did he put to the test through his warlike
mood. Through his strength of body he rode into many lands. Ho! What
bold warriors he after found in the Burgundian land! Mickle wonders
might one tell of Siegfried in his prime, in youthful days; what honors
he received and how fair of body he. The most stately women held him
in their love; with the zeal which was his due men trained him. But of
himself what virtues he attained! Truly his father's lands were honored,
that he was found in all things of such right lordly mind. Now was he
become of the age that he might ride to court. Gladly the people saw
him, many a maid wished that his desire might ever bear him hither. Enow
gazed on him with favor; of this the prince was well aware. Full seldom
was the youth allowed to ride without a guard of knights. Siegmund and
Siegelind bade deck him out in brave attire. The older knights who were
acquaint with courtly custom, had him in their care. Well therefore
might he win both folk and land.

Now he was of the strength that he bare weapons well. Whatever he needed
thereto, of this he had enow. With purpose he began to woo fair ladies;
these bold Siegfried courted well in proper wise. Then bade Siegmund
have cried to all his men, that he would hold a feasting with his loving
kindred. The tidings thereof men brought into the lands of other kings.
To the strangers and the home-folk he gave steeds and armor. Wheresoever
any was found who, because of his birth, should become a knight, these
noble youths were summoned to the land for the feasting. Here with the
youthful prince they gained the knightly sword. Wonders might one tell
of this great feast; Siegmund and Siegelind wist well how to gain great
worship with their gifts, of which their hands dealt out great store.
Wherefore one beheld many strangers riding to their realm. Four hundred
sword-thanes (4) were to put on knightly garb with Siegfried. Many a
fair maid was aught but idle with the work, for he was beloved of them
all. Many precious stones the ladies inlaid on the gold, which together
with the edging they would work upon the dress of the proud young
warriors, for this must needs be done.

The host bade make benches for the many valiant men, for the midsummer
festival, (5) at which Siegfried should gain the name of knight. Then
full many a noble knight and many a high-born squire did hie them to
the minster. Right were the elders in that they served the young, as had
been done to them afore. Pastimes they had and hope of much good cheer.
To the honor of God a mass was sung; then there rose from the people
full great a press, as the youths were made knights in courtly wise,
with such great honors as might not ever lightly be again. Then they
ran to where they found saddled many a steed. In Siegmund's court the
hurtling (6) waxed so fierce that both palace (7) and hall were heard
to ring; the high-mettled warriors clashed with mighty sound. From young
and old one heard many a shock, so that the splintering of the shafts
reechoed to the clouds. Truncheons (8) were seen flying out before
the palace from the hand of many a knight. This was done with zeal. At
length the host bade cease the tourney and the steeds were led away.
Upon the turf one saw all to-shivered (9) many a mighty buckler and
great store of precious stones from the bright spangles (10) of the
shields. Through the hurtling this did hap.

Then the guests of the host betook them to where men bade them sit. With
good cheer they refreshed them and with the very best of wine, of which
one bare frill plenty. To the strangers and the home-folk was shown
worship enow. Though much pastime they had throughout the day, many of
the strolling folk forsware all rest. They served for the largess, which
men found there richly, whereby Siegmund's whole land was decked with
praise. Then bade the king enfeoff Siegfried, the youth, with land
and castles, as he himself had done. Much his hand bestowed upon the
sword-companions. The journey liked them well, that to this land they
were come. The feasting lasted until the seventh day. Siegelind,
the noble queen, for the love of her son, dealt out ruddy gold in
time-honored wise. Full well she wot how to make him beloved of the
folk. Scarce could a poor man be found among the strolling mimes. Steeds
and raiment were scattered by their hand, as if they were to live not
one more day. I trow that never did serving folk use such great bounty.
With worshipful honors the company departed hence. Of the mighty barons
the tale doth tell that they desired the youth unto their lord, but of
this the stately knight, Sir Siegfried, listed naught. Forasmuch as both
Siegmund and Siegelind were still alive, the dear child of them twain
wished not to wear a crown, but fain would he become a lord against all
the deeds of force within his lands, whereof the bold and daring knight
was sore adread.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Siegmund" (M.H.G. "Sigemunt") was originally the hero of an
        independent saga.  See "Volsungasaga", chaps. 3-8.
   (2)  "Siegelind" (M.H.G. "Sigelint") is the correct name of
        Siegfried's mother, as the alliteration shows.  The Early
        Norse version has "Hjordis", which has come from the "Helgi
        saga".
   (3)  "Xanten" (M.H.G. "Santen" from the Latin "ad sanctos") is at
        present a town in the Rhenish Prussian district of
        Dusseldorf.  It does not now lie on the Rhine, but did in
        the Middle Ages.
   (4)  "Sword-thanes" (M.H.G. "swertdegene") were the young squires
        who were to be made knights.  It was the custom for a
        youthful prince to receive the accolade with a number of
        others.
   (5)  "Midsummer festival".  The M.H.G. "sunewende" means
        literally the 'sun's turning', i.e., the summer solstice.
        This was one of the great Germanic festivals, which the
        church later turned into St. John's Eve.  The bonfires still
        burnt in Germany on this day are survivals of the old
        heathen custom.
   (6)  "Hurtling" translates here M.H.G. "buhurt", a word borrowed
        from the French to denote a knightly sport in which many
        knights clashed together.  Hurtling was used in older
        English in the same significance.
   (7)  "Palace" (M.H.G. "palas", Lat. "palatium") is a large
        building standing alone and largely used as a reception
        hall.
   (8)  "Truncheons" (M.H.G. "trunzune", O.F. "troncon", 'lance
        splinters', 'fragments of spears'.
   (9)  "To-shivered", 'broken to pieces', in imitation of the older
        English to-beat, to-break, etc.
   (10) "Spangles" (M.H.G. "spangen"), strips of metal radiating
        from the raised centre of the shield and often set, as here,
        with precious stones.




ADVENTURE III. How Siegfried Came to Worms.

It was seldom that sorrow of heart perturbed the prince. He heard tales
told of how there lived in Burgundy a comely maid, fashioned wondrous
fair, from whom he thereafter gained much of joy, but suffering, too.
Her beauty out of measure was known far and wide. So many a here heard
of her noble mind, that it alone brought many a guest (1) to Gunther's
land. But however many were seen wooing for her love, Kriemhild never
confessed within her heart that she listed any for a lover. He was
still a stranger to her, whose rule she later owned. Then did the son of
Siegelind aspire to lofty love; the wooing of all others was to his but
as the wind, for well he wot how to gain a lady fair. In later days the
noble Kriemhild became bold Siegfried's bride. Kinsmen and liegemen enow
advised him, since he would have hope of constant love, that he woo
one who was his peer. At this bold Siegfried spake: "Then will I choose
Kriemhild, the fair maid of Burgundy, for her beauty beyond measure.
This I know full well, never was emperor so mighty, and he would have a
wife, that it would not beseem him to love this noble queen."

Tidings of this reached Siegmund's ear; through the talk of the
courtiers he was made ware of the wish of his son. Full loth it was to
the king, that his child would woo the glorious maid. Siegelind heard it
too, the wife of the noble king. Greatly she feared for her child, for
full well she knew Gunther and his men. Therefore they sought to turn
the hero from this venture. Up spake then the daring Siegfried: "Dear
father mine, I would fain ever be without the love of noble dames, if I
may not woo her in whom my heart hath great delight; whatsoever any may
aver, it will avail but naught."

"And thou wilt not turn back," spake the king, "then am I in sooth glad
of thy will and will help thee bring it to pass, as best I may. Yet hath
this King Gunther full many a haughty man. If there were none else but
Hagen, the doughty knight, he can use such arrogance that I fear me it
will repent us sore, if we woo this high-born maid."

Then Siegfried made reply: "Wherefore need that hinder us? What I may
not obtain from them in friendly wise, that my hand and its strength can
gain. I trow that 1 can wrest from him both folk and land."

To this Prince Siegmund replied: "Thy speech liketh me not, for if this
tale were told upon the Rhine, then durst thou never ride unto that
land. Long time have Gunther and Gernot been known to me. By force may
none win the maid, of this have I been well assured; but wilt thou ride
with warriors unto this land, and we still have aught of friends, they
shall be summoned soon."

"It is not to my mind," spake again Siegfried, "that warriors should
follow me to the Rhine, as if for battle, that I constrain thereby the
noble maid. My single hand can win her well--with eleven (2) comrades
I will fare to Gunther's land; thereto shalt thou help me, Father
Siegmund." Then to his knights they gave for garments furs both gray and
vair. (3)

Now his mother Siegelind also heard the tale. She began to make dole for
her loved child, whom she feared to lose through Gunther's men. Sorely
the noble queen gan weep. Lord Siegfried hied him straightway to where
he saw her; to his mother he spake in gentle wise: "Lady, ye must not
weep for me; naught have I to fear from all his fighting men. I pray
you, speed me on my journey to the Burgundian land, that I and my
warriors may have array such as proud heroes can wear with honor; for
this I will say you gramercy i' faith."

"Since naught will turn thee," spake then the Lady Siegelind, "so will I
speed thee on thy journey, mine only child, with the best of weeds that
ever knight did wear, thee and thy comrades. Ye shall have enow."

Siegfried, the youth, then made low obeisance to the queen. He spake:
"None but twelve warriors will I have upon the way. Let raiment be
made ready for them, I pray, for I would fain see how it standeth with
Kriemhild."

Then sate fair ladies night and day. Few enow of them, I trow, did ease
them, till Siegfried's weeds had all been wrought. Nor would he desist
from faring forth. His father bade adorn the knightly garb in which his
son should ride forth from Siegmund's land. The shining breastplates,
too, were put in trim, also the stanch helmets and their shields both
fair and broad. Now their journey to the Burgundian land drew near;
man and wife began to fear lest they never should come home again. The
heroes bade lade their sumpters with weapons and with harness. Their
steeds were fair and their trappings red with gold. No need were there
to live more proudly than Siegfried and his men. Then he asked for leave
to journey to the land of Burgundy; this the king and queen sorrowfully
vouchsafed. Lovingly he comforted them twain. "For my sake," spake he,
"must ye not weep, nor have fear for me or for my life."

The warriors, too, were sad and many a maiden wept; I ween, their hearts
did tell them rightly that many of their kinsmen would come to death
because of this. Just cause had they for wailing; need enow they had in
sooth.

Upon the seventh morning, forth upon the river sand at Worms the brave
warriors pricked. Their armor was of ruddy gold and their trappings
fashioned fair. Smoothly trotted the steeds of bold Siegfried's men.
Their shields were new; gleaming and broad and fair their helmets, as
Siegfried, the bold, rode to court in Gunther's land. Never had such
princely attire been seen on heroes; their sword-points hung down
to their spurs. Sharp javelins were borne by these chosen knights.
Siegfried wielded one full two spans broad, which upon its edges cut
most dangerously. In their hands they held gold-colored bridles; their
martingales were silken: so they came into the land. Everywhere the folk
began to gape amazed and many of Gunther's men fared forth to meet them.
High-mettled warriors, both knight and squire, betook them to the lords
(as was but right), and received into the land of their lords these
guests and took from their hands the black sumpters which bore the
shields. The steeds, too, they wished to lead away for easement. How
boldly then brave Siegfried spake: "Let stand the mounts of me and of
my men. We will soon hence again, of this have I great desire. Whosoever
knoweth rightly where I can find the king, Gunther, the mighty, of
Burgundian land, let him not keep his peace but tell me."

Then up spake one to whom it was rightly known: "Would ye find the king,
that can hap full well. In yon broad hall with his heroes did I but see
him. Ye must hither hie you; there ye may find with him many a lordly
man."

To the king now the word was brought, that full lusty knights were come,
who wore white breastplates and princely garb. None knew them in the
Burgundian land. Much it wondered the king whence came these lordly
warriors in such shining array, with such good shields, both new and
broad. Loth was it to Gunther, that none could tell him this. Then
Ortwin of Metz (a bold and mighty man was he) made answer to the king:
"Since we know them not, ye should send for mine uncle Hagen, and let
him see them. To him are known (4) all kingdoms and foreign lands. If so
be he knoweth these lords, he will tell us straightway."

Then bade the king that Hagen and his men be brought. One saw him with
his warriors striding in lordly wise unto the court.

"What would the king of me?" asked Hagen.

"There be come to my house strange warriors, whelm here none knoweth. If
ye have ever seen them, I pray you, Hagen, tell me now the truth."

"That will I," spake then Hagen. He hied him to a window and over the
guests he let his glances roam. Well liked him their trappings and their
array, but full strange were they to him in the Burgundian land. He
spake: "From wheresoever these warriors be come unto the Rhine, they may
well be princes or envoys of kings, for their steeds are fair and
their garments passing good. Whencesoever they bear these, forsooth
high-mettled warriors be they."

"I dare well say," so spake Hagen, "though I never have seen Siegfried,
yet can I well believe, however this may be, that he is the warrior that
strideth yonder in such lordly wise. He bringeth new tidings hither to
this land. By this here's hand were slain the bold Nibelungs, Schilbung
and Nibelung, (5) sons of a mighty king. Since then he hath wrought
great marvels with his huge strength. Once as the hero rode alone
without all aid, he found before a mountain, as I have in sooth been
told, by Nibelung's hoard full many a daring man. Strangers they were to
him, till he gained knowledge of them there.

"The hoard of Nibelung was borne entire from out a hollow hill. Now hear
a wondrous tale, of how the liegemen of Nibelung wished to divide it
there. This the hero Siegfried saw and much it gan wonder him. So near
was he now come to them, that he beheld the heroes, and the knights
espied him, too. One among them spake: `Here cometh the mighty
Siegfried, the hero of Netherland.' Passing strange were the tidings
that, he found among the Nibelungs. Schilbung and Nibelung greeted well
the knight; with one accord these young and noble lordings bade the
stately man divide the hoard. Eagerly they asked it, and the lord in
turn gan vow it to them.

"He beheld such store of gems, as we have heard said, that a hundred
wains might not bear the lead; still more was there of ruddy gold from
the Nibelung land. All this the hand of the daring Siegfried should
divide. As a guerdon they gave him the sword of Nibelung, but they were
served full ill by the service which the good knight Siegfried should
render them. Nor could he end it for them; angry of mood (6) they grew.
Twelve bold men of their kith were there, mighty giants these. What
might that avail them! Siegfried's hand slew them soon in wrath, and
seven hundred warriors from the Nibelung land he vanquished with the
good sword Balmung. (7) Because of the great fear that, many a young
warrior had of the sword and of the valiant man, they made the land and
its castles subject to his hand. Likewise both the mighty kings he
slew, but soon he himself was sorely pressed by Alberich. (8) The
latter weened to venge straightway his masters, till he then discovered
Siegfried's mighty strength; for no match for him was the sturdy dwarf.
Like wild lions they ran to the hill, where from Alberich he won the
Cloak of Darkness. (9) Thus did Siegfried, the terrible, become master
of the hoard; those who had dared the combat, all lay there slain. Soon
bade he cart and bear the treasure to the place from whence the men of
Nibelung had borne it forth. He made Alberich, the strong, warden of the
hoard and bade him swear an oath to serve him as his knave; and fit he
was for work of every sort."

So spake Hagen of Troneg: "This he hath done. Nevermore did warrior win
such mighty strength. I wot yet more of him: it is known to me that the
hero slew a dragon and bathed him in the blood, so that his skin became
like horn. Therefore no weapons will cut him, as hath full oft been
seen. All the better must we greet this lord, that we may not earn the
youthful warrior's hate. So bold is he that we should hold him as a
friend, for he hath wrought full many a wonder by his strength."

Then spake the mighty king: "Thou mayst well have right. Behold how
valiantly he with his knights doth stand in lust of battle, the daring
man! Let us go down to meet the warrior."

"That ye may do with honor," spake then Hagen; "he is of noble race, son
of a mighty king. God wot, methinks, he beareth him in such wise, that
it can be no little matter for which he hath ridden hither."

"Now be he welcome to us," spake then the king of the land. "He is both
noble and brave, as I have heard full well. This shall stand him in good
stead in the Burgundian land." Then went Lord Gunther to where Siegfried
stood.

The host and his warriors received the guest in such wise that full
little was there lack of worship. Low bowed the stately man, that they
had greeted him so fair. "It wondereth me," spake the king straightway,
"whence ye, noble Siegfried, be come unto this land, or what ye seek at
Worms upon the Rhine."

Then the stranger made answer to the king: "This will I not conceal from
you. Tales were told me in my father's land, that here with you were the
boldest warriors that ever king did gain. This I have often heard, and
that I might know it of a truth, therefore am I come. Likewise do I hear
boasting of your valor, that no bolder king hath ever been seen. This
the folk relate much through all these lands. Therefore will I not turn
back, till it be known to me. I also am a warrior and was to wear a
crown. Fain would I bring it to pass that it may be said of me: Rightly
doth he rule both folk and land. Of this shall my head and honor be a
pledge. Now be ye so bold, as hath been told me, I reck not be it
lief or loth to any man, I will gain from you whatso ye have--land and
castles shall be subject to my hand."

The king had likewise his men had marvel at the tidings they here heard,
that he was willed to take from them their land. The knights waxed
wroth, as they heard this word. "How have I earned this," spake Gunther,
the knight, "that we should lose by the force of any man that which my
father hath rules so long with honor? We should let it ill appear that
we, too, are used in knightly ways."

"In no wise will I desist," spake again the valiant man. "Unless it be
that through thy strength thy land have peace, I will rule it all. And
shouldst thou gain, by thy strength, my ancestral lands, they shall
be subject to thy sway. Thy lands, and mine as well, shall lie alike;
whether of us twain can triumph over the other, him shall both land and
people serve."

Hagen and Gernot, too, straightway gainsaid this. "We have no wish,"
spake Gernot, "that we should conquer aught of lands, or that any man
lie dead at hero's hands. We have rich lands, which serve us, as is
meet, nor hath any a better claim to them than we."

There stood his kinsmen, grim of mood; among them, too, Ortwin of Metz.
"It doth irk me much to hear these words of peace," spake he; "the
mighty Siegfried hath defied you for no just cause. Had ye and your
brothers no meet defense, and even if he led a kingly troop, I trow well
so to fight that the daring man have good cause to leave this haughty
mien."

At this the hero of Netherland grew wonderly wroth. He spake: "Thy hand
shall not presume against me. I am a mighty king, a king's vassal thou.
Twelve of thy ilk durst not match me in strife."

Then Ortwin of Metz called loudly for swords. Well was he fit to be
Hagen of Troneg's sister's son. It rued the king that he had held his
peace so long. Then Gernot, the bold and lusty knight, came in between.
He spake to Ortwin: "Now give over thy anger. Lord Siegfried hath done
us no such wrong, but that we may still part the strife in courteous
wise. Be advised of me and hold him still as friend; far better will
this beseem us."

Then spake the doughty Hagen: "It may well grieve us and all thy knights
that he ever rode for battle to the Rhine. He should have given it over;
my lordings never would have done such ill to him."

To this Siegfried, the mighty man, made answer: "Doth this irk you, Sir
Hagen, which I spake, then will I let you see that my hands shall have
dominion here in the Burgundian land."

"I alone will hinder this," answered Gernot, and he forbade his knights
speak aught with haughtiness that might cause rue. Siegfried, too, then
bethought him of the noble maid.

"How might it beseem us to fight with you?" spake Gernot anew. "However
really heroes should lie dead because of this, we should have scant
honor therefrom and ye but little gain."

To this Siegfried, the son of Siegmund, made reply: "Why waiteth Hagen,
and Ortwin, too, that he hasteth not to fight with his kin, of whom he
hath so many here in Burgundy?"

At this all held their peace; such was Gernot's counsel. Then spake
Queen Uta's son: "Ye shall be welcome to us with all your war-mates, who
are come with you. We shall gladly serve you, I and all my kin."

Then for the guests they bade pour out King Gunther's wine. The master
of the land then spake: "All that we have, if ye desire it in honorable
wise, shall owe fealty to you; with you shall both life and goods be
shared."

At this Lord Siegfried grew of somewhat gentler mood. Then they bade
that care be taken of the armor of the guests. The best of hostels that
men might find were sought for Siegfried's squires; great easement they
gave them. Thereafter they gladly saw the guest in Burgundy. Many a day
they offered him great worship, a thousand fold more than I can tell
you. This his prowess wrought; ye may well believe, full scant a one he
saw who was his foe.

Whenever the lordings and their liegemen did play at knightly games,
Siegfried was aye the best, whatever they began. Herein could no one
match him, so mighty was his strength, whether they threw the stone or
hurled the shaft. When through courtesie the full lusty knights
made merry with the ladies, there were they glad to see the hero of
Netherland, for upon high love his heart was bent. He was aye ready for
whatso they undertook, but in his heart he bare a lovely maid, whom he
had never seen. She too, who in secret spake full well of him, cherished
him alone. Whenever the pages, squires, and knights would play their
games within the court, Kriemhild, the noble queen, watched them from
the windows, for no other pastime she needed on such days. Had he known
that she gazed on him thus, whom he bare within his heart, then had he
had pastime enough, I trow, for well I wot that no greater joy in all
this world could chance to him.

Whenever he stood by the heroes in the court, as men still are wont to
do, for pastime's sake, so winsome was the posture of Siegelind's son,
that many a lady loved him for very joy of heart. But he bethought him
many a day: "How shall that hap, that I with mine own eyes may see the
noble maid, whom I do love with all my heart and so have done long time.
Sadly must I stand, sith she be still a stranger to me."

Whenever the mighty kings fared forth into their land, the warriors all
must needs accompany them at hand, and Siegfried, too. This the lady
rued, and he, too, suffered many pangs for love of her. Thus he dwelt
with the lordings, of a truth, full a year in Gunther's land, and in all
this time he saw not once the lovely maid, from whom in later days there
happed to him much joy and eke much woe.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Guest" translates here the M.H.G. "gest", a word which may
        mean either 'guest' or 'stranger,' and it is often
        difficult, as here, to tell to which meaning the preference
        should be given.
   (2)  "Eleven" translates the M.H.G. "selbe zwelfte", which means
        one of twelve.  The accounts are, however, contradictory, as
        a few lines below mention is made of twelve companions of
        Siegfried.
   (3)  "Vair" (O.F. "vair", Lat. "varius"), 'variegated', like the
        fur of the squirrel.
   (4)  "Known".  It was a mark of the experienced warrior, that he
        was acquainted with the customs and dress of various
        countries and with the names and lineage of all important
        personages.  Thus in the "Hildebrandslied" Hildebrand asks
        Hadubrand to tell him his father's name, and adds: "If thou
        tellest me the one, I shall know the other."
   (5)  "Schilbung" and "Nibelung", here spoken of as the sons of a
        mighty king, were originally dwarfs, and, according to some
        authorities, the original owners of the treasure.  Boer, ix,
        199, thinks, however, that the name Nibelungs was
        transferred from Hagen to these dwarfs at a late stage in
        the formation of the saga.
   (6)  "Angry of mood".  The reason of this anger is apparent from
        the more detailed account in "Biterolf", 7801.  The quarrel
        arose from the fact that, according to ancient law,
        Siegfried acquired with the sword the rights of the first
        born, which the brothers, however, refused to accord to him.
   (7)  "Balmung".  In the older Norse version and in the
        "Thidreksaga" Siegfried's sword bore the name of Gram.
   (8)  "Alberich" is a dwarf king who appears in a number of
        legends, e.g., in the "Ortnit saga" and in "Biterolf".
        Under the Romance form of his name, "Oberon", he plays an
        important role in modern literature.
   (9)  "Cloak of Darkness".  This translates the M.H.G.
        "tarnkappe", a word often retained by translators.  It is
        formed from O.H.G. tarni, 'secret' (cf. O.E. "dyrne"), and
        "kappe" from late Latin "cappa", 'cloak'.  It rendered the
        wearer invisible and gave him the strength of twelve men.




ADVENTURE IV. How He Fought with the Saxons. (1)

Now there came strange tales to Gunther's land, though messengers sent
them from afar--tales of unknown warriors, who bare them hate. When they
heard this word, in sooth it pleased them not. These warriors will
I name to you: there was Liudeger of Saxon land, a great and lordly
prince, and then from Denmark Lindegast, the king. For their journey
they had gathered many a lordly stranger.

To Gunther's land were come the messengers his foes had sent. Men asked
the strangers for their tidings and bade them hie them soon to court
unto King Gunther. The king gave them greeting fair; he spake: "Be
ye welcome. I have not heard who sent you hither, but let that now be
told." So spake the right good king. But they feared full sore King
Gunther's warlike mood.

"Will ye, O King, permit that we tell the tales we bring, then we shall
not hold our tongue, but name to you the lordings who have sent us
hither: Liudegast and Liudeger; they would march upon this land. Ye
have earned their wrath, indeed we heard that both lords bear you mortal
hate. They would harry at Worms upon the Rhine and have the aid of
many a knight; that may ye know upon our faith. Within twelve weeks the
journey must befall. And ye have aught of good friends, who will help
guard your castles and your lands, let this soon be seen. Here shall be
carved by them many a helm and shield. Or would ye parley with them, let
messengers be sent. Then the numerous bands of your mighty foes will
not ride so near you, to give you pain of heart, from which full many a
lusty knight and a good must die."

"Now bide a time," spake the good king, "till I bethink me better; then
ye shall know my mind. Have I aught of trusty men, I will not withhold
from them these startling tales, but will make complaint thereof unto my
friends."

To Gunther, the mighty king, it was loth enow, but in his heart he bare
the speech in secret wise. He bade Hagen be fetched and others of his
men, and sent eftsoon to court for Gernot. Then came the very best of
men that could be found. The king spake: "Men would seek us here in this
our land with mighty armies, now make ye wail for that."

To this Gernot, a brave and lusty knight, made answer: "That will we
fend indeed with swords. Only the fey (2) will fall. So let them die;
for their sake I will not forget my honor. Let these foes of ours be
welcome to us."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "This thinketh me not good. Liudegast and
Liudeger bear great arrogance; nor can we summon all our men in such
short time. Why tell ye not Siegfried of the thing?" So spake the
valiant knight.

To the messengers they bade give lodging in the town. Whatever hate they
bore them, yet Gunther, the mighty, bade purvey them well, as was but
right, till he discovered of his friends who there was who would lend
him aid. Yet in his fears the king was ill at ease. Just then full
blithe a knight, who wot not what had happed, saw him thus sad and
prayed King Gunther to tell him of the matter. "Much it wondereth me,"
spake Siegfried, for he it was, "that ye thus have changed your merry
wont, which ye have used thus far with us."

To this Gunther, the stately knight, replied: "It liketh me not to tell
all folk the grievance which I must bear within my heart in secret wise.
Only to trusty friends should one confide his woe of heart."

At this Siegfried's color waxed both pale and red. To the king he spake:
"I have denied you naught and will gladly help you turn aside your
woes. And ye seek friends, I will be one of them and trow well to deport
myself with honor until mine end."

"Now God reward you, Sir Siegfried, your speech thinketh me good, and
though your prowess help me not, yet do I rejoice to hear that ye are
friend to me, and live I yet a while, I shall repay you well. I will
let you hear why I stand thus sad; from the messengers of my foes I
have heard that they would visit me with war, a thing which knights have
never done to us in all these lands."

"Regard this lightly," spake then Siegfried, "and calm your mood. Do
as I pray you. Let me gain for you both worship and advantage and do ye
command your knights, that they gather to your aid. Should your mighty
foes be helped by thirty thousand (3) men, yet could I withstand them,
had I but a thousand; for that rely on me."

Then spake King Gunther: "For this I'll serve you ever."

"So bid me call a thousand of your men, since of mine own I have
but twelve, and I will guard your land. Faithfully shall the hand of
Siegfried serve you. Hagen shall help us and also Ortwin, Dankwart,
and Sindolt, your trusty men. Folker, the valiant man, shall also ride
along; he shall bear the banner, for to none would I liefer grant it.
Let now the envoys ride home to their masters' lands. Give them to
understand they soon shall see us, that our castles may rest in peace."

Then the king bade summon both his kinsmen and his men. The messengers
of Liudeger betook them to the court. Fain they were that they should
journey home again. Gunther, the good king, made offrance of rich gifts
and gave them safe-convoy. At this their spirits mounted high. "Now say
unto my foes," spake then Gunther, "that they may well give over their
journey and stay at home; but if they will seek me here within my lands,
hardships shall they know, and my friends play me not false."

Rich gifts men bare then for the envoys; enow of these had Gunther to
bestow, nor durst the men of Liudeger refuse them. When at last they
took their leave, they parted hence in merry mood.

Now when the messengers were come to Denmark and King Liudegast had
heard how they parted from the Rhine, as was told him, much he rued, in
sooth, their (4) proud defiance. The envoys said that Gunther had full
many a valiant man-at-arms and among them they saw a warrior stand,
whose name was Siegfried, a hero from Netherland. Little liked it
Liudegast when he heard aright this tale. When the men of Denmark
had heard these tidings told, they hasted all the more to call their
friends; till Sir Liudegast had gathered for his journey full twenty
thousand knights from among his valiant men. Then King Liudeger, also,
of Saxon land, sent forth his summons, till they had forty thousand men
and more, with whom they thought to ride to the Burgundian land.

Likewise at home King Gunther got him men-at-arms among his kin and the
liegemen of his brothers, and among Hagen's men whom they wished to lead
thence for battle. Much need of this the heroes had, but warriors soon
must suffer death from this. Thus they made them ready for the journey.
When they would hence, Folker, the daring, must bear the flag. In such
wise they thought to ride from Worms across the Rhine. Hagen of Troneg
was master of the troop; with them rode Sindolt and Hunolt, too, who
wist well how to merit Gunther's gold. Dankwart, Hagen's brother, and
Ortwin, too, well could they serve with honor in this war.

"Sir King," spake then Siegfried, "stay ye at home; since that your
warriors are willed to follow me, remain ye with the ladies and keep
your spirits high. I trow well to guard for you both honor and estate.
Well will I bring it to pass that those who thought to seek you out at
Worms upon the Rhine, had better far have stayed at home. We shall ride
so nigh unto their land that their proud defiance shall be turned to
fear."

From the Rhine they rode through Hesse with their warriors towards Saxon
land, where they later fought. With fire and pillage, too, they harried
all the countryside, so that the two kings did learn of it in dire
distress. Then came they to the border; the warriors marched along.
Siegfried, the strong, gan ask: "Who shall now guard here the troop?"
Forsooth never did men ride more scathfully to the Saxons. They spake:
"Let the valiant Dankwart guard the young upon the way, he is a doughty
knight. Thus shall we lose the less through Liudeger's men. Let him and
Ortwin guard the rear."

"Then I myself will ride," spake Siegfried, the knight, "and play the
outlook toward the foe, until I discover aright where these warriors
be." Quickly the son of fair Siegelind donned his harness. The troop
he gave in charge to Hagen, when he would depart, and to Gernot, the
valiant man. Thus he rode hence into the Saxon land alone and many a
helmet band he cut to pieces on that day. Soon he spied the mighty host
that lay encamped upon the plain and far outweighed the forces of his
men. Forty thousand or better still there were. Full blithely Siegfried
saw this in lofty mood. Meantime a warrior full well arrayed had mounted
to the outlook 'gainst the foe. Him Sir Siegfried spied, and the bold
man saw him, too. Each began to watch the other in hostile wise. Who it
was, who stood on guard, I'll tell you now; a gleaming shield of gold
lay by his hand. It was the good King Liudegast, who was guarding here
his band. The noble stranger pricked along in lordly wise.

Now had Sir Liudegast espied him with hostile eye. Into the flanks of
their horses they plunged the spurs; with all their might they couched
the spears against the shields. At this great fear befell the mighty
king. After the thrust the horses carried past each other the royal
knights, as though borne upon the wind. With the bridles they wheeled
in knightly wise and the two fierce champions encountered with their
swords. Then smote Sir Siegfried, so that the whole field did ring.
Through the hero's hand from out the helmets, as from firebrands, flew
the bright red sparks. Each in the other found his match. Sir Liudegast,
too, struck many a savage blow; the might of each broke full upon the
shields. Thirty of Liudegast's men stood there on guard, but ere they
could come to his aid, Siegfried had won the fight, with three groat
wounds which he dealt the king through his gleaming breastplate, the
which was passing good. The blood from the wounds gushed forth along
the edges of the sword, whereat King Liudegast stood in sorry mood. He
begged for life and made offrance of his lands and said that his name
was Liudegast. Then came his warrior's, who had witnessed what there had
happed upon the lookout. As Siegfried would lead his captive thence, he
was set upon by thirty of these men. With mighty blows the hero's hand
guarded his noble prize. The stately knight then wrought worse scathe.
In self-defense he did thirty unto death; only one he left alive,
who rode full fast to tell the tale of what here had chanced. By his
reddened helmet one might see the truth. It sorely grieved the men of
Denmark, when the tale was told them that their king was taken captive.
Men told it to his brother, who at the news began to rage with monstrous
wrath, for great woe it brought him.

Liudegast, the warrior, then was led away by Siegfried's might to
Gunther's men and given to Hagen in charge. When that they heard it was
the king, full moderate was their dole. The Burgundians now were bidden
raise their banner. "Up, men," cried Siegfried, "here shall more be
done, ere the day end, and I lose not my life. Full many a stately dame
in Saxon land shall rue this fight. Ye heroes from the Rhine, give heed
to me, for I can guide you well to Liudeger's band. So shall ye see
helmets carved by the hands of goodly knights; ere we turn again, they
shall become acquaint with fear."

To their horses Gernot and all his men now hasted, and soon the stalwart
minstrel, Sir Folker, grasped the battle-flag and rode before the band.
Then were all the comrades arrayed in lordly wise for strife; nor
had they more than a thousand men, and thereto Siegfried's twelve
men-at-arms. Now from the road gan rise the dust, as across the land
they rode; many a lordly shield was seen to gleam from out their midst.
There, too, were come the Saxons with their troops and well-sharpened
swords, as I since have heard. Sore cut these weapons in the heroes'
hands, for they would fain guard both their castles and their land
against the strangers. The lordings' marshals led on the troop.
Siegfried, too, was come with his men-at-arms, whom he had brought from
Netherland. In the storm of battle many a hand this day grew red with
blood. Sindolt and Hunolt and Gernot, too, slew many a knight in the
strife, ere these rightly knew the boldness of their foes. This many a
stately dame must needs bewail. Folker and Hagen and Ortwin, too,
dimmed in the battle the gleam of many a helm with flowing blood, these
storm-bold men. By Dankwart, too, great deeds were done.

The men of Denmark proved well their hands; one heard many a shield
resounding from the hurtling and from the sharp swords as well, many of
which were wielded there. The battle-bold Saxons did scathe enow, but
when the men of Burgundy pressed to the fight, by them was really a wide
wound carved. Then down across the saddles the blood was seen to flow.
Thus they fought for honors, these knights both bold and good. Loud rang
the sharp weapons in the heroes' hands, as those of Netherland followed
their lording through the sturdy host. Valiantly they forced their way
in Siegfried's wake, but not a knight from the Rhine was seen to follow.
Through the shining helmets one could see flow the bloody stream, drawn
forth by Siegfried's hand, till at last he found Liudeger before his
men-at-arms. Thrice had he pierced the host from end to end. Now was
Hagen come, who helped him achieve in the battle all his mind. Before
them many a good knight must needs die this day.

When the mighty Liudeger espied Siegfried and saw that he bore high in
hand the good sword Balmung and did slay so many a man, then waxed the
lording wroth and fierce enow. A mighty surging and a mighty clang of
swords arose, as their comrades pressed against each other. The two
champions tried their prowess all the more. The troops began to yield;
fierce grew the hate. To the ruler of the Saxons the tale was told that
his brother had been captured; great dole this gave him. Well he knew it
was the son of Siegelind who had done the deed. Men blamed Sir Gernot,
but later he learned the truth.

So mighty were the blows of Liudeger that Siegfried's charger reeled
beneath the saddle. When the steed recovered, bold Siegfried took on a
frightful usance in the fray. In this Hagen helped him well, likewise
Gernot, Dankwart, and Folker, too. Through them lay many dead. Likewise
Sindolt and Hunolt and Ortwin, the knight, laid many low in strife; side
by side in the fray the noble princes stood. One saw above the helmets
many a spear, thrown by here's hand, hurtling through the gleaming
shields. Blood-red was colored many a lordly buckler; many a man in the
fierce conflict was unhorsed. At each other ran Siegfried, the brave,
and Liudeger; shafts were seen to fly and many a keen-edged spear. Then
off flew the shield-plates, struck by Siegfried's hand; the hero of
Netherland thought to win the battle from the valiant Saxons, wondrous
many of whom one saw. Ho! How many shining armor-rings the daring
Dankwart broke!

Then Sir Liudegor espied a crown painted on the shield in Siegfried's
hand. Well he knew that it was Siegfried, the mighty man. To his friends
the hero loudly called: "Desist ye from the strife, my men, here I have
seen the son of Siegmund, Siegfried, the strong, and recognized him
well. The foul fiend himself hath sent him hither to the Saxon land."
The banners bade he lower in the fight. Peace he craved, and this was
later granted him, but he must needs go as hostage to Gunther's land.
This was wrung from him by valiant Siegfried's hand. With one accord
they then gave over the strife and laid aside the many riddled helmets
and the broad, battered bucklers. Whatever of these was found, bore the
hue of blood from the Burgundians' hand. They captured whom they would,
for this lay in their power. Gernot and Hagen, the full bold warriors,
bade bear away the wounded; five hundred stately men they led forth
captive to the Rhine. The worsted knights rode back to Denmark, nor had
the Saxons fought so well that one could give them aught of praise, and
this the heroes rued full sore. The fallen, too, were greatly mourned by
friends.

Then they bade place the weapons on sumpters for the Rhine. Siegfried,
the warrior, and his heroes had wrought full well, as Gunther's men must
needs confess. Sir Gernot now sent messengers homeward to Worms in his
native land, and bade tell his kin what great success had happed to him
and to his men, and how these daring knights had striven well for
honor. The squirelings ran and told the tale. Then those who afore had
sorrowed, were blithe for joy at the pleasing tidings that were come.
Much questioning was heard from noble dames, how it had fared with
the liegemen of the mighty king. One of the messengers they bade go to
Kriemhild; this happed full secretly (openly she durst not), for she,
too, had amongst them her own true love. When she saw the messenger
coming to her bower, fair Kriemhild spake in kindly wise: "Now tell me
glad news, I pray. And thou dost so without deceit, I will give thee of
my gold and will ever be thy friend. How fared forth from the battle my
brother Gernot and others of my kin? Are many of them dead perchance? Or
who wrought there the best? This thou must tell me."

Quickly then the envoy spake: "Ne'er a coward did we have, but, to tell
the truth, O noble queen, none rode so well to the strife and fray,
as did the noble stranger from Netherland. Mickle wonders the hand of
valiant Siegfried wrought. Whate'er the knights have done in strife,
Dankwart and Hagen and other men of the king, however much they strove
for honor, 'tis but as the wind compared with Siegfried, the son of
Siegmund, the king. They slew full many a hero in the fray, but none
might tell you of the wonders which Siegfried wrought, whenever he rode
into the fight. Great woe he did the ladies through their kin; upon the
field the love of many a dame lay dead. His blows were heard to ring so
loud upon the helmets, that from the wounds they drew forth the blood
in streams. In every knightly art he is a worthy knight and a brave.
Whatever Ortwin of Metz achieved (and he whom he could reach with his
good sword, fell sorely wounded, but mostly dead), yet your brother
wrought the direst woe that could ever chance in battle. One must say of
the chosen knights in truth, that these proud Burgundians acquitted
them so well that they can well preserve their honor from every taint
of shame. Through their hands we saw many a saddle bare, while the field
resounded with the flashing swords. So well rode the warriors from
the Rhine, that it were better for their foes had it been avoided. The
valiant men of Troneg, also, wrought dire woe, when in great numbers the
armies met. Bold Hagen's hand did many a one to death; of this full many
stories might be told here in the Burgundian land. Sindolt and Hunolt,
Gernot's men, Rumolt the brave, have done such deeds that it may well
ever rue Liudeger that he made war upon thy kinsmen by the Rhine. The
very best fight that happed from first to last, that one has ever seen,
was made full lustily by Siegfried's hand. Rich hostages he bringeth to
Gunther's land. He won them by his prowess, this stately man. Of this
King Liudegast must bear the loss and eke his brother Liudeger of Saxon
land. Now listen to my tale, most noble queen: by the hand of Siegfried
the twain were caught. Never have men brought so many hostages to this
land, as now are coming to the Rhine through him. Men are bringing
to our land five hundred or more unharmed captives; and of the deadly
wounded, my lady, know, not less than eighty blood-red biers. These men
were mostly wounded by bold Siegfried's hand. Those who in haughty
pride sent a challenge to the Rhine, must now needs be the captives of
Gunther, the king, and men are bringing them with joy unto this land."

Still higher rose Kriemhild's color when she heard this tale. Her fair
face blushed a rosy red, that Siegfried, the youth, the stately knight,
had fared forth so joyfully from the dangerous strife. These tidings
could not have pleased her better. For her kinsmen, too, she rejoiced in
duty bound. Then spake the lovely maid: "A fair tale thou hast told me;
therefore shalt thou have as guerdon rich attire. Likewise I'll have
thee brought ten marks of gold." (5) Small wonder that such tales are
gladly told to noble dames.

They gave him then his guerdon, the garments and the gold. Then many a
fair maid hied her to the casement and gazed upon the street, where many
high-mettled warriors were seen riding into the Burgundian land. There
came the champions, the wounded and the sound. Without shame they heard
the greetings of their friends. Merrily the host rode forth to meet his
guests, for his great sorrow had been turned to joy. Well greeted he
his vassals and the strangers, too; for it was only meet that the mighty
king in courtly wise should thank those who were come back to him,
because in the storm of battle they had won the fight with honor.
Gunther bade his kinsmen tell who had been slain upon the march; but
sixty had been lost, whom one must mourn, as is the wont with heroes.
Many a riven shield and battered helm the unharmed warriors brought to
Gunther's land. The men alighted from their steeds before the palace
of the king. Loud was heard the joyous sound of the merry welcome;
then order was given to lodge the warriors in the town. The king bade
minister well unto his guests, attend the wounded and give them good
easement. His courtesie was cleverly seen upon his foes. He spake to
Liudegast: "Now be ye welcome. Much damage have I ta'en because of you;
for this I shall now be repaid, if fortune favor. God reward my kinsmen,
for they have given me joy."

"Well may ye thank them," answered Liudeger; "such noble hostages hath
king never gained afore. For fair treatment we offer great store of
wealth, that ye may act with mercy towards your foes."

"I will let you both go free," spake Gunther, "but I must have surety
that my foes remain here with me, that they do not leave the land
against my will." To that Liudeger pledged his hand.

Men brought them to their lodgings and gave them easement. The wounded
were bedded well, and for the sound were poured out good mead and wine.
Never could the comrades have been more merry. Their battered shields
were borne away for keeping, and enow there was of bloody saddles which
one bade hide away, that the ladies might not weep. Many a good knight
returned aweary from the fray. The king did make his guests great cheer.
His lands were full of strangers and of home-folk. He bade ease the
sorely wounded in kindly wise; their haughty pride was now laid low. Men
offered to the leeches rich rewards, silver without weight and thereto
shining gold, if they would heal the heroes from the stress of war. To
his guests the king likewise gave great gifts. Those that were minded to
set out for home, were asked to stay, as one doth to friends. The king
bethought him how he might requite his men, for they had brought to pass
his wish for fame and honor.

Then spake Lord Gernot: "Let them ride away, but be it made known to
them that in six weeks they must come again for a mighty feast. By then
will many a one be healed who now lieth sorely wounded."

Then Siegfried of Netherland also asked for leave, but when King Gunther
learned his wish, lovingly he bade him stay erstwhile. Were it not for
the king's sister, this were never done. He was too rich to take reward,
though he well deserved it and the king liked him well, as also did the
kinsmen, who had seen what happed in battle through his strength. For
the sake of one fair lady he thought to stay, if perchance he might espy
her. Later it was done, and according to his wish he met the maid. He
rode thereafter joyfully to Siegmund's land.

At all times the host bade practice knighthood, and many a youthful
knight did this right gladly. Meanwhile he ordered seats prepared upon
the sand before the town of Worms for those who were to visit him in the
Burgundian land. At the time when they should come, fair Kriemhild heard
it said that the king would hold a feasting for the sake of his dear
friends. Then comely women hasted apace with robes and headgear which
they were to don. The noble Uta heard tales told of the proud warriors
who were to come. Then many rich dresses were taken from the press. To
please her children she bade make garments ready, that many ladies and
many maids might therewith be decked and many youthful knights of the
Burgundian land. Also for many of the strangers she bade fashion lordly
robes.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Saxons".  This war with the Saxons does not appear in the
        poetic "Edda", but was probably introduced into the story
        later to provide the heroes with a suitable activity in the
        period elapsing between Siegfried's marriage and the journey
        to Brunhild's land.  (In our poem it is placed before the
        marriage.)  It reflects the ancient feuds between the Franks
        on the one hand and the Saxons and Danes on the other.
        Originally Siegfried probably did not take part in it, but
        was later introduced and made the leader of the expedition
        in place of the king, in accordance with the tendency to
        idealize him and to give him everywhere the most important
        role.  The two opposing leaders are "Liudeger", lord of the
        Saxons, and "Liudegast", king of Denmark.  In "Biterolf"
        Liudeger rules over both Saxons and Danes, and Liudegast is
        his brother.
   (2)  "Fey".  This Scotch and older English word has been chosen
        to translate the M.H.G. "veige", 'fated', 'doomed', as it is
        etymologically the same word.  The ancient Germans were
        fatalists and believed only those would die in battle whom
        fate had so predestined.
   (3)  "Thirty thousand".  The M.H.G. epics are fond of round
        numbers and especially of thirty and its multiples.  They
        will be found to occur very frequently in our poem.  See
        Lachmann, "Anmerkungen zu den Nibelungen", 474 1.
   (4)  "Their".  The original is obscure here; the meaning is,
        'when he heard with what message they were come, he rued the
        haughtiness of the Burgundians'.
   (5)  "Marks of gold".  A mark (Lat. "mares") was half a pound of
        gold or silver.




ADVENTURE V. How Siegfried First Saw Kriemhild.

One saw daily riding to the Rhine those who would fain be at the
feasting. Full many of these who for the king's sake were come into the
land, were given steeds and lordly harness. Seats were prepared for all,
for the highest and the best, as we are told, for two and thirty princes
at the feast. For this, too, the fair ladies vied in their attire.
Giselher, the youth, was aught but idle; he and Gernot and all their
men received the friends and strangers. In truth, they gave the knights
right courtly greetings. These brought into the land many a saddle
of golden red, dainty shields and lordly armor to the feasting on the
Rhine. Many a wounded man was seen full merry since. Even those who lay
abed in stress of wounds, must needs forget the bitterness of death.
Men ceased to mourn for the weak and sick and joyed in prospect of the
festal day, and how well they would fare at the feasting of the king.
Pleasure without stint and overabundance of joy pervaded all the folk
which there were seen. Therefore great rejoicing arose throughout the
whole of Gunther's land.

Upon a Whitsun morning five thousand or more brave men, clad in glad
attire, were seen going forth to the high festal tide. On all sides they
vied with each other in knightly sports. The host marked well, what he
already wet, how from his very heart the hero of Netherland did love his
sister, albeit he had never seen her, whose comeliness men praised above
all maids. Then spake the knight Ortwin to the king: "Would ye have full
honor at your feast, so should ye let be seen the charming maids, who
live in such high honors here in Burgundy. What were the joy of man,
what else could give him pleasure, but pretty maids and noble dames?
Pray let your sister go forth before the guests." To the joy of many a
hero was this counsel given.

"This will I gladly do," spake then the king, and all who heard it were
merry at the thought. Then bade he say to the Lady Uta and her comely
daughter, that with their maidens they should come to court. From the
presses they took fair raiment and whatso of rich attire was laid away.
Of rings and ribbons, too, enow they had. Thus each stately maiden
decked herself with zeal. Full many a youthful knight upon that day was
of the mind that he was so fair to look upon for ladies, that he would
not exchange this chance for the lands of any mighty king. Gladly they
gazed on those whom till now they had not known. Then bade the mighty
king full a hundred of his men, who were his kin and hers, escort
his sister and serve her thus. These were the court retainers of the
Burgundian land and carried swords in hand. Soon one saw the noble Uta
coming with her child. Full hundred or more fair ladies had she taken
for her train, who wore rich robes. Likewise there followed her daughter
many a stately maid. When from out a bower men saw them come, there rose
a mighty press of knights who had the hope, if that might be, to gaze
with joy upon the noble maid. Now came she forth, the lovely fair, as
doth the red of dawn from out the lowering clouds. He then was reft
of many woes who bore her in his heart so long a time, when he saw the
lovely maid stand forth so glorious. How shone full many a precious
stone upon her robes! In lovely wise her rose-red hue appeared. Whatever
one might wish, he could not but confess that never in the world had
he beheld a fairer maid. As the radiant moon, whose sheen is thrown so
brightly on the clouds, doth stand before the stars, so stood she now
before full many a stately dame. Therefore higher rose the spirits of
the comely knights. Richly appareled chamberlains marched on in front,
while the high-mettled warriors forsooth must press where they might
see the lovely maid. At this Lord Siegfried felt both joy and dole. To
himself he thought: "How could that chance, that I should love thee?
That is a foolish dream. But if I now must lose thee, then were I better
dead." At thought of this his color came and went. There stood the son
of Siegmund in such dainty grace, as he were limned on parchment by
skillful master's art. Indeed 'twas said of him that never had so fair a
knight been seen. The escort of the ladies now bade everywhere give
way and many a man obeyed. These high-born hearts rejoiced full many a
wight, as thus so many a noble dame appeared in courtly bearing.

Then spake Lord Gernot of Burgundy: "Dear brother Gunther, him who
offered service in such kindly wise, ye should in like manner requite
before these knights; nor shall I ever rue this counsel. Bid Siegfried
now approach my sister, that the maid may greet him; this will ever be
our gain. She who never greeted warrior shall greet him fair, that by
this means we now may win the stately knight."

Then went the kinsmen of the host to fetch the hero. To the champion
from Netherland they spake: "You hath the king permitted to go to court;
his sister is to greet you. This hath he decreed to do you honor."

At this the lord grew blithe of mood, for in his heart he bare joy
without alloy, that he thus should see fair Uta's child. With lovely
grace she greeted Siegfried then, but when she saw the haughty knight
stand thus before her, her cheeks flamed bright. "Be welcome, Sir
Siegfried, most good and noble knight," the fair maid spake, and at this
greeting his spirits mounted high. Courteously he made obeisance; she
took him by the hand. How gallantly he walked by the lady's side! Upon
each other this lord and lady gazed with kindling eyes. Full secretly
this happed. Was perchance a white hand there fervently pressed by
heart-felt love? That know I not; yet I cannot believe that this was
left undone, for soon had she betrayed to him her love. Nevermore in
summertide nor in the days of May bare he within his heart such lofty
joy as now he gained, when hand in hand he walked with her whom he fain
would call his love.

Then thought full many a knight: "Had that but happed to me, to walk
thus with her hand in hand, as now I see him do, or to lie beside her,
I'd bear it willingly."

Never has warrior better served to gain a queen. From whatever land the
guests were come, all gazed alike upon this pair alone. She then was
bidden kiss the stately man, to whom no such delight had ever happened
in this world.

Then spake the king of Denmark: "Because of this high greeting many a
warrior lieth wounded (this wot I well), through Siegfried's hand. God
grant that he may never come again to my kingly lands."

On all sides they bade make way for Kriemhild, as thus to church one saw
her go with many a valiant knight in courtly wise. Then soon the stately
knight was parted from her side. Thus went she to the minster, followed
by many a dame. So full of graces was this queenly maid that many a
daring wish must needs be lost. Born she was to be the eyes' delight
of many a knight. Siegfried scarce could wait till mass was sung. Well
might he think his fortune that she did favor him, whom thus he bare in
heart. Cause enow he had to love the fair.

When she came forth from out the minster, they begged the gallant knight
again to bear her company, as he had done afore. Then first the lovely
maid began to thank him that he had fought so gloriously before so many
knights. "Now God requite you, Sir Siegfried," spake the comely maid,
"that ye have brought to pass with your service, that the warriors do
love you with such fealty as I hear them say."

Then upon Dame Kriemhild he began to gaze in loving wise. "I will serve
them ever," spake then the knight, "and while life shall last, never
will I lay my head to rest till I have done their will; and this I do,
my Lady Kriemhild, to win your love."

A twelfth-night long, on each and every day, one saw the winsome maid
beside the knight, when she should go to court to meet her kin. This
service was done from sheer delight. A great rout of joy and pleasure
was daily seen in front of Gunther's hall, without and eke within, from
many a daring man. Ortwin and Hagen began to do great marvels. Whatever
any wished to play, these lusty knights were fully ready; thus they
became well known to all the guests and so the whole of Gunther's land
was decked with honor. Those who had lain wounded were now seen coming
forth; they, too, would fain have pastime with the troop and guard
themselves with bucklers and hurl the shaft. Enow there were to help
them, for there was great store of men.

At the feasting the host bade purvey them with the best of cheer. He
kept him free from every form of blame that might befall a king; men
saw him move in friendly wise among his guests. He spake: "Ye worthy
knights, ere ye go hence, pray take my gifts. I am minded to deserve it
of you ever. Do not disdain my goods, the which I'll share with you, as
I have great desire."

Then up spake they of Denmark: "Ere we ride homeward to our land, we
crave a lasting peace; we knights have need thereof, for many a one of
our kinsmen lieth dead at the hands of your men-at-arms."

Liudegast, the Saxon chief, was now cured of his wounds and had
recovered from the fray, though many dead they left within this land.
Then King Gunther went to find Sir Siegfried; to the knight he spake:
"Now tell me what to do. Our foes would fain ride early and beg for
lasting peace of me and of my men. Advise me now, Knight Siegfried, what
thinketh thee good to do? What the lordings offer me will I tell thee;
what of gold five hundred steeds can bear, that would they gladly give
me, and I set them free again."

Then spake the mighty Siegfried: "That were done but ill. Let them ride
hence unhindered, but make each of the lordings give surety with his
hand, that their noble knights henceforth forbear all hostile riding
hither to your land."

"This counsel will I follow." Herewith they parted, and to the king's
foes was told that no one craved the gold they proffered. For their
loved friends at home the battle-weary warriors longed. Many a shield
full of treasure was then brought forth which the king dealt out
unweighed to his many friends, to each five hundred marks of gold, and
to a few, still more. Gernot, the brave, had counseled Gunther this.
Then they all took leave, sith they would hence. One saw the guests
draw nigh to Kriemhild and also to where Dame Uta sate. Never yet were
knights dismissed in better wise. Lodgings grew empty as they rode away,
but still there stayed at home the king and all his kin and many a noble
liegeman. Daily they were seen as they went to Lady Kriemhild. The good
knight Siegfried now would likewise take his leave; he weened not to win
that on which his mind was set. The king heard said that he would hence,
but Giselher, the youth, quite won him from the journey.

"Whither would ye ride now, noble Siegfried? Pray tarry with the
knights, I beg you, with Gunther the king and with his men. Here, too,
are many comely dames whom we shall gladly let you see."

Then spake the mighty Siegfried: "Let stand the steeds. I listed to ride
hence, but now will I desist. The shields, too, bear away. To my land I
craved to go, in truth, but Giselher with his great love hath turned me
from it."

So the valiant knight stayed on to please his friends, nor could he
have fared more gentilly in any land. This happed because he daily saw
Kriemhild, the fair; for the sake of her unmeasured beauty the lording
stayed. With many a pastime they whiled the hours away, but still her
love constrained him and often gave him dole. Because of this same love
in later days the valiant knight lay pitiful in death.




ADVENTURE VI. How Gunther Fared To Isenland (1) for Brunhild.

New tidings came across the Rhine. 'Twas said that yonder many a fair
maid dwelt. The good king Gunther thought to win him one of these; high
therefore rose the warrior's spirits. There lived a queen beyond the
sea, whose like men knew not anywhere. Peerless was her beauty and great
her strength. With doughty knights she shot the shaft for love. The
stone she hurled afar and sprang far after it. He who craved her love
must win without fail three games from this high-born dame. When the
noble maid had done this passing oft, a stately knight did hear it by
the Rhine. He turned his thoughts upon this comely dame, and so heroes
must needs later lose their lives.

One day when the king and his vassals sate and pondered to and fro in
many a wise, whom their lord might take to wife, who would be fit to be
their lady and beseem the land, up spake the lord of the Rhinelands: "I
will go down to the sea and hence to Brunhlld, however it may go with
me. For her love I'll risk my life. I will gladly lose it and she become
not my wife."

"Against that do I counsel you," spake then Siegfried, "if, as ye say,
the queen doth have so fierce a wont, he who wooeth for her love will
pay full dear. Therefore should ye give over the journey."

Then spake King Gunther: "Never was woman born so strong and bold that I
might not vanquish her with mine own hand."

"Be still," spake Siegfried, "ye little know her strength."

"So will I advise you," spake Hagen then, "that ye beg Siegfried to
share with you this heavy task. This is my rede, sith he doth know so
well how matters stand with Brunhild."

The king spake: "Wilt thou help me, noble Siegfried, to woo this lovely
maid? And thou doest what I pray thee and this comely dame become my
love, for thy sake will I risk both life and honor."

To this Siegfried, the son of Siegmund, answered: "I will do it, and
thou give me thy sister Kriemhild, the noble queen. For my pains I ask
no other meed."

"I'll pledge that, Siegfried, in thy hand," spake then Gunther, "and if
fair Brunhild come hither to this land, I'll give thee my sister unto
wife. Then canst thou live ever merrily with the fair."

This the noble warriors swore oaths to do, and so the greater grew their
hardships, till they brought the lady to the Rhine. On this account
these brave men must later be in passing danger. Siegfried had to take
with him hence the cloak which he, the bold hero, had won 'mid dangers
from a dwarf, Alberich he hight. These bold and mighty knights now made
them ready for the journey. When Siegfried wore the Cloak of Darkness
he had strength enow: the force of full twelve men beside his own. With
cunning arts he won the royal maid. This cloak was fashioned so, that
whatsoever any wrought within it, none saw him. Thus he won Brunhild,
which brought him dole.

"Now tell me, good Knight Siegfried, before our trip begin, shall we
not take warriors with us into Brunhild's land, that we may come with
passing honors to the sea? Thirty thousand men-at-arms can soon be
called."

"However many men we take," quoth Siegfried, "the queen doth use so
fierce a wont that they must perish through her haughty pride. I'll give
thee better counsel, O brave and worthy king. Let us fare as wandering
knights adown the Rhine, and I will tell thee those that shall be of the
band. In all four knights, we'll journey to the sea and thus we'll woo
the lady, whatever be our fate thereafter. I shall be one of the four
comrades, the second thou shalt be. Let Hagen be the third (then have
we hope of life), Dankwart then the fourth, the valiant man. A thousand
others durst not match us in the fight."

"Gladly would I know," spake then the king, "ere we go hence ('t would
please me much), what garments we should wear before Brunhild, which
would beseem us there. Pray tell this now to Gunther."

"Weeds of the very best which can be found are worn all times in
Brunhild's land. We must wear rich clothes before the lady, that we feel
no shame when men shall hear the tidings told."

The good knight spake: "Then will I go myself to my dear mother, if
perchance I can bring it to pass that her fair maids purvey us garments
which we may wear with honor before the high-born maid."

Hagen of Troneg spake then in lordly wise: "Wherefore will ye pray your
mother of such service? Let your sister hear what ye have in mind, and
she'll purvey you well for your journey to Brunhild's court."

Then sent he word to his sister, that he would fain see her, and Knight
Siegfried, too, sent word. Ere this happed the fair had clad her passing
well. That these brave men were coming, gave her little grief. Now were
her attendants, too, arrayed in seemly wise. The lordings came, and when
she heard the tale, from her seat she rose and walked in courtly wise to
greet the noble stranger and her brother, too.

"Welcome be my brother and his comrade. I'd gladly know," so spake the
maid, "what ye lords desire, sith ye be thus come to court. Pray let me
hear how it standeth with you noble knights."

Then spake king Gunther: "My lady, I'll tell you now. Maugre our lofty
mood, yet have we mickle care. We would ride a-wooing far into foreign
lands, and for this journey we have need of costly robes."

"Now sit you down, dear brother," spake the royal maid, "and let me hear
aright who these ladies be whom ye fain would woo in the lands of other
kings."

By the hand the lady took the chosen knights and with the twain she
walked to where she sate afore upon a couch, worked, as well I wot, with
dainty figures embossed in gold. There might they have fair pastime
with the ladies. Friendly glances and kindly looks passed now full oft
between the twain. In his heart he bare her, she was dear to him as
life. In after days fair Kriemhild became strong Siegfried's wife.

Then spake the mighty king: "Dear sister mine, without thy help it may
not be. We would go for knightly pastime to Brunhild's land, and have
need of princely garb to wear before the dames."

Then the noble maiden answered: "Dear brother mine, I do you now to wit,
that whatever need ye have of help of mine, that stand I ready to give.
Should any deny you aught, 't would please Kriemhild but ill. Most noble
knights, beseech me not with such concern, but order me with lordly
air to do whatso ye list. I stand at your bidding and will do it with a
will." So spake the winsome maid.

"We would fain, dear sister, wear good attire, and this your noble hand
shall help to choose. Your maidens then must make it fit us, for there
be no help against this journey." Then spake the princess: "Now mark ye
what I say. Silks I have myself; see ye that men do bring us jewels upon
the shields and thus we'll work the clothes. Gunther and Siegfried, too,
gave glad assent.

"Who are the comrades," spake the queen, "who shall fare with you thus
clad to court?"

He spake: "I shall be one of four. My liegemen twain, Dankwart and
Hagen, shall go with me to court. Now mark ye well, my lady, what I say.
Each of us four must have to wear for four whole days three changes
of apparel and such goodly trappings that without shame we may quit
Brunhild's land."

In fitting wise the lords took leave and parted hence. Kriemhild, the
queen, bade thirty of her maidens who were skillful in such work, come
forth from out their bowers. Silks of Araby, white as snow, and the
fair silk of Zazamanc, (2) green as is the clover, they overlaid with
precious stones; that gave garments passing fair. Kriemhild herself, the
high-born maiden, cut them out. Whatso they had at hand of well-wrought
linings from the skin of foreign fish, but rarely seen of folk, they
covered now with silk, as was the wont to wear. (3) Now hear great
marvels of these shining weeds. From the kingdom of Morocco and from
Libya, too, they had great store of the fairest silks which the kith of
any king did ever win. Kriemhild made it well appear what love she bore
the twain. Sith upon the proud journey they had set their minds, they
deemed ermine to be well fit. (4) Upon this lay fine silk as black as
coal. This would still beseem all doughty knights at high festal tides.
From out a setting of Arabian gold there shone forth many a stone. The
ladies' zeal, it was not small, forsooth; in seven weeks they wrought
the robes. Ready, too, were the weapons for the right good knights.

When now they all stood dight, (5) there was built for them in haste
upon the Rhine a sturdy little skiff, that should bear them downward
to the sea. Weary were the noble maids from all their cares. Then the
warriors were told that the brave vestures they should wear were now
prepared; as they had craved it, so it now was done. Then no
longer would they tarry on the Rhine; they sent a message to their
war-companions, if perchance they should care to view their new attire,
to see if it be too long or short. All was found in fitting measure,
and for this they gave the ladies thanks. All who saw them could not but
aver that never in the world had they seen attire more fair. Therefore
they wore it gladly at the court. None wist how to tell of better
knightly weeds. Nor did they fail to give great thanks. Then the lusty
knights craved leave to go, and this the lordings did in courtly wise.
Bright eyes grew dim and moist thereat from weeping.

Kriemhild spake: "Dear brother, ye might better tarry here a while and
pay court to other dames, where ye would not so risk your life; then
would I say well done. Ye might find nearer home a wife of as high a
birth."

I ween their hearts did tell them what would hap. All wept alike, no
matter what men said. The gold upon their breasts was tarnished by their
tears, which thick and fast coursed downward from their eyes.

She spake: "Sir Siegfried, let this dear brother of mine be commended
to your fealty and troth, that naught may harm him in Brunhild's land."
This the full brave knight vowed in Lady Kriemhild's hand.

The mighty warrior spake: "If I lose not my life, ye may be free from
every care, my lady. I'll bring him to you sound again hither to the
Rhine; that know of a surety." The fair maid bowed her thanks.

Men bare their gold-hued shields out to them upon the sands and brought
them all their harness. One bade lead up the steeds, for they would
ride away. Much weeping then was done by comely dames. The winsome maids
stood at the easements. A high wind stirred the ship and sails; the
proud war fellowship embarked upon the Rhine.

Then spake King Gunther: "Who shall be the captain of the ship?"

"That will I," quoth Siegfried, "I wot well how to steer you on the
flood. That know, good knights, the right water ways be well known to
me."

So they parted merrily from out the Burgundian land. Siegfried quickly
grasped an oar and from the shore the stalwart man gan push. Bold
Gunther took the helm himself, and thus the worshipful and speedy
knights set forth from land. With them they took rich food and eke good
wine, the best that could be found along the Rhine. Their steeds stood
fair; they had good easement. Their ship rode well; scant harm did hap
them. Their stout sheet-rope was tightened by the breeze. Twenty leagues
they sailed, or ever came the night, with a good wind, downward toward
the sea. These hard toils later brought the high-mettled warriors pain.

Upon the twelfth-day morning, as we hear say, the winds had borne them
far away to Isenstein in Brunhild's land. To none save Siegfried was
this known; but when King Gunther spied so many castles and broad
marches, too, how soon he spake: "Pray tell me, friend Siegfried, is it
known to you whose are these castles and this lordly land?"

Siegfried answered: "I know it well. It is the land and folk of Brunhild
and the fortress Isenstein, as ye heard me say. Fair ladies ye may still
see there to-day. Methinketh good to advise you heroes that ye be of
one single mind, and that ye tell the selfsame tale. For if we go to-day
before Brunhild, in much jeopardy must we stand before the queen. When
we behold the lovely maiden with her train, then, ye far-famed heroes,
must ye tell but this single tale: that Gunther be my master and I his
man; then what he craveth will come to pass." Full ready they were for
whatever he bade them vow, nor because of pride did any one abstain.
They promised what he would; wherefrom they all fared well, when King
Gunther saw fair Brunhild. (6)

"Forsooth I vow it less for thy sake than for thy sister's, the comely
maid, who is to me as mine own soul and body. Gladly will I bring it to
pass, that she become my wife."


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Isenland" translates here M.H.G. "Islant", which has,
        however, no connection with Iceland in spite of the
        agreement of the names in German.  "Isen lant", the reading
        of the MSS. BJh, has been chosen, partly to avoid confusion,
        and partly to indicate its probable derivation from
        "Isenstein", the name of Brunhild's castle.  Boer's
        interpretation of "Isen" as 'ice' finds corroboration in
        Otfrid's form "isine steina" ('ice stones', i.e. crystals)
        I, 1. 70.  Isenstein would then mean Ice Castle.  In the
        "Thidreksaga" Brunhild's castle is called "Saegarthr" ('Sea
        Garden'), and in a fairy tale (No. 93 of Grimm) "Stromberg",
        referring to the fact that it was surrounded by the sea.
        Here, too, in our poem it stands directly on the shore.
   (2)  "Zazamanc", a fictitious kingdom mentioned only here and a
        few times in Parzival, Wolfram probably having obtained the
        name from this passage.  (See Bartsch, "Germanistische
        Studien", ii, 129.)
   (3)  "Wont to wear".  In the Middle Ages costly furs and
        fish-skins were used as linings and covered, as here
        described, with silk or cloth.  By fish such amphibious
        animals as otter and beaver were often meant.
   (4)  "Well fit".  In this passage "wert", the reading of A and D,
        has been followed, instead of unwert of B and C, as it seems
        more appropriate to the sense.
   (5)  "Dight", 'arrayed'; used by Milton.
   (6)  "Brunhild".  The following words are evidently a late
        interpolation, and weaken the ending, but have been
        translated for the sake of completeness.  They are spoken by
        Siegfried.




ADVENTURE VII. How Gunther Won Brunhild.

Meanwhile their bark had come so near the castle that the king saw many
a comely maiden standing at the casements. Much it irked King Gunther
that he knew them not. He asked his comrade Siegfried: "Hast thou no
knowledge of these maidens, who yonder are gazing downward towards us on
the flood? Whoever be their lord, they are of lofty mood."

At this Sir Siegfried spake: "I pray you, spy secretly among the
high-born maids and tell me then whom ye would choose, and ye had the
power."

"That will I," spake Gunther, the bold and valiant knight. "In yonder
window do I see one stand in snow-white weeds. She is fashioned so fair
that mine eyes would choose her for her comeliness. Had I power, she
should become my wife."

"Right well thine eyes have chosen for thee. It is the noble Brunhild,
the comely maid, for whom thy heart doth strive and eke thy mind and
mood." All her bearing seemed to Gunther good.

When bade the queen her high-born maids go from the windows, for it
behooved them not to be the mark of strangers' eyes. Each one obeyed.
What next the ladies did, hath been told us since. They decked their
persons out to meet the unknown knights, a way fair maids have ever
had. To the narrow casements they came again, where they had seen the
knights. Through love of gazing this was done.

But four there were that were come to land. Through the windows the
stately women saw how Siegfried led a horse out on the sand, whereby
King Gunther felt himself much honored. By the bridle he held the steed,
so stately, good and fair, and large and strong, until King Gunther had
sat him in the saddle. Thus Siegfried served him, the which he later
quite forgot. Such service he had seldom done afore, that he should
stand at any here's stirrup. Then he led his own steed from the ship.
All this the comely dames of noble birth saw through the casements. The
steeds and garments, too, of the lusty knights, of snow-white hue, were
right well matched and all alike; the bucklers, fashioned well, gleamed
in the hands of the stately men. In lordly wise they rode to Brunhild's
hall, their saddles set with precious stones, with narrow martingales,
from which hung bells of bright and ruddy gold. So they came to the
land, as well befit their prowess, with newly sharpened spears, with
well-wrought swords, the which hung down to the spurs of these stately
men. The swords the bold men bore were sharp and broad. All this
Brunhild, the high-born maid, espied.

With the king came Dankwart and Hagen, too. We have heard tales told of
how the knights wore costly raiment, raven black of hue. Fair were their
bucklers, mickle, good and broad. Jewels they wore from the land of
India, the which gleamed gloriously upon their weeds. By the flood they
left their skiff without a guard. Thus the brave knights and good
rode to the castle. Six and eighty towers they saw within, three broad
palaces, (1) and one hall well wrought of costly marble, green as
grass, wherein Brunhild herself sate with her courtiers. The castle was
unlocked and the gates flung wide. Then ran Brunhild's men to meet them
and welcomed the strangers into their mistress' land. One bade relieve
them of their steeds and shields.

Then spake a chamberlain: "Pray give us now your swords and your shining
breastplates, too."

"That we may not grant you," said Hagen of Troneg; "we ourselves will
bear them."

Then gan Siegfried tell aright the tale. "The usage of the castle, let
me say, is such that no guests may here bear arms. Let them now be taken
hence, then will all be well."

Unwillingly Hagen, Gunther's man, obeyed. For the strangers men bade
pour out wine and make their lodgings ready. Many doughty knights were
seen walking everywhere at court in lordly weeds. Mickle and oft were
these heroes gazed upon.

Then the tidings were told to Lady Brunhild, that unknown warriors were
come in lordly raiment, sailing on the flood. The fair and worthy maid
gan ask concerning this. "Pray let me hear," spake the queen, "who be
these unknown knights, who stand so lordly in my castle, and for whose
sake the heroes have journeyed hither?"

Then spake one of the courtiers: "My lady, I can well say that never
have I set eyes on any of them, but one like Siegfried doth stand among
them. Him ye should give fair greetings; that is my rede, in truth. The
second of their fellowship is so worthy of praise that he were easily
a mighty king over broad and princely lands, and he had the power and
might possess them. One doth see him stand by the rest in such right
lordly wise. The third of the fellowship is so fierce and yet withal
so fair of body, most noble queen. By the fierce glances he so oft doth
east, I ween he be grim of thought and mood. The youngest among them
is worshipful indeed. I see the noble knight stand so charmingly, with
courtly bearing, in almost maiden modesty. We might all have cause
for fear, had any done him aught. However blithely he doth practice
chivalry, and howso fair of body he be, yet might he well make many a
comely woman weep, should he e'er grow angry. He is so fashioned that in
all knightly virtues he must be a bold knight and a brave."

Then spake the queen: "Now bring me my attire. If the mighty Siegfried
be come unto this land through love of mine, he doth risk his life. I
fear him not so sore, that I should become his wife."

Brunhild, the fair, was soon well clad. Then went there with her many a
comely maid, full hundred or more, decked out in gay attire. The stately
dames would gaze upon the strangers. With them there walked good knights
from Isenland, Brunhild's men-at-arms, five hundred or more, who bore
swords in hand. This the strangers rued. From their seats then the brave
and lusty heroes rose. When that the queen spied Siegfried, now hear
what the maid did speak.

"Be ye welcome, Siegfried, here in this our land! What doth your journey
mean? That I fain would know."

"Gramercy, my Lady Brunhild, that ye have deigned to greet me, most
generous queen, in the presence of this noble knight who standeth here
before me, for he is my liege lord. This honor I must needs forswear. By
birth he's from the Rhine; what more need I to say? For thy sake are we
come hither. Fain would he woo thee, however he fare. Methink thee now
betimes, my lord will not let thee go. He is hight Gunther and is a
lordly king. An' he win thy love, he doth crave naught more. Forsooth
this knight, so well beseen, did bid me journey hither. I would fain
have given it over, could I have said him nay."

She spake: "Is he thy liege and thou his man, dare he assay the games
which I mete out and gain the mastery, then I'll become his wife; but
should I win, 't will cost you all your lives."

Then up spake Hagen of Troneg: "My lady, let us see your mighty games.
It must indeed go hard, or ever Gunther, my lord, give you the palm. He
troweth well to win so fair a maid."

"He must hurl the stone and after spring and cast the spear with me. Be
ye not too hasty. Ye are like to lose here your honor and your life as
well. Bethink you therefore rightly," spake the lovely maid.

Siegfried, the bold, went to the king and bade him tell the queen
all that he had in mind, he should have no fear. "I'll guard you well
against her with my arts."

Then spake King Gunther: "Most noble queen, now mete out whatso ye list,
and were it more, that would I all endure for your sweet sake. I'll
gladly lose my head, and ye become not my wife."

When the queen heard this speech, she begged them hasten to the games,
as was but meet. She bade purvey her with good armor for the strife: a
breastplate of ruddy gold and a right good shield. A silken surcoat, (2)
too, the maid put on, which sword had never cut in any fray, of silken
cloth of Libya. Well was it wrought. Bright embroidered edging was seen
to shine thereon.

Meanwhile the knights were threatened much with battle cries. Dankwart
and Hagen stood ill at ease; their minds were troubled at the thought of
how the king would speed. Thought they: "Our journey will not bring us
warriors aught of good."

Meanwhile Siegfried, the stately man, or ever any marked it, had hied
him to the ship, where he found his magic cloak concealed. Into it he
quickly slipped and so was seen of none. He hurried back and there he
found a great press of knights, where the queen dealt out her lofty
games. Thither he went in secret wise (by his arts it happed), nor was
he seen of any that were there. The ring had been marked out, where
the games should be, afore many valiant warriors, who were to view them
there. More than seven hundred were seen bearing arms, who were to say
who won the game.

Then was come Brunhild, armed as though she would battle for all royal
lands. Above her silken coat she wore many a bar of gold; gloriously her
lovely color shone beneath the armor. Then came her courtiers, who bare
along a shield of ruddy gold with large broad strips as hard as steel,
beneath the which the lovely maid would fight. As shield-thong there
served a costly band upon which lay jewels green as grass. It shone and
gleamed against the gold. He must needs be passing bold, to whom the
maid would show her love. The shield the maid should bear was three
spans thick beneath the studs, as we are told. Rich enow it was, of
steel and eke of gold, the which four chamberlains could scarcely carry.

When the stalwart Hagen saw the shield borne forth, the knight of Troneg
spake full grim of mood: "How now, King Gunther? How we shall lose our
lives! She you would make your love is the devil's bride, in truth."

Hear now about her weeds; enow of these she had; she wore a surcoat
of silk of Azagoue, (3) noble and costly. Many a lordly stone shone in
contrast to its color on the person of the queen.

Then was brought forth for the lady a spear, sharp, heavy, and large,
the which she cast all time, stout and unwieldy, mickle and broad,
which on its edges cut most fearfully. Of the spear's great weight
hear wonders told. Three and one half weights (4) of iron were wrought
therein, the which scarce three of Brunhild's men could bear. The noble
Gunther gan be sore afraid. Within his heart he thought: "What doth this
mean? How could the devil from hell himself escape alive? Were I safe
and sound in Burgundy, long might she live here free of any love of
mine."

Then spake Hagen's brother, the valiant Dankwart: "The journey to this
court doth rue me sore. We who have ever borne the name of knights, how
must we lose our lives! Shall we now perish at the hands of women in
these lands? It doth irk me much, that ever I came unto this country.
Had but my brother Hagen his sword in hand, and I mine, too, then should
Brunhild's men go softly in their overweening pride. This know for sure,
they'd guard against it well. And had I sworn a peace with a thousand
oaths, before I'd see my dear lord die, the comely maid herself should
lose her life."

"We might leave this land unscathed," spake then his brother Hagen, "had
we the harness which we sorely need and our good swords as well; then
would the pride of this strong dame become a deal more soft."

What the warrior spake the noble maid heard well. Over her shoulders she
gazed with smiling mouth. "Now sith he thinketh himself so brave,
bring them forth their coats-of-mail; put in the warriors' hands their
sharp-edged swords."

When they received their weapons as the maiden bade, bold Dankwart
blushed for very joy. "Now let them play whatso they list," spake the
doughty man. "Gunther is unconquered, since now we have our arms."

Mightily now did Brunhild's strength appear. Into the ring men bare a
heavy stone, huge and great, mickle and round. Twelve brave and valiant
men-at-arms could scarcely bear it. This she threw at all times, when
she had shot the spear. The Burgundians' fear now grew amain.

"Woe is me," cried Hagen. "Whom hath King Gunther chosen for a love?
Certes she should be the foul fiend's bride in hell."

Upon her fair white arm the maid turned back her sleeves; with her hands
she grasped the shield and poised the spear on high. Thus the strife
began. Gunther and Siegfried feared Brunhild's hate, and had Siegfried
not come to Gunther's aid, she would have bereft the king of life.
Secretly Siegfried went and touched his hand; with great fear Gunther
marked his wiles. "Who hath touched me?" thought the valiant man. Then
he gazed around on every side, but saw none standing there.

"'Tis I, Siegfried, the dear friend of thine. Thou must not fear the
queen. Give me the shield from off thy hand and let me bear it and mark
aright what thou dost hear me say. Make thou the motions, I will do the
deeds."

When Gunther knew that it was Siegfried, he was overjoyed.

Quoth Siegfried: "Now hide thou my arts; tell them not to any man; then
can the queen win from thee little fame, albeit she doth desire it. See
how fearlessly the lady standeth now before thee."

Then with might and main the noble maiden hurled the spear at a shield,
mickle, new, and broad, which the son of Siegelind bore upon his arm.
The sparks sprang from the steel, as if the wind did blow. The edge of
the mighty spear broke fully through the shield, so that men saw the
fire flame forth from the armor rings. The stalwart men both staggered
at the blow; but for the Cloak of Darkness they had lain there dead.
From the mouth of Siegfried, the brave, gushed forth the blood. Quickly
the good knight sprang back again and snatched the spear that she had
driven through his shield. Stout Siegfried's hand now sent it back
again. He thought: "I will not pierce the comely maid." So he reversed
the point and cast it at her armor with the butt, that it rang out
loudly from his mighty hand. The sparks flew from the armor rings, as
though driven by the wind. Siegmund's son had made the throw with might.
With all her strength she could not stand before the blow. In faith King
Gunther never could have done the deed.

Brunhild, the fair, how quickly up she sprang! "Gunther, noble knight,
I cry you mercy for the shot." She weened that he had done it with
his strength. To her had crept a far more powerful man. Then went she
quickly, angry was her mood. The noble maid and good raised high the
stone and hurled it mightily far from her hand. After the cast she
sprang, that all her armor rang, in truth. The stone had fallen twelve
fathoms hence, but with her leap the comely maid out-sprang the throw.
Then went Sir Siegfried to where lay the stone. Gunther poised it, while
the hero made the throw. Siegfried was bold, strong, and tall; he threw
the stone still further and made a broader jump. Through his fair arts
he had strength enow to bear King Gunther with him as he sprang. The
leap was made, the stone lay on the ground; men saw none other save
Gunther, the knight, alone. Siegfried had banished the fear of King
Gunther's death. Brunhild, the fair, waxed red with wrath. To her
courtiers she spake a deal too loud, when she spied the hero safe and
sound at the border of the ring: "Come nearer quickly, ye kinsmen and
liegemen of mine, ye must now be subject to Gunther, the king."

Then the brave knights laid aside their arms and paid their homage at
the feet of mighty Gunther from the Burgundian land. They weened that he
had won the games by his own strength alone. He greeted them in loving
wise; in sooth he was most rich in virtues.

Then the lovely maiden took him by the hand; full power she granted him
within the land. At this Hagen, the bold and doughty knight, rejoiced
him. She bade the noble knight go with her hence to the spacious palace.
When this was done, they gave the warriors with their service better
cheer. With good grace Hagen and Dankwart now must needs submit. The
doughty Siegfried was wise enow and bare away his magic cloak. Then he
repaired to where the ladies sate. To the king he spake and shrewdly
did he this: "Why wait ye, good my lord? Why begin ye not the games, of
which the queen doth deal so great a store? Let us soon see how they be
played." The crafty man did not as though he wist not a whit thereof.

Then spake the Queen: "How hath it chanced that ye, Sir Siegfried, have
seen naught of the games which the hand of Gunther here hath won?"

To this Hagen of the Burgundian land made answer. He spake: "Ye have
made us sad of mind, my lady. Siegfried, the good knight, was by the
ship when the lord of the Rhineland won from you the games. He knoweth
naught thereof."

"Well is me of this tale," spake Siegfried, the knight, "that your pride
hath been brought thus low, and that there doth live a wight who hath
the power to be your master. Now, O noble maiden, must ye follow us
hence to the Rhine."

Then spake the fair-fashioned maid: "That may not be. First must my kith
and liegemen learn of this. Certes, I may not so lightly void my lands;
my dearest friends must first be fetched."

Then bade she messengers ride on every side. She called her friends,
her kinsmen, and her men-at-arms and begged them come without delay to
Isenstein, and bade them all be given lordly and rich apparel. Daily,
early and late, they rode in troops to Brunhild's castle.

"Welaway," cried Hagen, "what have we done! We may ill abide the coming
of fair Brunhild's men. If now they come into this land in force, then
hath the noble maid been born to our great rue. The will of the queen is
unknown to us; what if she be so wroth that we be lost?"

Then the stalwart Siegfried spake: "Of that I'll have care. I'll not let
hap that which ye fear. I'll bring you help hither to this land, from
chosen knights the which till now ye have not known. Ye must not ask
about me; I will fare hence. Meanwhile may God preserve your honor. I'll
return eftsoon and bring you a thousand men, the very best of knights
that I have ever known."

"Pray tarry not too long," spake then the king; "of your help we be
justly glad."

He answered: "In a few short days I'll come again. Tell ye to Brunhild,
that ye've sent me hence."


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Palaces".  See Adventure III, note 7.
   (2)  "Surcoat", which here translates the M.H.G. "wafenhemde", is
        a light garment of cloth or silk worn above the armor.
   (3)  "Azagouc".  See Zazamanc, Adventure VI, note 2.  This
        strophe is evidently a late interpolation, as it contradicts
        the description given above.
   (4)  Weights.  The M.H.G. "messe" (Lat. "masse") is just as
        indefinite as the English expression.  It was a mass or lump
        of any metal, probably determined by the size of the
        melting-pot.




ADVENTURE VIII. How Siegfried Fared To His Men-At-Arms, the Nibelungs.

(1)

Through the gate Siegfried hied him in his Cloak of Darkness down to the
sand, where he found a skiff. Secretly the son of Siegmund embarked and
drove it quickly hence, as though the wind did blow it on. None saw the
steersman; the bark fared fast, impelled by Siegfried's mighty strength.
They weened a seldom strong wind did drive it on. Nay, it was rowed
by Siegfried, the son of Siegelind, the fair. In the time of a day and
night with might and main he reached a land full hundred rests (2) away,
or more. The people hight Nibelungs, where he owned the mighty hoard.
The hero rowed alone to a broad isle, where the lusty knight now beached
the boat and made it fast full soon. To a hill he hied him, upon which
stood a castle, and sought here lodgment, as way-worn travelers do. He
came first to a gateway that stood fast locked. In sooth they guarded
well their honor, as men still do. The stranger now gan knock upon
the door, the which was closely guarded. There within he saw a giant
standing, who kept the castle and at whose side lay at all times his
arms. He spake: "Who is it who doth knock so rudely on the gate?"

Then bold Siegfried changed his voice and spake: "I am a knight; do up
the door, else will I enrage many a one outside to-day, who would liefer
lie soft and take his ease."

When Siegfried thus spake, it irked the warder. Meanwhile the giant had
donned his armor and placed his helm upon his head. Quickly the mighty
man snatched up his shield and opened wide the gate. How fiercely he
ran at Siegfried and asked, how he durst wake so many valiant men? Huge
blows were dealt out by his hand. Then the lordly stranger gan defend
him, but with an iron bar the warder shattered his shield-plates. Then
was the hero in dire need. Siegfried gan fear a deal his death, when the
warder struck such mighty blows. Enow his master Siegfried loved him for
this cause. They strove so sore that all the castle rang and the sound
was heard in Nibelung's hall. He overcame the warder and bound him, too.

The tale was noised abroad in all the Nibelungs' land. Alberich, the
bold, a savage dwarf, heard the fierce struggle through the mountain.
He armed him quick and ran to where he found the noble stranger, as he
bound the mighty giant. Full wroth was Alberich and strong enow. On his
body he bare helmet and rings of mail and in his hand a heavy scourge of
gold. Swift and hard he ran to where Siegfried stood. Seven heavy knobs
(3) hung down in front, with which he smote so fiercely the shield upon
the bold man's arm, that it brake in parts. The stately stranger came in
danger of his life. From his hand he flung the broken shield and thrust
into the sheath a sword, the which was long. He would not strike his
servant dead, but showed his courtly breeding as his knightly virtue
bade him. He rushed at Alberich and with his powerful hands he seized
the gray-haired man by the beard. So roughly he pulled his beard, that
he screamed aloud. The tugging of the youthful knight hurt Alberich
sore.

Loud cried the valiant dwarf: "Now spare my life. And might I be the
vassal of any save one knight, to whom I swore an oath that I would own
him as my lord, I'd serve you till my death." So spake the cunning (4)
man.

He then bound Alberich as he had the giant afore. Full sore the strength
of Siegfried hurt him. The dwarf gan ask: "How are ye named?"

"My name is Siegfried," he replied; "I deemed ye knew me well."

"Well is me of these tidings," spake Alberich, the dwarf. "Now have I
noted well the knightly deeds, through which ye be by right the sovran
of the land. I'll do whatso ye bid, and ye let me live."

Then spake Sir Siegfried: "Go quickly now and bring me the best of
knights we have, a thousand Nibelungs, that they may see me here."

Why he wanted this, none heard him say. He loosed the bonds of Alberich
and the giant. Then ran Alberich swift to where he found the knights. In
fear he waked the Nibelung men. He spake: "Up now, ye heroes, ye must go
to Siegfried."

From their beds they sprang and were ready in a trice. A thousand
doughty knights soon stood well clad. They hied them to where they saw
Sir Siegfried stand. Then was done a fair greeting, in part by deeds.
Great store of tapers were now lit up; they proffered him mulled wine.
(5) He gave them thanks that they were come so soon. He spake: "Ye must
away with me across the flood."

Full ready for this he found the heroes brave and good. Well thirty
hundred men were come eftsoon, from whom he chose a thousand of the
best. Men brought them their helmets and other arms, for he would lead
them to Brunhild's land. He spake: "Ye good knights, this will I tell
you, ye must wear full costly garments there at court, for many lovely
dames shall gaze upon us. Therefore must ye deck yourselves with goodly
weeds."

Early on a morn they started on their way. What a speedy journey
Siegfried won! They took with them good steeds and lordly harness, and
thus they came in knightly wise to Brunhild's land. The fair maids stood
upon the battlements. Then spake the queen: "Knoweth any, who they be
whom I see sailing yonder far out upon the sea? They have rich sails
e'en whiter than the snow."

Quoth the king of the Rhineland: "They're men of mine, the which I left
hard by here on the way. I had them sent for, and now they be come, my
lady." All eyes were fixed upon the lordly strangers.

Then one spied Siegfried standing at his vessel's prow in lordly weeds
and many other men. The queen spake: "Sir King, pray tell me, shall I
receive the strangers or shall I deny them greetings?"

He spake: "Ye must go to meet them out before the palace, that they may
well perceive how fain we be to see them here."

Then the queen did as the king advised her. She marked out Siegfried
with her greetings from the rest. Men purveyed them lodgings and took
in charge their trappings. So many strangers were now come to the land,
that everywhere they jostled Brunhild's bands. Now would the valiant men
fare home to Burgundy.

Then spake the queen: "My favor would I bestow on him who could deal out
to the king's guests and mine my silver and gold, of which I have such
store."

To this Dankwart, King Giselher's liegeman, answered: "Most noble
queen," spake the brave knight, "let me but wield the keys. I trow to
deal it out in fitting wise; whatso of blame I gain, let be mine own."
That he was bountiful, he made appear full well.

When now Sir Hagen's brother took the keys in charge, the hero's hand
did proffer many a costly gift. He who craved a mark (6) received such
store that all the poor might lead a merry life. Full hundred pounds
he gave, nor did he stop to count. Enow walked before the hall in rich
attire, who never had worn afore such lordly dress. Full sore it rued
the queen when this she heard. She spake: "Sir King, I fain would have
your aid, lest your chamberlain leave naught of all my store of dress;
he squandereth eke my gold. If any would forfend this, I'd be his friend
for aye. He giveth such royal gifts, the knight must ween, forsooth,
that I have sent for death. I would fain use it longer and trow well
myself to waste that which my father left me." No queen as yet hath ever
had so bounteous a chamberlain.

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "My lady, be it told you that the king of
the Rhineland hath such great store of gold and robes to give, that we
have no need to carry hence aught of Brunhild's weeds."

"Nay, and ye love me," spake the queen, "let me fill twenty traveling
chests with gold and silk as well, the which my hand shall give, when we
are come across to Gunther's land."

Men filled her chests with precious stones, the while her chamberlains
stood by. She would not trust the duty to Giselher's men. Gunther and
Hagen began to laugh thereat.

Then spake the queen: "With whom shall I leave my lands? This my hand
and yours must first decree."

Quoth the noble king: "Now bid draw near whom ye deem fit and we will
make him steward."

The lady spied near by one of her highest kin (it was her mother's
brother); to him the maiden spake: "Now let be commended to your care my
castles and my lands, till that King Gunther's hand rule here."

Then twenty hundred of her men she chose, who should fare with her hence
to Burgundy, together with those thousand warriors from the Nibelung
land. They dressed their journey; one saw them riding forth upon the
sand. Six and eighty dames they took along and thereto a hundred maids,
their bodies passing fair. No longer now they tarried, for they were
fain to get them hence. Ho, what great wail was made by those they
left at home! In courtly wise she voided thus her land. She kissed her
nearest kinsmen who were found at court. After a fair leave-taking they
journeyed to the sea. To her fatherland the lady nevermore returned.
Many kinds of games were seen upon the way; pastimes they had galore.
A real sea breeze did help them on their voyage. Thus they fared forth
from the land fully merrily. She would not let her husband court her
on the way; this pleasure was deferred until their wedding-tide in
the castle, their home, at Worms, to which in good time she came right
joyfully with all her knights.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  Adventure VIII.  This whole episode, in which Siegfried
        fetches men to aid Gunther in case of attempted treachery on
        Brunhild's part, is of late origin and has no counterpart in
        the older versions.  It is a further development of
        Siegfried's fight in which he slew Schilbung and Nibelung
        and became the ruler of the Nibelung land.  The fight with
        Alberich is simply a repetition of the one in the former
        episode.
   (2)  "Rest" (M.H.G. "rast"), originally 'repose', then used as a
        measure of distance, as here.
   (3)  "Knobs", round pieces of metal fastened to the scourge.
   (4)  "Cunning" is to be taken here in the Biblical sense of
        'knowing'.  The M.H.G. "listig" which it here translates,
        denotes 'skilled' or 'learned' in various arts and is a
        standing epithet of dwarfs.
   (5)  "Mulled wine" translates M.H.G. "lutertranc", a claret
        mulled with herbs and spice and left to stand until clear.
   (6)  "Mark".  See Adventure V, note 5.




ADVENTURE IX. How Siegfried Was Sent To Worms.

When they had thus fared on their way full nine days, Hagen of Troneg
spake: "Now mark ye what I say. We wait too long with the tidings for
Worms upon the Rhine. Our messengers should be e'en now in Burgundy."

Then spake King Gunther: "Ye have told me true, and none be more fitting
for this trip than ye, friend Hagen; now ride ye to my land. None can
acquaint them better with our journey home to court."

To this Hagen made answer: "I am no fit envoy. Let me play chamberlan,
I'll stay with the ladies upon the flood and guard their robes, until
we bring them to the Burgundian land. Bid Siegfried bear the message, he
knoweth how to do it well with his mighty strength. If he refuse you the
journey, then must ye in courtly and gentle wise pray him of the boon
for your sister's sake."

Gunther sent now for the warrior, who came to where he stood. He spake:
"Sith we be now nearing my lands at home, it behooveth me to send a
messenger to the dear sister of mine and to my mother, too, that we draw
near the Rhine. This I pray you, Siegfried; now do my will, that I may
requite it to you ever," spake the good knight.

Siegfried, the passing bold man, however said him nay, till Gunther
gan beseech him sore. He spake: "Ye must ride for my sake and for
Kriemhild's too, the comely maiden, so that the royal maid requite it,
as well as I."

When Siegfried heard these words, full ready was the knight. "Now bid me
what ye will; naught shall be withheld. I will do it gladly for the fair
maid's sake. Why should I refuse her whom I bear in heart? Whatso ye
command for love of her, shall all be done."

"Then tell my mother Uta, the queen, that we be of lofty mood upon this
voyage. Let my brothers know how we have fared. These tidings must ye
let our friends hear, too. Hide naught from my fair sister, give her
mine and Brunhild's greetings. Greet the retainers, too, and all my men.
How well I have ended that for which my heart hath ever striven! And
tell Ortwin, the dear nephew of mine, that he bid seats be built at
Worms along the Rhine. Let my other kinsmen know that I am willed to
hold with Brunhild a mighty wedding feast. And tell my sister, when she
hath heard that I be come with my guests to the land, that she give fair
greeting to my bride. For that I will ever render Kriemhild service."

The good Lord Siegfried soon took leave of Lady Brunhild, as beseemed
him well, and of all her train; then rode he to the Rhine. Never might
there be a better envoy in this world. He rode with four and twenty
men-at-arms to Worms; he came without the king. When that was noised
about, the courtiers all were grieved; they feared their master had been
slain.

Then they dismounted from their steeds, high stood their mood. Giselher,
the good young king, came soon to meet them, and Gernot his brother,
too. How quickly then he spake, when he saw not Gunther at Siegfried's
side: "Be welcome, Siegfried; pray let me know where ye have left the
king my brother? The prowess of Brunhild, I ween, hath ta'en him from
us. Great scathe had her haughty love then brought us."

"Let be this fear. My battle-comrade sendeth greetings to you and to his
kin. I left him safe and sound. He sent me on ahead, that I might be his
messenger with tidings hither to this land. Pray have a care, however
that may hap, that I may see the queen and your sister, too, for I must
let them hear what message Gunther and Brunhild have sent them. Both are
in high estate."

Then spake Giselher, the youth: "Now must ye go to her, for ye have
brought my much of joy. She is mickle fearful for my brother. I'll
answer that the maid will see you gladly."

Then spake Sir Siegfried: "Howsoever I may serve her, that shall be
gladly done, in faith. Who now will tell the ladies that I would hie me
thither?"

Giselher then became the messenger, the stately man. The doughty knight
spake to his mother and his sister too, when that he saw them both: "To
us is come Siegfried, the hero from Netherland; him my brother Gunther
hath sent hither to the Rhine. He bringeth the news of how it standeth
with the king. Pray let him therefore come to court. He'll tell you the
right tidings straight from Isenland."

As yet the noble ladies were acquaint with fear, but now for their weeds
they sprang and dressed them and bade Sir Siegfried come to court. This
he did full gladly, for he was fain to see them. Kriemhild, the noble
maid, addressed him fair: "Be welcome, Sir Siegfried, most worshipful
knight. Where is my brother Gunther, the noble and mighty king? We ween
that we have lost him through Brunhild's strength. Woe is me, poor maid,
that ever I was born."

Then spake the daring knight: "Now give me an envoy's guerdon, ye
passing fair ladies, ye do weep without a cause. I do you to wit, I left
him safe and sound. They have sent me with the tidings to you both. He
and his bride do send you kindly greetings and a kinsman's love, O noble
queen. Now leave off your weeping, they'll come full soon."

In many a day she had not heard a tale so glad. With her snow-white
hem she wiped the tears from her pretty eyes and began to thank the
messenger for the tidings, which now were come. Thus her great sorrow
and her weeping were taken away. She bade the messenger be seated; full
ready he was for this. Then spake the winsome maid: "I should not rue
it, should I give you as an envoy's meed my gold. For that ye are too
rich, but I will be your friend in other ways."

"And had I alone," spake he, "thirty lands, yet would I gladly receive
gifts from your fair hand."

Then spake the courtly maid: "It shall be done." She bade her
chamberlain go fetch the meed for tidings. Four and twenty arm-rings,
set with goodly gold, she gave him as his meed. So stood the hero's mood
that he would not retain them, but gave them straightway to her nearest
maidens, he found within the bower. Full kindly her mother offered him
her service. "I am to tell you the tale," then spake the valiant man,
"of what the king doth pray you, when he cometh to the Rhine. If ye
perform that, my lady, he'll ever hold you in his love. I heard him
crave that ye should give fair greetings to his noble guests and grant
him the boon, that ye ride to meet him out in front of Worms upon the
strand. This ye are right truly admonished by the king to do."

Then spake the winsome maid: "For this am I full ready. In whatsoever
wise I can serve the king, that will I not refuse; with a kinsman's
love it shall be done." Her color heightened for very joy. Never was the
messenger of any prince received more fair. The lady would have kissed
him, had she but dared. How lovingly he parted from the dames!

The men of Burgundy then did as Siegfried counseled. Sindolt and Hunolt
and Rumolt, the knight, must needs be busy with the work of putting up
the seats outside of Worms upon the strand. The royal stewards, too,
were found at work. Ortwin and Gere would not desist, but sent to fetch
their friends on every side, and made known to them the feasting that
was to be. The many comely maids arrayed themselves against the feast.
Everywhere the palace and the walls were decked out for the guests.
Gunther's hall was passing well purveyed for the many strangers. Thus
began full merrily this splendid feast.

From every side along the highways of the land pricked now the kinsmen
of these three kings, who had been called that they might wait upon
those who were coming home. Then from the presses great store of costly
weeds was taken. Soon tidings were brought that men saw Brunhild's
kinsmen ride along. Great jostling then arose from the press of folk in
the Burgundian land. Ho, what bold knights were found on either side!

Then spake fair Kriemhild: "Ye maids of mine, who would be with me at
the greeting, seek out from the guests the very best of robes; then will
praise and honor be given us by the guests." Then came the warriors,
too, and bade the lordly saddles of pure red gold be carried forth,
on which the ladies should ride from Worms down to the Rhine. Better
trappings might there never be. Ho, what bright gold did sparkle on
the jet-black palfreys! From their bridles there gleamed forth many a
precious stone. The golden stepping-blocks were brought and placed on
shining carpets for the ladies, who were gay of mood. As I have said,
the palfreys now stood ready in the courtyard for the noble maids. One
saw the steeds wear narrow martingales of the best of silk, of which
tale might be told. Six and eighty ladies who wore fillets (1) in their
hair were seen come forth. The fair ones came to Kriemhild wearing
glittering robes. Then followed many a comely maid in brave attire,
fifty and four from the Burgundian land. They were eke the best that
might anywhere be found. Men saw them walking with their flaxen hair and
shining ribbons. That which the king desired was done with zeal. They
wore before the stranger knights rich cloth of silk, the best that
could be found, and so many a goodly robe, which well befit their ample
beauty. One found there many clothes of sable and ermine fur. Many an
arm and hand was well adorned with bracelets over the silken sleeves,
which they should wear. None might tell the story of this tiring to the
end. Many a hand played with well-wrought girdles, rich and long, above
gay colored robes, over costly ferran (2) skirts of silken cloth of
Araby. In high spirits were these maids of noble birth. Clasps (3) were
sewed in lovely wise upon the dress of many a comely maid. She had good
cause to rue it, whose bright color did not shine in contrast to her
weeds. No kingly race hath now such fair retainers. When now the lovely
maids had donned the garments they should wear, there then drew near a
mickle band of high-mettled champions. Together with their shields they
carried many an ashen spear.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Fillets" were worn only by married women.
   (2)  "Ferran", a gray colored cloth of silk and wool; from O.F.
        "ferrandine".
   (3)  "Clasps" or "brooches" were used to fasten the dresses in
        front.




ADVENTURE X. How Brunhild Was Received At Worms.

Across the Rhine men saw the king with his guests in many bands pricking
to the shore. One saw the horse of many a maiden, too, led by the
bridle. All those who should give them welcome were ready now. When
those of Isenland and Siegfried's Nibelung men were come across in
boats, they hasted to the shore (not idle were their hands), where the
kindred of the king were seen upon the other bank. Now hear this tale,
too, of the queen, the noble Uta, how she herself rode hither with the
maidens from the castle. Then many a knight and maid became acquaint.
Duke Gere led Kriemhild's palfroy by the bridle till just outside
the castle gate. Siegfried, the valiant knight, must needs attend her
further. A fair maid was she! Later the noble dame requited well this
deed. Ortwin, the bold, rode by Lady Uta's side, and many knights and
maidens rode in pairs. Well may we aver that so many dames were never
seen together at such stately greeting. Many a splendid joust was
ridden by worshipful knights (not well might it be left undone) afore
Kriemhild, the fair, down to the ships. Then the fair-fashioned ladies
were lifted from the palfreys. The king was come across and many a
worthy guest. Ho, what stout lances brake before the ladies' eyes! One
heard the clash of many hurtling shields. Ho, what costly bucklers rang
loudly as they closed! The lovely fair stood by the shore as Gunther and
his guests alighted from the boats; he himself led Brunhild by the hand.
Bright gems and gleaming armor shone forth in rivalry. Lady Kriemhild
walked with courtly breeding to meet Dame Brunhild and her train.
White hands removed the chaplets, (1) as these twain kissed each other;
through deference this was done.

Then in courteous wise the maiden Kriemhild spake: "Be ye welcome in
these lands of ours, to me and to my mother and to all the loyal kin we
have."

Low bows were made and the ladies now embraced full oft. Such loving
greeting hath one never heard, as the two ladies, Dame Uta and her
daughter, gave the bride; upon her sweet mouth they kissed her oft. When
now Brunhild's ladies all were come to land, stately knights took many
a comely woman by the hand in loving wise. The fair-fashioned maids were
seen to stand before the lady Brunhild. Long time elasped or ever the
greetings all were done; many a rose-red mouth was kissed, in sooth.
Still side by side the noble princesses stood, which liked full well
the doughty warriors for to see. They who had heard men boast afore that
such beauty had ne'er been seen as these two dames possessed, spied now
with all their eyes and must confess the truth. Nor did one see upon
their persons cheats of any kind. Those who wot how to judge of women
and lovely charms, praised Gunther's bride for beauty; but the wise had
seen more clear and spake, that one must give Kriemhild the palm before
Brunhild.

Maids and ladies now drew near each other. Many a comely dame was seen
arrayed full well. Silken tents and many rich pavilions stood hard by,
the which quite filled the plain of Worms. The kinsmen of the king came
crowding around, when Brunhild and Kriemhild and with them all the dames
were bidden go to where shade was found. Thither the knights from the
Burgundian land escorted them.

Now were the strangers come to horse, and shields were pierced in many
royal jousts. From the plain the dust gan rise, as though the whole land
had burst forth into flames. There many a knight became well known as
champion. Many a maiden saw what there the warriors plied. Methinks,
Sir Siegfried and his knights rode many a turn afore the tents. He led a
thousand stately Nibelungs.

Then Hagen of Troneg came, as the king had counseled, and parted in
gentle wise the jousting, that the fair maids be not covered with the
dust, the which the strangers willingly obeyed. Then spake Sir Gernot:
"Let stand the steeds till the air grow cooler, for ye must be full
ready when that the king will ride. Meanwhile let us serve the comely
dames before the spacious hall."

When now over all the plain the jousts had ceased, the knights, on
pastime bent, hied them to the ladies under many a high pavilion in the
hope of lofty joys. There they passed the hours until they were minded
to ride away.

Just at eventide, when the sun was setting and the air grew chill, no
longer they delayed, but man and woman hasted toward the castle. Many a
comely maiden was caressed with loving glances. In jousting great store
of clothes were torn by good knights, by the high-mettled warriors,
after the custom of the land, until the king dismounted by the hall.
Valiant heroes helped the ladies, as is their wont. The noble queens
then parted; Lady Uta and her daughter went with their train to a
spacious hall, where great noise of merriment was heard on every side.

The seats were now made ready, for the king would go to table with his
guests. At his side men saw fair Brunhild stand, wearing the crown in
the king's domain. Royal enow she was in sooth. Good broad tables, with
full many benches for the men, were set with vitaille, as we are told.
Little they lacked that they should have! At the king's table many a
lordly guest was seen. The chamberlains of the host bare water forth in
basins of ruddy gold. It were but in vain, if any told you that men were
ever better served at princes' feasts: I would not believe you that.

Before the lord of the Rhineland took the water to wash his hands,
Siegfried did as was but meet, he minded him by his troth of what he had
promised, or ever he had seen Brunhild at home in Isenland. He spake:
"Ye must remember how ye swore me by your hand, that when Lady Brunhild
came to this land, ye would give me your sister to wife. Where be now
these oaths? I have suffered mickle hardship on our trip."

Then spake the king to his guest: "Rightly have ye minded me. Certes my
hand shall not be perjured. I'll bring it to pass as best I can."

Then they bade Kriemhild go to court before the king. She came with her
fair maidens to the entrance of the hall. At this Sir Giselher sprang
down the steps. "Now bid these maidens turn again. None save my sister
alone shall be here by the king."

Then they brought Kriemhild to where the king was found. There stood
noble knights from many princes' lands; throughout the broad hall one
bade them stand quite still. By this time Lady Brunhild had stepped
to the table, too. Then spake King Gunther: "Sweet sister mine, by thy
courtesie redeem my oath. I swore to give thee to a knight, and if he
become thy husband, then hast thou done my will most loyally."

Quoth the noble maid: "Dear brother mine, ye must not thus entreat me.
Certes I'll be ever so, that whatever ye command, that shall be done.
I'll gladly pledge my troth to him whom ye, my lord, do give me to
husband."

Siegfried here grew red at the glance of friendly eyes. The knight then
proffered his service to Lady Kriemhild. Men bade them take their stand
at each other's side within the ring and asked if she would take the
stately man. In maidenly modesty she was a deal abashed, yet such was
Siegfried's luck and fortune, that she would not refuse him out of hand.
The noble king of Netherland vowed to take her, too, to wife. When he
and the maid had pledged their troths, Siegfried's arm embraced eftsoon
the winsome maid. Then the fair queen was kissed before the knights. The
courtiers parted, when that had happed; on the bench over against the
king Siegfried was seen to take his scat with Kriemhild. Thither many
a man accompanied him as servitor; men saw the Nibelungs walk at
Siegfried's side.

The king had seated him with Brunhild, the maid, when she espied
Kriemhild (naught had ever irked her so) sitting at Siegfried's side.
She began to weep and hot tears coursed down fair cheeks. Quoth the lord
of the land: "What aileth you, my lady, that ye let bright eyes grow
dim? Ye may well rejoice; my castles and my land and many a stately
vassal own your sway."

"I have good cause to weep," spake the comely maid; "my heart is sore
because of thy sister, whom I see sitting so near thy vassal's side. I
must ever weep that she be so demeaned."

Then spake the King Gunther: "Ye would do well to hold your peace. At
another time I will tell you the tale of why I gave Siegfried my sister
unto wife. Certes she may well live ever happily with the knight."

She spake: "I sorrow ever for her beauty and her courtesie. I fain would
flee, and I wist whither I might; go, for never will I lie close by
your side, unless ye tell me through what cause Kriemhild be Siegfried's
bride."

Then spake the noble king: "I'll do it you to wit; he hath castles
and broad domains, as well as I. Know of a truth, he is a mighty king,
therefore did I give him the peerless maid to love."

But whatsoever the king might say, she remained full sad of mood.

Now many a good knight hastened from the board. Their hurtling waxed so
passing hard, that the whole castle rang. But the host was weary of his
guests. Him-thought that he might lie more soft at his fair lady's side.
As yet he had not lost at all the hope that much of joy might hap to him
through her. Lovingly he began to gaze on Lady Brunhild. Men bade the
guests leave off their knightly games, for the king and his wife would
go to bed. Brunhild and Kriemhild then met before the stairway of the
hall, as yet without the hate of either. Then came their retinue. Noble
chamberlains delayed not, but brought them lights. The warriors, the
liegemen of the two kings, then parted on either side and many of the
knights were seen to walk with Siegfried.

The lords were now come to the rooms where they should lie. Each of the
twain thought to conquer by love his winsome dame. This made them blithe
of mood. Siegfried's pleasure on that night was passing great. When Lord
Siegfried lay at Kriemhild's side and with his noble love caressed the
high-born maid so tenderly, she grew as dear to him as life, so that not
for a thousand other women would he have given her alone. No more I'll
tell how Siegfried wooed his wife; hear now the tale of how King Gunther
lay by Lady Brunhild's side. The stately knight had often lain more
soft by other dames. The courtiers now had left, both maid and man. The
chamber soon was locked; he thought to caress the lovely maid. Forsooth
the time was still far off, ere she became his wife. In a smock of snowy
linen she went to bed. Then thought the noble knight: "Now have I here
all that I have ever craved in all my days." By rights she must needs
please him through her comeliness. The noble king gan shroud the lights
and then the bold knight hied him to where the lady lay. He laid him at
her side, and great was his joy when in his arms he clasped the lovely
fair. Many loving caresses he might have given, had but the noble dame
allowed it. She waxed so wroth that he was sore a-troubled; he weened
that they were lovers, but he found here hostile hate. She spake: "Sir
Knight, pray give this over, which now ye hope. Forsooth this may not
hap, for I will still remain a maid, until I hear the tale; now mark ye
that."

Then Gunther grew wroth; he struggled for her love and rumpled all her
clothes. The high-born maid then seized her girdle, the which was a
stout band she wore around her waist, and with it she wrought the king
great wrong enow. She bound him hand and foot and bare him to a nail and
hung him on the wall. She forbade him love, sith he disturbed her sleep.
Of a truth he came full nigh to death through her great strength.

Then he who had weened to be the master, began to plead. "Now loose my
bands, most noble queen. I no longer trow to conquer you, fair lady, and
full seldom will I lie so near your side."

She reeked not how he felt, for she lay full soft. There he had to hang
all night till break of day, until the bright morn shone through the
casements. Had he ever had great strength, it was little seen upon him
now.

"Now tell me, Sir Gunther, would that irk you aught," the fair maid
spake, "and your servants found you bound by a woman's hand?"

Then spake the noble knight: "That would serve you ill; nor would it
gain me honor," spake the doughty man. "By your courtesie, pray let me
lie now by your side. Sith that my love mislike you so, I will not touch
your garment with my hands."

Then she loosed him soon and let him rise. To the bed again, to the lady
he went and laid him down so far away, that thereafter he full seldom
touched her comely weeds. Nor would she have allowed it.

Then their servants came and brought them new attire, of which great
store was ready for them against the morn. However merry men made, the
lord of the land was sad enow, albeit he wore a crown that day. As
was the usage which they had and which they kept by right, Gunther and
Brunhild no longer tarried, but hied them to the minster, where mass was
sung. Thither, too, Sir Siegfried came and a great press arose among the
crowd. In keeping with their royal rank, there was ready for them all
that they did need, their crowns and robes as well. Then they were
consecrated. When this was done, all four were seen to stand joyful
'neath their crowns. Many young squires, six hundred or better, were now
girt with sword in honor of the kings, as ye must know. Great joy rose
then in the Burgundian land; one heard spear-shafts clashing in the
hands of the sworded knights. There at the windows the fair maids sat;
they saw shining afore them the gleam of many a shield. But the king had
sundered him from his liegemen; whatso others plied, men saw him stand
full sad. Unlike stood his and Siegfried's mood. The noble knight and
good would fain have known what ailed the king. He hasted to him and gan
ask: "Pray let me know how ye have fared this night, Sir King."

Then spake the king to his guest: "Shame and disgrace have I won; I have
brought a fell devil to my house and home. When I weened to love her,
she bound me sore; she bare me to a nail and hung me high upon a wall.
There I hung affrighted all night until the day, or ever she unbound me.
How softly she lay bedded there! In hope of thy pity do I make plaint to
thee as friend to friend."

Then spake stout Siegfried: "That rueth me in truth. I'll do you this to
wit; and ye allow me without distrust, I'll contrive that she lie by you
so near this night, that she'll nevermore withhold from you her love."

After all his hardships Gunther liked well this speech. Sir Siegfried
spake again: "Thou mayst well be of good cheer. I ween we fared unlike
last night. Thy sister Kriemhild is dearer to me than life; the Lady
Brunhild must become thy wife to-night. I'll come to thy chamber this
night, so secretly in my Cloud Cloak, that none may note at all my arts.
Then let the chamberlains betake them to their lodgings and I'll put out
the lights in the pages' hands, whereby thou mayst know that I be within
and that I'll gladly serve thee. I'll tame for time thy wife, that thou
mayst have her love to-night, or else I'll lose my life."

"Unless be thou embrace my dear lady," spake then the king, "I shall be
glad, if thou do to her as thou dost list. I could endure it well, an'
thou didst take her life. In sooth she is a fearful wife."

"I pledge upon my troth," quoth Siegfried, "that I will not embrace her.
The fair sister of thine, she is to me above all maids that I have ever
seen."

Gunther believed full well what Siegfried spake.

From the knightly sports there came both joy and woe; but men forbade
the hurtling and the shouting, since now the ladies were to hie them to
the hall. The grooms-in-waiting bade the people stand aside; the court
was cleared of steeds and folk. A bishop led each of the ladies, as they
should go to table in the presence of the kings. Many a stately warrior
followed to the seats. In fair hope the king sate now full merrily; well
he thought on that which Siegfried had vowed to do. This one day thought
him as long as thirty days, for all his thoughts were bent upon his
lady's love. He could scarce abide the time to leave the board. Now men
let fair Brunhild and Kriemhild, too, both go to their rest. Ho, what
doughty knights were seen to walk before the queens!

The Lord Siegfried sate in loving wise by his fair wife, in bliss
without alloy. With her snow-white hands she fondled his, till that he
vanished from before her eyes, she wist not when. When now she no longer
spied him, as she toyed, the queen spake to his followers: "Much this
wondereth me, whither the king be gone. Who hath taken his hands from
mine?"

She spake no other word, but he was gone to where he found many grooms
of the chamber stand with lights. These he gan snuff out in the pages'
hands. Thus Gunther knew that it was Siegfried. Well wist he what he
would; he bade the maids and ladies now withdraw. When that was done,
the mighty king himself made fast the door and nimbly shoved in place
two sturdy bolts. Quickly then he hid the lights behind the hangings of
the bed. Stout Siegfried and the maiden now began a play (for this there
was no help) which was both lief and loth to Gunther. Siegfried laid him
close by the high-born maid. She spake: "Now, Gunther, let that be, and
it be lief to you, that ye suffer not hardship as afore."

Then the lady hurt bold Siegfried sore. He held his peace and answered
not a whit. Gunther heard well, though he could not see his friend a
bit, that they plied not secret things, for little ease they had upon
the bed. Siegfried bare him as though he were Gunther, the mighty king.
In his arms he clasped the lovely maid. She cast him from the bed upon
a bench near by, so that his head struck loudly against the stool. Up
sprang the valiant man with all his might; fain would he try again. When
he thought now to subdue her, she hurt him sore. Such defense, I ween,
might nevermore be made by any wife.

When he would not desist, up sprang the maid. "Ye shall not rumple thus
my shift so white. Ye are a clumsy churl and it shall rue you sore,
I'll have you to know fall well," spake the comely maid. In her arms she
grasped the peerless knight; she weened to bind him, as she had done the
king, that she might have her case upon the bed. The lady avenged full
sore, that he had rumpled thus her clothes. What availed his mickle
force and his giant strength? She showed the knight her masterly
strength of limb; she carried him by force (and that must needs be) and
pressed him rudely 'twixt a clothes-press and the wall.

"Alas," so thought the knight, "if now I lose my life at a maiden's
hands, then may all wives hereafter bear towards their husbands haughty
mien, who would never do it else."

The king heard it well and feared him for his liegeman's life. Siegfried
was sore ashamed; wrathful he waxed and with surpassing strength he set
himself against her and tried it again with Lady Brunhild in fearful
wise. It thought the king full long, before he conquered her. She
pressed his hands, till from her strength the blood gushed forth from
out the nails: this irked the hero. Therefore he brought the highborn
maiden to the pass that she gave over her unruly will, which she
asserted there afore. The king heard all, albeit not a word he spake.
Siegfried pressed her against the bed, so that she shrieked aloud.
Passing sore his strength did hurt her. She grasped the girdle around
her waist and would fain have bound him, but his hand prevented it in
such a wise that her limbs and all her body cracked. Thus the strife was
parted and she became King Gunther's wife.

She spake: "Most noble king, pray spare my life. I'll do thee remedy for
whatso I have done thee. I'll no longer struggle against thy noble
love, for I have learned full well that thou canst make thee master over
women."

Siegfried let the maiden be and stepped away, as though he would do off
his clothes. From her hand he drew a golden finger ring, without that
she wist it, the noble queen. Thereto he took her girdle, a good stout
band. I know not if he did that for very haughtiness. He gave it to his
wife and rued it sore in after time.

Then lay Gunther and the fair maid side by side. He played the lover,
as beseemed him, and thus she must needs give over wrath and shame. From
his embrace a little pale she grew. Ho, how her great strength failed
through love! Now was she no stronger than any other wife. He caressed
her lovely form in lover's wise. Had she tried her strength again, what
had that availed? All this had Gunther wrought in her by his love. How
right lovingly she lay beside him in bridal joy until the dawn of day!

Now was Sir Siegfried gone again to where he was given fair greetings by
a woman fashioned fair. He turned aside the question she had thought to
put and hid long time from her what he had brought, until she ruled as
queen within his land. How little he refused to give her what he should!

On the morn the host was far cheerier of mood than he had been afore.
Through this the joy of many a noble man was great in all his lands,
whom he had bidden to his court, and to whom he proffered much of
service. The wedding feast now lasted till the fourteenth day, so that
in all this while the sound never died away of the many joys which there
they plied. The cost to the king was rated high. The kinsmen of the
noble host gave gifts in his honor to the strolling folk, as the king
commanded: vesture and ruddy gold, steeds and silver, too. Those who
there craved gifts departed hence full merrily. Siegfried, the lord from
Netherland, with a thousand of his men, gave quite away the garments
they had brought with them to the Rhine and steeds and saddles, too.
Full well they wot how to live in lordly wise. Those who would home
again thought the time too long till the rich gifts had all been made.
Nevermore have guests been better eased. Thus ended the wedding feast;
Gunther, the knight, would have it so.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Chaplet" (O.F. "chaplet", dim. of "chapel", M.H.G.
        "schapel" or "schapelin") or wreath was the headdress
        especially of unmarried girls, the hair being worn flowing.
        It was often of flowers or leaves, but not infrequently of
        gold and silver.  (See Weinhold, "Deutsche Frauen im
        Mittelalter", i, 387.)




ADVENTURE XI. How Siegfried Journeyed Homeward With His Wife.

When now the strangers had all ridden hence, Siegmund's son spake to his
fellowship: "We must make us ready, too, to journey to my lands."

Lief was it to his wife, when the lady heard the tale aright. She spake
to her husband: "When shall we ride? I pray thee, make me not haste too
sore. First must my brothers share their lands with me."

It was loth to Siegfried, when he heard this from Kriemhild. The
lordings hied them to him and all three spake: "Now may ye know, Sir
Siegfried, that our true service be ever at your bidding till our
death."

Then he made obeisance to the knights, as it was proffered him in such
kindly wise. "We shall share with you," spake Giselher, the youth, "both
land and castles which we do own and whatever broad realms be subject to
our power. Of these ye and Kriemhild shall have a goodly share."

The son of Siegmund spake to the princes, as he heard and saw the
lordings' will: "God grant that ye be ever happy with your heritage and
the folk therein. My dear bride can well forego in truth the share which
ye would give. There where she shall wear a crown, she shall be mightier
than any one alive, and live to see the day. For whatsoever else ye do
command, I stand ready to your bidding."

Then spake the Lady Kriemhild: "Though ye forego my heritage, yet is
it not so light a matter with the Burgundian men-at-arms. A king might
gladly lead them to his land. Forsooth my brothers' hands must share
them with me."

Then spake the Lord Gernot: "Now take whomsoever thou dost wish. Thou
wilt find here really a one who'll gladly ride with thee. We will
give thee a thousand of our thirty hundred warriors; be they thy court
retainers."

Kriemhild then gan send for Hagen of Troneg and also for Ortwin, to ask
if they and their kinsfolk would be Kriemhild's men.

At this Hagen waxed wonderly wroth. He spake: "Certes, Gunther may not
give us to any in the world. Let others follow as your train. Ye know
full well the custom of the men of Troneg: we must in duty bound remain
here with the kings at court. We must serve them longer, whom we till
now have followed."

They gave that over and made them ready to ride away. Lady Kriemhild
gained for herself two and thirty maids and five hundred men, a noble
train. The Margrave Eckewart (1) followed Kriemhild hence. They all
took leave, both knights and squires and maids and ladies, as was mickle
right. Anon they parted with a kiss and voided merrily King Gunther's
land. Their kinsmen bare them company far upon the way and bade them
pitch their quarters for the night, whereso they listed, throughout the
princes' land.

Then messengers were sent eftsoon to Siegmund, that he might know,
and Siegelind, too, that his son would come with Lady Uta's child,
Kriemhild, the fair, from Worms beyond the Rhine. Liefer tidings might
they never have. "Well for me," spake then Siegmund, "that I have
lived to see fair Kriemhild here as queen. My heritage will be thereby
enhanced. My son, the noble Siegfried, shall himself be king."

Then the Lady Siegelind gave much red velvet, silver, and heavy gold;
this was the envoy's meed. The tale well liked her, which then she
heard. She clad her and her handmaids with care, as did beseem them. Men
told who was to come with Siegfried to the land. Anon they bade seats be
raised, where he should walk crowned before his friends. King Siegmund's
liegemen then rode forth to meet him. Hath any been ever better greeted
than the famous hero in Siegmund's land, I know not. Siegelind, the
fair, rode forth to meet Kriemhild with many a comely dame (lusty
knights did follow on behind), a full day's journey, till one espied the
guests. Home-folk and the strangers had little easement till they were
come to a spacious castle, hight Xanten, (2) where they later reigned.

Smilingly Siegelind and Siegmund kissed Kriemhild many times for joy and
Siegfried, too; their sorrow was taken from them. All their fellowship
received great welcome. One bade now bring the guests to Siegmund's
hall, and lifted the fair young maids down from the palfreys. Many a
knight gan serve the comely dames with zeal. However great the feasting
at the Rhine was known to be, here one gave the heroes much better robes
than they had worn in all their days. Of their splender great marvels
might be told. When now they sate in lofty honors and had enow of all,
what gold-hued clothes their courtiers wore with precious stones well
worked thereon! Thus did Siegelind, the noble queen, purvey them well.

Then to his friends Lord Siegmund spake: "I do all Siegfried's kin
to wit, that he shall wear my crown before these knights." Those of
Netherland heard full fain the tale. He gave his son the crown, the
cognizance, (3) and lands, so that he then was master of them all. When
that men went to law and Siegfried uttered judgment, that was done in
such a wise that men feared sore fair Kriemhild's husband.

In these high honors Siegfried lived, of a truth, and judged as king,
till the tenth year was come, when his fair lady bare a son. This was
come to pass after the wish of the kinsmen of the king. They hastened
to baptize and name him Gunther for his uncle; nor had he need to be
ashamed of this. Should he grow like to his kinsman, he would fare full
well. They brought him up with care, as was but due. In these same times
the Lady Siegelind died, and men enow made wail when death bereft them
of her. Then the child of the noble Uta held withal the power over the
lands, which well beseemed such high-born dames. (4)

Now also by the Rhine, as we hear tell, at mighty Gunther's court, in
the Burgundian land, Brunhild, the fair, had born a son. For the hero's
sake they named him Siegfried. With what great care they bade attend
him! The noble Gunther gave him masters who well wot how to bring him
up to be a doughty man. Alas, what great loss of kin he later suffered
through misfortune!

Many tales were told all time, of how right worshipfully the lusty
knights dwelt alway in Siegmund's land. Gunther dealt the same with his
distinguished kin. The Nibelung land and Schilbung's knights and the
goods of both served Siegfried here (none of his kinsmen ever waxed
mightier than he). So much the higher rose the mood of the valiant man.
The very greatest heard that any hero ever gained, save those who owned
it aforetime, the bold man had, the which he had won by his own hand
hard by a hill, and for which he did many a lusty knight to death. He
had honors to his heart's desire, and had this not been so, yet one must
rightly aver of the noble champion, that he was one of the best that
ever mounted horse. Men feared his might and justly, too.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Eckewart", see Adventure I, note 15.
   (2)  "Xanten", see Adventure II, note 3.
   (3)  "Cognizance", 'jurisdiction.'
   (4)  "Dames", i.e., Siegelind and Kriemhild.




ADVENTURE XII. How Gunther Bade Siegfried To The Feasting.

Now Gunther's wife thought alway: "How haughtily doth Lady Kriemhild
bear her! Is not her husband Siegfried our liegeman? Long time now hath
he done us little service." This she bare within her heart, but held her
peace. It irked her sore that they did make themselves such strangers
and that men from Siegfried's land so seldom served her. Fain would she
have known from whence this came. She asked the king if it might hap
that she should see Kriemhild again. Secretly she spake what she had in
mind. The speech like the king but moderately well. "How might we bring
them," quoth he, "hither to our land? That were impossible, they live
too far away; I dare not ask them this."

To this Brunhild replied in full crafty wise: "However high and mighty
a king's vassal be, yet should he not leave undone whatsoever his lord
command him."

King Gunther smiled when she spake thus. However oft he saw Siegfried,
yet did he not count it to him as service.

She spake: "Dear lord, for my sake help me to have Siegfried and thy
sister come to this land, that we may see them here. Naught liefer might
ever hap to me in truth. Whenso I think on thy sister's courtesie and
her well-bred mind, how it delighteth me! How we sate together, when I
first became thy wife! She may with honor love bold Siegfried."

She besought so long, till the king did speak: "Now know that I have
never seen more welcome guests. Ye need but beg me gently. I will send
my envoys for the twain, that they may come to see us to the Rhine."

Then spake the queen: "Pray tell me then, when ye are willed to send for
them, or in what time our dear kinsmen shall come into the land. Give me
also to know whom ye will send thither."

"That will I," said the prince. "I will let thirty of my men ride
thither."

He had these come before him and bade them carry tidings to Siegfried's
land. To their delight Brunhild did give them full lordly vesture.

Then spake the king: "Ye knights must say from me all that I bid you to
mighty Siegfried and the sister of mine; this must ye not conceal: that
no one in the world doth love them more, and beg them both to come to
us to the Rhine. For this I and my lady will be ever at your service. At
the next Midsummer's Day shall he and his men gaze upon many here, who
would fain do them great honor. Give to the king Siegmund my greetings,
and say that I and my kinsmen be still his friends, and tell my sister,
too, that she fail not to ride to see her kin. Never did feasting beseem
her better."

Brunhild and Uta and whatever ladies were found at court all commended
their service to the lovely dames and the many valiant men in
Siegfried's land. With the consent of the kinsmen of the king the
messengers set forth. They rode as wandering knights; their horses and
their trappings had now been brought them. Then they voided the land,
for they had haste of the journey, whither they would fare. The king
bade guard the messengers well with convoys. In three weeks they came
riding into the land, to Nibelung's castle, in the marches of Norway,
(1) whither they were sent. Here they found the knight. The mounts of
the messengers were weary from the lengthy way.

Both Siegfried and Kriemhild were then told that knights were come, who
wore such clothes as men were wont to wear at Burgundy. She sprang
from a couch on which she lay to rest and bade a maiden hie her to the
window. In the court she saw bold Gere standing, him and the fellowship
that had been sent thither. What joyful things she there found against
her sorrow of heart! She spake to the king: "Now behold where they
stand, who walk in the court with the sturdy Gere, whom my brother
sendeth us adown the Rhine."

Spake Then the valiant Siegfried: "They be welcome to us."

All the courtiers ran to where one saw them. Each of them in turn then
spake full kindly, as best he could to the envoys. Siegmund, the lord,
was right blithe of their coming. Then Gere and his men were lodged and
men bade take their steeds in charge. The messengers then went hence
to where Lord Siegfried sate by Kriemhild. This they did, for they had
leave to go to court. The host and his lady rose from their seats at
once and greeted well Gere of the Burgundian land with his fellowship,
Gunther's liegemen. One bade the mighty Gere go and sit him down.

"Permit us first to give our message, afore we take our seats; let us
way-worn strangers stand the while. We be come to tell you tidings which
Gunther and Brunhild, with whom all things stand well, have sent you,
and also what Lady Uta, your mother, sendeth. Giselher, the youth, and
Sir Gernot, too, and your dearest kin, they have sent us hither and
commend their service to you from out the Burgundian land."

"Now God requite them," quoth Siegfried; "I trow them much troth and
good, as one should to kinsfolk; their sister doth the same. Ye must
tell us more, whether our dear friends at home be of good cheer? Since
we have been parted from them, hath any done amiss to my lady's kinsmen?
That ye must let me know. If so, I'll ever help them bear it in duty
bound, until their foes must rue my service."

Then spake the Margrave Gere, a right good knight: "They are in every
virtue of such right high mood, that they do bid you to a feasting by
the Rhine. They would fain see you, as ye may not doubt, and they do beg
my lady that she come with you, when the winter hath taken an end. They
would see you before the next Midsummer's Day."

Quoth the stalwart Siegfried: "That might hardly hap."

Then answered Gere from the Burgundian land: "Your mother Uta, Gernot,
and Giselher have charged you, that ye refuse them not. I hear daily
wail, that ye do live so far away. My Lady Brunhild and all her maids
be fain of the tidings, if that might be that they should see you
again; this would raise their spirits high." These tidings thought fair
Kriemhild good.

Gere was of their kin; the host bade him be seated and had wine poured
out for the guests; no longer did they tarry. Now Siegmund was come
to where he saw the messengers. The lord said to the Burgundians in
friendly wise: "Be welcome, Sir Knights, ye men of Gunther. Sith now
Siegfried, my son, hath won Kriemhild to wife, one should see you more
often here in this our land, if ye would show your kinship."

They answered that they would gladly come, when so he would. Of their
weariness they were cased with joyous pastime. Men bade the messengers
be seated and brought them food, of which Siegfried had them given
great store. They must needs stay there full nine days, till at last
the doughty knights made plaint, that they durst not ride again to their
land.

Meantime king Siegfried had sent to fetch his friends; he asked them
what they counseled, whether or no they should to the Rhine. "My kinsman
Gunther and his kin have sent to fetch me for a feasting. Now I would
go full gladly, but that his land doth lie too far away. They beg
Kriemhild, too, that she journey with me. Now advise, dear friends, in
what manner she shall ride thither. Though I must harry for them through
thirty lands, yet would Siegfried's arm fain serve them there."

Then spake his warriors: "And ye be minded to journey to the feasting,
we will advise what ye must do. Ye should ride to the Rhine with a
thousand knights, then can ye stand with worship there in Burgundy
land."

Up spake then Lord Siegmund of Netherland: "Will ye to the feasting, why
make ye it not known to me? If ye scorn it not, I will ride thither with
you and will take a hundred knights, wherewith to swell your band."

"And will ye ride with us, dear father mine," quoth brave Siegfried,
"glad shall I be of that. Within a twelfth night I will quit my lands."

All who craved it were given steeds and vesture, too.

Since now the noble king was minded for the journey, men bade the good
and speedy envoys ride again. He sent word to his wife's kindred on
the Rhine, that he would full fain be at their feasting. Siegfried and
Kriemhild, as the tale doth tell, gave the messengers such store of
gifts that their horses could not bear them to their native land. A
wealthy man was he. They drove their sturdy sumpters merrily along.

Siegfried and Siegmund arrayed their men. Eckewart, the margrave, that
very hour bade seek out ladies' robes, the best that were at hand or
might be found throughout all Siegfried's land. Men gan prepare the
saddles and the shields. To knights and ladies who should go hence with
him was given whatso they would, so that they wanted naught. He brought
to his kinsfolk many a lordly stranger.

The messengers pricked fast upon their homeward way. Now was Gere, the
knight, come to Burgundy and was greeted fair. Then they dismounted from
their steeds and from the nags in front of Gunther's hall. Young and old
did hie them, as people do, to ask the tidings. Quoth the good knight:
"When I tell them to the king, thou be at hand a hear."

With his fellowship he went to where he found King Gunther. For very joy
the king sprang from his seat. Fair Brunhild cried them mercy, that they
were come so quick. Gunther spake to the envoys: "How fareth Siegfried,
from whom so much of gladness hath happed to me?"

Brave Gere spake: "He blushed for joy, he and your sister; no truer
tidings did ever any man send to friends, than the Lord Siegfried and
his father, too, have sent to you."

Then to the margrave spake the noble queen: "Now tell me, cometh
Kriemhild to us? Hath the fair still kept the graces which she knew how
to use?"

"She cometh to you surely," quoth Gere, the knight.

Then Uta bade the messenger come quickly to her. By her question one
might note full well that she was fain to hear if Kriemhild still were
well. He told how he had found her and that she would shortly come. Nor
were the gifts concealed by them at court, which Siegfried gave them,
gold and vesture; these they brought for the vassals of the three kings
to see. For their passing great bounty men gave them thanks.

"He may lightly give great gifts," spake then Hagen; "he could not
squander all his wealth, and he should live for aye. His hand hath
closed upon the hoard of the Nibelungs. Ho, let him only come to the
Burgundian land!"

All the courtiers were glad that they should come. Early and late the
men of the three kings were busy. Many benches they gan raise for the
folk. The valiant Hunolt and the knight Sindolt had little rest. All
time they had to oversee the stewards and the butlers and raise many a
bench. Ortwin helped them, too, at this, and Gunther said them thanks.
Rumolt, the master cook, how well he ruled his underlings! Ho, how many
a broad kettle, pot, and pan they had! They made ready the vitaille for
those who were coming to the land.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Norway".  The interpolated character of the Adventures XI
        to XIII, which are not found in the earlier versions, is
        shown by the confusion in the location of Siegfried's court.
        The poet has forgotten that Xanten is his capital, and
        locates it in Norway.  No mention is made, however, of the
        messengers crossing the sea; on the contrary, Kriemhild
        speaks of their being sent down the Rhine.




ADVENTURE XIII. How They Journeyed To The Feasting.

Let us now take leave of all their bustling, and tell how Lady Kriemhild
and her maidens journeyed from the Nibelung land down toward the Rhine.
Never did sumpters bear so much lordly raiment. They made ready for
the way full many traveling chests. Then Siegfried, the knight, and the
queen as well, rode forth with their friends to where they had hope of
joys. Later it sped them all to their great harm. They left Siegfried's
little child, Kriemhild's son, at home. That must needs be. Great grief
befell him through their journey to the court. The bairn never saw his
father and his mother more. With them, too, there rode Lord Siegmund.
Had he known aright how he would fare at the feasting, no whit of it
would he have seen. No greater woe might ever hap to him in loving
friends.

Messengers were sent ahead, who told the tale. Then with a stately band
there rode to meet them many of Uta's kith and Gunther's liegemen. The
host gan bestir him for his guests. He went to where Brunhild sate and
asked: "How did my sister greet you when ye came to our land? In like
manner must ye greet Siegfried's wife."

"That will I gladly," quoth she, "for I have good cause to be her
friend."

The mighty king spake further: "They come to us early on the morrow; if
ye would greet them, set quickly to work, that we abide them not within
the castle. At no time have such welcome guests ever come to see me."

At once she bade her maids and ladies hunt out goodly raiment, the best
they had, the which her train should wear before the guests. One may
lightly say, they did this gladly. Gunther's men hasted also for to
serve them, and around him the host did gather all his knights. Then
the queen rode forth in princely wise and mickle greeting of the welcome
guests was done. With what great joy did they receive them! It thought
them as though Lady Kriemhild had not greeted Lady Brunhild so fair in
the Burgundian land. Those who had never seen her became acquaint with
lofty mood.

Now was Siegfried come with his liegemen. One saw the heroes wending
to and fro upon the plain in unwieldy bands. None might guard him there
against the jostling and the dust.

When that the ruler of the land spied Siegfried and Siegmund, how
lovingly he spake: "Now be ye full welcome to me and all my friends; we
shall be of good cheer because of this your journey to our court."

"Now God requite you," quoth Siegmund, the honor-seeking man; "sith my
son Siegfried won you to kinsman, my heart hath urged that I should go
to see you."

At this spake Gunther: "Now hath joy happed to me thereby."

Siegfried was received with much great worship as beseemed him; none
bare him hatred there. Giselher and Gernot helped thereby with great
courtesie. I ween, never have guests been greeted in such goodly wise.

Then the wives of the two kings drew near each other. Emptied were many
saddles, as fair ladies were lifted down by knightly hands upon the
sward. How busy were those who gladly served the dames! The lovely women
now drew near each other, and many a knight was blithe, that such fair
greeting passed between the twain. Then one saw great press of warriors
standing by the high-born maids. The lordly meiny (1) grasped each
other by the hand. Much courteous bowing was seen and loving kisses from
fair-fashioned dames. This liked well Gunther's and Siegfried's liegemen
for to see. They bided now no longer, but rode to town. The host
bade show his guests full well that all were fain to see them in the
Burgundian land. Many a royal joust took place before the high-born
maids. Hagen of Troneg and Ortwin, too, proved full well their prowess.
One durst not leave undone whatso they would command. Much service was
rendered by them to the welcome guests. Many shields were heard resound
from thrusts and blows before the castle gate. The host and his guests
tarried long time without, or ever they came within. Forsooth the hours
passed quickly for them with their sports. Merrily they rode before the
royal palace. Many cunning housings (2) of good cloth and well cut
were seen hanging on either side from the saddles of the fair-fashioned
dames.

Then came Gunther's liegemen. Men bade lead the strangers quickly to
their easement. At times one saw Brunhild glance at Lady Kriemhild, who
was passing fair enow. Her color against the gold gave back the gleam
in lovely wise. On every side in Worms one heard the courtiers shout.
Gunther bade Dankwart, his marshal, have them in his care, who then
gan lodge the retinue in goodly wise. One let them eat within and eke
without. Never were stranger guests better cared for. Men gave them
gladly all they craved; so rich was the king, that not a wish was there
denied. Men served them in friendly wise without all hate. The host now
took his seat at table with his guests. One bade Siegfried be seated
where he sate afore. Then many a stately man went with him to the seats.
Twelve hundred warriors in sooth did sit at his round table. Brunhild
thought her that a vassal could not be mightier than he; yet she was
still so friendly to him that she did not wish his death.

On an evening when the king was seated at the board, many costly robes
were wet with wine, as the butlers hied them to the tables. Full service
was given there with mickle zeal. As hath long been the wont at feasts,
men bade the ladies and the maids be given fair lodgment. From wherever
they were come, the host bare them right good will. One gave them all
enow with goodly honors.

When the night had an end and the day appeared, many a precious stone
from the sumpter chests sparkled on goodly weeds, as they were touched
by woman's hand. Many a lordly robe was taken forth. Or ever the day had
fully dawned, many knights and squires came out before the hall. Then
rose a merry rout before the early mass, which was sung for the king.
There young heroes rode so well that the king did cry them mercy. Many
a trumpet rang out passing loud, and the noise of drums and flutes did
grow so great that the broad town of Worms reechoed with the sound. The
high-mettled heroes horsed them everywhere. Then there rose in the land
high knightly play from many a doughty champion; one saw a great rout
of them whose youthful hearts beat high, and many a dapper knight and a
good stood armed with shield. At the easements sate the high-born dames
and many comely maids, decked out in brave attire. They watched the
pastimes of the many valiant men. The host himself gan tilt there with
his friends. Thus they passed the time, the which seemed aught but long.

Then from the dome was heard the sound of many bells. The palfreys came,
the ladies rode away; but many a bold man followed the noble queens.
They alighted on the green before the minster; Brunhild was still
friendly to her guests. Wearing crowns, they entered the spacious
church. Later their love was parted, which caused great hate. When they
had heard the mass, they rode away again with many honors and were soon
seen going merrily to table. Their pleasure at the feasting did not flag
until the eleventh day.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Meiny" (M.E. "meiny", O.F. "mesnee"), 'courtiers', 'serving
        folk'.
   (2)  "Housings", 'saddle cloths'.




ADVENTURE XIV. How The Queens Reviled Each Other.

On a day before the vesper tide a great turmoil arose, which many
knights made in the court, where they plied their knightly sports for
pastime's sake, and a great throng of men and women hasted there to
gaze. The royal queens had sat them down together and talked of two
worshipful knights.

Then spake the fair Kriemhild: "I have a husband who by right should
rule over all these kingdoms."

Quoth Lady Brunhild: "How might that be? If none other lived but he
and thou, then might these kingdoms own his sway, but the while Gunther
liveth, this may never hap."

Kriemhild replied: "Now dost thou see, how he standeth, how right
royally he walketh before the knights, as the moon doth before the
stars? Therefore must I needs be merry of mood."

Said Lady Brunhild: "However stately be thy husband, howso worthy and
fair, yet must thou grant the palm to Knight Gunther, the noble brother
of thine. Know of a truth, he must be placed above all kings."

Then Kriemhild spake again: "So doughty is my husband, that I have not
lauded him without good cause. His worship is great in many things. Dost
thou believe it, Brunhild, he is easily Gunther's peer."

"Forsooth thou must not take it amiss of me, Kriemhild, for I have not
spoken thus without good reason. I heard them both aver, when I saw them
first of all, and the king was victor against me in the games, and when
he won my love in such knightly wise, that he was liegeman to the king,
and Siegfried himself declared the same. I hold him therefore as my
vassal, sith I heard him speak thus himself."

Then spake fair Kriemhild: "Ill had I then sped. How could my noble
brothers have so wrought, that I should be a mere vassal's bride?
Therefore I do beseech thee, Brunhild, in friendly wise, that for my
sake thou kindly leave off this speech."

"I'll not leave it off," quoth the king's wife. "Why should I give up so
many a knight, who with the warrior doth owe us service?"

Kriemhild, the passing fair, waxed wroth out of wit. "Thou must forego
that ho ever do you a vassal's service; he is worthier than my brother
Gunther, the full noble man. Thou must retract what I have heard thee
say. Certes, it wondereth me, sith he be thy vassal and thou hast so
much power over us twain, why he hath rendered thee no tribute so long a
time. By right I should be spared thy overweening pride."

"Thou bedrest thee too high," spake the king's wife. "I would fain see
whether men will hold thee in such high honor as they do me."

The ladies both grew wonderly wroth of mood. Then spake the Lady
Kriemhild: "This must now hap. Sith thou hast declared my husband for
thy liegeman, now must the men of the two kings perceive to-day whether
I durst walk before the queen to church. Thou must see to-day that I am
noble and free and that my husband is worthier than thine; nor will I
myself be taxed therewith. Thou shalt mark to-day how thy liegewoman
goeth to court before the knights of the Burgundian land. I myself
shall be more worshipful than any queen was known to be, who ever wore a
crown." Great hate enow rose then betwixt the ladies.

Then Brunhild answered: "Wilt thou not be a liegewoman of mine, so
must thou sunder thee with thy ladies from my train when that we go to
church."

To this Kriemhild replied: "In faith that shall be done."

"Now array you, my maids," spake Siegfried's wife. "I must be here
without reproach. Let this be seen to-day, and ye do have rich weeds.
Brunhild shall fain deny what she hath here averted."

They needed not much bidding, but sought rich robes and many a dame and
maid attired her well. Then the wife of the noble king went forth with
her train. Fair Kriemhild, too, was well arrayed and three and forty
maidens with her, whom she had brought hither to the Rhine. They wore
bright vesture wrought in Araby, and thus the fair-fashioned maids
betook them to the minster. All Siegfried's men awaited them before the
house. The folk had marvel whence it chanced that the queens were seen
thus sundered, so that they did not walk together as afore. From this
did many a warrior later suffer dire distress. Here before the minster
stood Gunther's wife, while many a good knight had pastime with the
comely dames whom they there espied.

Then came the Lady Kriemhild with a large and noble train. Whatever kind
of clothes the daughters of noble knights have ever worn, these were but
the wind against her retinue. She was so rich in goods, that what the
wives of thirty kings could not purvey, that Kriemhild did. An' one
would wish to, yet he could not aver that men had ever seen such costly
dresses as at this time her fair-fashioned maidens wore. Kriemhild
had not done it, save to anger Brunhild. They met before the spacious
minster. Through her great hate the mistress of the house in evil wise
bade Kriemhild stand: "Forsooth no vassaless should ever walk before the
queen."

Then spake fair Kriemhild (angry was her mood): "Couldst thou have held
thy peace, 'twere well for thee. Thou hast disgraced thee and the fair
body of thine. How might a vassal's leman (1) ever be the wife of any
king?"

"Whom callest thou here leman?" spake the queen.

"That call I thee," quoth Kriemhild. "Thy fair person was first caressed
by Siegfried, my dear husband. Certes, it was not my brother who won thy
maidhood. Whither could thy wits have wandered? It was an evil trick.
Wherefore didst thou let him love thee, sith he be thy vassal? I hear
thee make plaint without good cause," quoth Kriemhild.

"I' faith," spake then Brunhild, "Gunther shall hear of this."

"What is that to me?" said Kriemhild. "Thy pride hath bewrayed thee.
With words thou hast claimed me for thy service. Know, by my troth, it
will ever grieve me, for I shall be no more thy faithful friend."

Then Brunhild wept. Kriemhild delayed no longer, but entered the minster
with her train before the queen. Thus there rose great hatred, from
which bright eyes grew dim and moist.

Whatso men did or sang to God's service there, the time seemed far
too long for Brunhild, for she was sad of heart and mood. Many a brave
knight and a good must later rue this day. Brunhild with her ladies now
went forth and stopped before the minster. Her-thought: "Kriemhild must
tell me more of what this word-shrewd woman hath so loudly charged me.
Hath Siegfried made boast of this, 'twill cost his life."

Now the noble Kriemhild came with many a valiant liegeman. Lady Brunhild
spake: "Stand still a while. Ye have declared me for a leman, that must
ye let be seen. Know, that through thy speech, I have fared full ill."

Then spake the Lady Kriemhild: "Ye should have let me pass. I'll prove
it by the ring of gold I have upon my hand, and which my lover brought
me when he first lay at your side."

Brunhild had never seen so ill a day. She spake: "This costly hoop of
gold was stolen from me, and hath been hid full long a time from me in
evil wise. I'll find out yet who hath ta'en it from me."

Both ladies now had fallen into grievous wrath.

Kriemhild replied: "I'll not be called a thief. Thou hadst done better
to have held thy peace, an' thou hold thine honor dear. I'll prove it
by the girdle which I wear about my waist, that I lie not. Certes, my
Siegfried became thy lord."

She wore the cord of silk of Nineveh, set with precious stones; in sooth
'twas fair enow. When Brunhild spied it, she began to weep. Gunther and
all the Burgundian men must needs now learn of this.

Then spake the queen: "Bid the prince of the Rhineland come hither. I
will let him hear how his sister hath mocked me. She saith here openly
that I be Siegfried's wife."

The king came with knights, and when he saw his love a-weeping, how
gently he spake: "Pray tell me, dear lady, who hath done you aught?"

She answered to the king: "I must stand unhappy; thy sister would fain
part me from all mine honors. I make here plaint to thee she doth aver
that Siegfried, her husband hath had me as his leman."

Quoth King Gunther: "Then hath she done ill."

"She weareth here my girdle, which I have lost, and my ring of ruddy
gold. It doth repent me sore that I was ever born, unless be thou
clearest me of this passing great shame, for that I'll serve thee ever."

King Gunther spake: "Have him come hither. He must let us hear if
he hath made boast of this, or he must make denial, the hero of
Netherland." One bade fetch at once Kriemhild's love.

When Siegfried saw the angry dames (he wist not of the tale), how
quickly then he spake: "I fain would know why these ladies weep, or for
what cause the king hath had me fetched."

Then King Gunther spake: "It doth rue me sore, forsooth. My Lady
Brunhild hath told me here a tale, that thou hast boasted thou wast the
first to clasp her lovely body in thine arms; this Lady Kriemhild, thy
wife, doth say."

Then spake Lord Siegfried: "And she hath told this tale, she shall rue
it sore, or ever I turn back, and I'll clear me with solemn oaths in
front of all thy men, that I have not told her this."

Quoth the king of the Rhineland: "Let that be seen. The oath thou dost
offer, and let it now be given, shall free thee of all false charges."

They bade the proud Burgundians form a ring. Siegfried, the bold,
stretched out his hand for the oath; then spake the mighty king: "Thy
great innocence is so well known to me, that I will free thee of that
of which my sister doth accuse thee and say, thou hast never done this
thing."

Siegfried replied: "If it boot my lady aught to have thus saddened
Brunhild, that will surely cause me boundless grief."

Then the lusty knights and good gazed one upon the other. "One should
so train women," spake again Siegfried, the knight, "that they leave
haughty words unsaid. Forbid it to thy wife, and I'll do the same to
mine. In truth, I do shame me of her great discourtesie."

Many fair ladies were parted by the speech. Brunhild mourned so sore,
that it moved King Gunther's men to pity. Then came Hagen of Troneg to
his sovran lady. He found her weeping, and asked what grief she had.
She told him then the tale. On the spot he vowed that Kriemhild's lord
should rue it sore, or he would nevermore be glad. Ortwin and Gernot
joined their parley and these heroes counseled Siegfried's death.
Giselher, the son of the noble Uta, came hither too. When he heard the
talk, he spake full true: "Ye trusty knights, wherefore do ye this?
Siegfried hath not merited forsooth such hate, that he should therefore
lose his life. Certes, women oft grow angry over little things."

"Shall we then raise cuckolds?" answered Hagen; "such good knights would
gain from that but little honor. Because he hath boasted of my liege
lady, I will rather die, an' it cost him not his life."

Then spake the king himself: "He hath shown us naught but love and
honor, so let him live. What booteth it, if I now should hate the
knight? He was ever faithful to us and that right willingly."

Knight Ortwin of Metz then spake: "His great prowess shall not in sooth
avail him aught. If my lord permit, I'll do him every evil."

So without cause the heroes had declared a feud against him. In this
none followed, save that Hagen counselled all time Knight Gunther the
that if Siegfried no longer lived, then many kingly lands would own his
sway. At this the king grew sad, so they let it rest.

Jousting was seen once more. Ho, what stout shafts they splintered
before the minster in the presence of Siegfried's wife, even down to the
hall! Enow of Gunther's men were now in wrath. The king spake: "Let be
this murderous rage, he is born to our honor and to our joy. Then, too,
the wonderly bold man is so fierce of strength, that none durst match
him, if he marked it."

"No, not he," spake Hagen then, "Ye may well keep still; I trow to bring
it to pass in secret, that he rue Brunhild's tears. Certes, Hagen hath
broken with him for all time."

Then spake King Gunther: "How might that chance?"

To this Hagen made answer: "I'll let you hear. We'll bid messengers,
that be not known to any here, ride into our land, to declare war upon
us openly. Then do ye say before your guests that ye and your men will
take the field. When that is done, he will vow to serve you then and
from this he shall lose his life, an' I learn the tale from the bold
knight's wife."

The king followed his liegeman Hagen in evil wise. These chosen knights
gan plan great faithlessness, or ever any one was ware. From two women's
quarreling full many a hero lost his life.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Leman" (M.E. "lemman", O.E. "leof mann", 'lief man', i.e.,
        'dear one'), 'mistress' in a bad sense.




ADVENTURE XV. How Siegfried Was Betrayed.

Upon the fourth morning two and thirty men were seen to ride to court
and the tale was brought to mighty Gunther that war had been declared.
The very direst woes befell fair women from a lie. They gained leave
to come before the king and say that they were Liudeger's men, whom
Siegfried's hand had conquered afore and had brought as hostages to
Gunther's land. He greeted then the messengers and bade them go and seat
them. One among them spake: "My lord, pray let us stand till we have
told the message we do bear you. This know, ye have of a truth many
a mother's son as foe. Liudegast and Liudeger, whom ye one time gave
grievous sores, declare a feud against you and are minded to ride with
an army to this land." The king waxed wroth when he heard This tale.

Men bade lead the perjurers to their lodgings. How might Siegfried, or
any else against whom they plotted, ware himself against their wiles?
This later brought great sorrow to them all. The king walked whispering
with his friends; Hagen of Troneg never let him rest. Enow of the king's
liegemen would fain have parted the strife, but Hagen would not give
up his plan. On a day Siegfried found them whispering. The hero of
Netherland gan ask: "How go the king and his men so sadly? I'll help
avenge it, hath any done you aught."

Then spake King Gunther: "I am rightly sad. Liudegast and Liudeger have
challenged me to war; they are minded to ride openly into my land."

At this the bold knight said: "Siegfried's hand shall hinder that with
zeal, as beseemeth all your honors. I'll do yet to these knights as I
did before; I'll lay waste their lands, or ever I turn again. Be my head
your pledge of this. Ye and your warriors shall stay at home and let me
ride to meet them with those I have. I'll let you see how fain I serve
you. This know, through me it shall go evil with your foes."

"Well is me of these tidings," spake then the king, as though he were
glad in earnest of this aid. With guile the faithless man bowed low.

Quoth Lord Siegfried: "Ye shall have small care."

Then they made ready for the journey hence with the men-at-arms. This
was done for Siegfried and his men to see. He, too, bade those of
Netherland get them ready. Siegfried's warriors sought out warlike
weeds. Then the stalwart Siegfried spake: "My father Siegmund, ye must
stay here. We shall return in short space hither to the Rhine, and God
give us luck. Ye must here make merry with the king."

They tied fast their banners, as though they would away, and there were
enow of Gunther's men who wist not wherefore this was done. Great rout
of men was seen at Siegfried's side. They bound their helmets and their
breastplates upon the steeds, and many a stout knight made ready to
quit the land. Then Hagen of Troneg went to find Kriemhild and asked for
leave; sith they would void the land.

"Now well is me," spake Kriemhild, "that I have won a husband who dare
protect so well my loving kinsfolk, as my Lord Siegfried doth here.
Therefore," spake the queen, "will I be glad of heart. Dear friend
Hagen, think on that, that I do serve you gladly and never yet did bear
you hate. Requite this now to me in my dear husband. Let him not suffer,
if I have done to Brunhild aught. I since have rued it," spake the noble
wife. "Moreover, he since hath beaten me black and blue; the brave hero
and a good hath well avenged that ever I spake what grieved her heart."

"Ye'll be friends once more after some days. Kriemhild, dear lady, pray
tell me how I may serve you in your husband Siegfried. Liefer will I do
this for you than for any else."

"I should be without all fear," quoth the noble dame, "that any one
would take his life in the fray, if he would not follow his overweening
mood; then the bold knight and a good were safe."

"Lady," spake then Hagen, "an' ye do think that men might wound him,
pray let me know with what manner of arts I can prevent this. On foot,
on horse, will I ever be his guard."

She spake: "Thou art my kinsman and I am thine. I'll commend to thee
trustingly the dear lover of mine, that thou mayst guard him well,
mine own dear husband." She made him acquaint with tales which had been
better left unsaid. She spake: "My husband is brave and strong enow.
When he slew the dragon on the hill, the lusty warrior bathed him of
a truth in the blood, so that since then no weapon ever cut him in
the fray. Yet am I in fear, whenever he standeth in the fight and many
javelins are cast by heroes' hands, that I may lose this dear husband of
mine. Alas, how oft I suffer sore for Siegfried's sake! Dear kinsman, in
the hope that thou wilt hold thy troth with me, I'll tell thee where
men may wound the dear lord of mine. I let thee hear this, 'tis done in
faith. When the hot blood gushed from the dragon's wounds and the bold
hero and a good bathed him therein, a broad linden leaf did fall betwixt
his shoulder blades. Therefore am I sore afraid that men may cut him
there."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "Sew a small mark upon his coat, whereby I
may know where I must guard him, when we stand in battle."

She weened to save her knight, but 'twas done unto his death. She spake:
"With fine silk I'll sew a secret cross upon his vesture. There, knight,
thy hand must guard my husband, when the strife is on and he standeth in
the battle before his foes."

"That will I well, dear my lady," Hagen then replied.

The lady weened that it would boot him aught, but Kriemhild's husband
was thereby betrayed. Hagen then took leave; merrily he hied him hence.
The king's liegeman was blithe of mood. I ween that nevermore will
warrior give such false counsel, as was done by him when Kriemhild
trusted in his troth.

Next morning Siegfried with a thousand of his men rode merrily forth. He
weened he should avenge the grievance of his kinsmen. Hagen rode so
near him that he could eye his clothes. When he saw the sign, he sent
in secret twain of his men, who should tell another tale: that Gunther's
land should still have peace and that Liudeger had sent them to the
king. How loth Siegfried now rode home again, or ever he had avenged his
kinsmen's wrongs! Gunther's men could hardly turn him back. He rode then
to the king; the host gan thank him. "Now God requite you of your will,
friend Siegfried, that ye do so willingly what I bid you. For this
I'll ever serve you, as I rightly should. I trust you more than all my
friends. Now that we be rid of this foray, I am minded to ride a-hunting
for bears and boars to the Vosges forest, as I have done oft-time." That
Hagen, the faithless knight, had counseled. "Let it be told to all my
guests, that we ride betimes. Those that would hunt with me must make
them ready. If any choose to stay at home to court the ladies, that
liketh me as well."

Then spake Sir Siegfried in lordly wise: "And ye would a-hunting, I'd
fain go with you. Pray lend me a huntsman and some brach, (1) and I will
ride to the pines."

"Will ye have but one?" spake the king anon. "I'll lend you, an' ye
will, four men to whom both wood and paths be known where the game is
wont to go, and who will not let you miss the camp."

Then rode the full lusty warrior to his wife, whilst Hagen quickly told
the king how he thought to trap the doughty knight. A man should never
use such faithlessness.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Brach", 'hunting dog', cognate with M.H.G. "braeke", used
        here.




ADVENTURE XVI. How Siegfried Was Slain.

Gunther and Hagen, the passing bold knights, faithlessly let cry
a-hunting in the woods, that with sharp spears they would hunt boars
and bears and bison. What might be braver? With them rode Siegfried
in lordly guise; many kinds of victual did they take along. At a cool
spring he later lost his life, the which Brunhild, King Gunther's wife,
had counseled. The bold knight then went to where he found Kriemhild.
His costly hunting garb and those of his fellowship were already bound
upon the sumpters, for they would cross the Rhine. Never could Kriemhild
have been more sorrowful. He kissed his love upon her mouth. "God let
me see thee, lady, still in health and grant that thine eyes may see me
too. Thou shalt have pastime with thy loving kinsmen. I may not stay at
home."

Then she thought of the tale she had told to Hagen, though she durst not
say a whit. The noble queen began to rue that she was ever born. Lord
Siegfried's wife wept out of measure. She spake to the knight: "Let be
your hunting. I had an evil dream last night, how two wild boars did
chase you across the heath; then flowers grew red. I have in truth great
cause to weep so sore. I be much adread of sundry plans and whether we
have not misserved some who might bear us hostile hate. Tarry here, dear
my lord, that I counsel by my troth."

He spake: "Dear love, I'll come back in a few short days. I wot not here
of people who bear me aught of hate. Each and all of thy kinsmen be my
friends, nor have I deserved it other of the knights."

"No, no, Sir Siegfried, in truth I fear thy fall. I had last night an
evil dream, how two mountains fell upon thee. I saw thee nevermore. It
doth cut me to the heart, that thou wilt part from me."

In his arms he clasped his courteous wife and kissed her tenderly. Then
in a short space he took his leave and parted hence. Alas, she never saw
him in health again.

Then they rode from thence into a deep wood for pastime's sake. Many
bold knights did follow Gunther and his men, but Gernot and Giselher
stayed at home. Many laden sumpters were sent before them across the
Rhine, the which bare for the hunting fellowship bread and wine, meat
and fish, and great store of other things, which so mighty a king might
rightly have. They bade the proud huntsmen and bold halt before a green
wood over against the courses of the game, upon a passing broad glade
where they should hunt. The king was told that Siegfried, too, was come.
The hunting fellowship now took their stand on every side. Then the
bold knight, the sturdy Siegfried, asked: "Ye heroes bold and brave, who
shall lead us to the game within the wood?"

"Let us part," spake Hagen, "ere we begin the chase. Thereby my lords
and I may know who be the best hunter on this woodland journey. Let us
divide the folk and hounds and let each turn whithersoever he list. He
who doth hunt the best shall have our thanks." Short time the huntsmen
bided by another after that.

Then spake Lord Siegfried: "I need no dogs save one brach that hath
been trained that he can tell the track of the beasts through the pine
woods." Quoth Kriemhild's husband: "We'll find the game."

Then an old huntsman took a good sleuth-hound and in a short space
brought the lord to where many beasts were found. Whatso rose from its
lair the comrades hunted as good hunters still are wont to do. Whatever
the brach started, bold Siegfried, the hero of Netherland, slew with his
hand. His horse did run so hard that none escaped him. In the chase he
gained the prize above them all. Doughty enow he was in all things. The
beast which he slew with his hands was the first, a mighty boar; after
which he found full soon a monstrous lion. (1) When the brach started
this from its lair, he shot it with his bow, in which he had placed a
full sharp arrow. After the shot the lion ran the space of but three
bounds. The hunting fellowship gave Siegfried thanks. Thereafter he
speedily slew a bison and an elk, four strong ure-oxen, (2) and a savage
shelk. (3) His horse bare him so swiftly that naught escaped him, nor
could hart or hind avoid him. Then the sleuth-hound found a mighty boar;
when he began to flee, at once there came the master of the hunt and
encountered him upon his path. Wrathfully the boar did run against the
valiant hero, but Kriemhild's husband slew him with his sword. Another
huntsman might not have done this deed so lightly. When he had felled
him, they leashed the sleuth-hound; his rich booty was soon well known
to the Burgundian men.

Then spake his huntsman: "Sir Siegfried, if might so be, let us leave a
deal of the beasts alive. Ye'll empty both our hill and woods to-day."

At this the brave knight and a bold gan smile. Then the calls of men and
the baying of hounds were heard on every side; so great was the noise
that both hill and pine woods echoed with the sound. The huntsmen had
let loose full four and twenty packs. Then passing many beasts must
needs lose their lives. Each man weened to bring it to pass that men
should give him the prize of the hunt; that might not be, for the
stalwart Siegfried was already standing by the fire. The chase was over,
and yet not quite. Those who would to the camp-fire brought with them
thither hides of many beasts and game in plenty. Ho, how much the king's
meiny bare then to the kitchen!

Then bade the king announce to the huntsman that he would dismount. A
horn was blown full loud just once, that all might know that one might
find the noble prince in camp. Spake then one of Siegfried's huntsmen:
"My lord, I heard by the blast of a horn that we must now hie us to the
quarters; I'll now give answer."

Thus by many blasts of horns they asked about the hunters. Then spake
Sir Siegfried: "Now let us leave the pine wood!" His steed bare him
smoothly and with him they hasted hence. With their rout they started
up a savage beast; a wild bear it was. Quoth then the knight to those
behind: "I'll give our fellowship a little pastime. Let loose the brach.
Forsooth I spy a bear which shall journey with us to the camp. Flee he
never so fast, he shall not escape us."

The brach was loosed, the bear sprang hence; Kriemhild's husband would
fain overtake him. He reached a thicket, where none could follow. The
mighty beast weened now to escape from the hunter with his life, but the
proud knight and a good leaped from his steed and began to chase him.
The bear was helpless and could not flee away. At once the hero caught
it and bound it quickly with not a wound, so that it might neither
scratch nor bite the men. The doughty knight then tied it to his saddle
and horsed him quickly. Through his overweening mood the bold warrior
and a good brought it to the camp-fire as a pastime. In what lordly wise
he rode to the quarters! Mickle was his boar-spear, strong and broad. A
dainty sword hung downward to his spurs. The lord bare also a fair horn
of ruddy gold. Never heard I tale of better hunting weeds. One saw him
wear a coat of black and silky cloth and a hat of sable: rich enow it
was. Ho, what costly bands he wore upon his quiver! A panther's skin was
drawn over it for its sweet fragrance' (4) sake. He bare a bow, which
any but the hero must needs draw back with a windlass, and he would bend
it. His vesture was befurred with otter skin (5) from head to toe. From
the bright fur shone out on both sides of the bold master of the hunt
many a bar of gold. Balmung (6) he also bare, a good broad sword, that
was so sharp that it never failed when 'twas wielded 'gainst a helmet;
its edge was good. In high spirits was the lordly huntsman. Sith I must
tell you all the tale, his costly quiver was full of goodly darts, the
heads a full hand's breadth, on golden shafts. What he pierced therewith
must needs die soon.

Thus the noble knight rode hence in hunter's garb. Gunther's men espied
him coming and ran out to meet him and took his horse in charge. On his
saddle he carried a large bear and a strong. When he had dismounted, he
loosed the bonds from feet and snout. Those of the pack bayed loudly,
that spied the bear. The beast would to the woods; the serving folk had
fear. Dazed by the din, the bear made for the kitchen. Ho, how he
drove the scullions from the fire! Many a kettle was upset and many a
firebrand scattered. Ho, what good victual men found lying in the ashes!
Then the lordings and their liegemen sprang from their scats. The bear
grew furious and the king bade loose the pack that lay enleashed. Had
all sped well, they would have had a merry day. No longer the doughty
men delayed, but ran for the bear with bows and pikes. There was such
press of dogs that none might shoot, but from the people's shouts the
whole hill rang. The bear began to flee before the dogs; none could
follow him but Kriemhild's husband, who caught and slew him with his
sword. Then they bore the bear again to the fire. Those that saw it,
averred he was a mighty man.

Men bade now the proud hunting fellowship seat them at the tables. Upon
a fair mead there sate a goodly company. Ho, what rich viands they
bare there to the noble huntsmen! The butlers who should bring the wine
delayed; else might never heroes have been better served. Had they not
been so falsely minded, then had the knights been free of every blame.

Now the Lord Siegfried spake: "Me-wondereth, since men do give us such
great store from the kitchen, why the butlers bring us not the
wine. Unless men purvey the hunters better, I'll be no more your
hunting-fellow. I have well deserved that they regard me, too."

The king addressed him from his seat with guile: "We fain would do you
remedy of what we lack. It is Hagen's fault, who is willed to let us die
of thirst."

Then spake Hagen: "Dear my lord, I weened that the hunt should be in the
Spessart (7) wood, therefore sent I thither the wine. Though we may not
drink today, how well will I avoid this in the future!"

At this Lord Siegfried spake: "Small thanks ye'll get for that. One
should have brought me hither seven sumpter loads of mead and mulled
wine. (8) If that might not be, then men should have placed our benches
nearer to the Rhine."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "Ye noble knights and bold, I wot near by a
good cold spring. Let us go thither, that ye wax not wroth."

To the danger of many a knight was this counsel given. The pangs of
thirst now plagued the warrior Siegfried. He bade the tables be borne
away the sooner, for he would go to the spring in the mountains. With
false intent the counsel was then given by the knights. They bade the
game which Siegfried's hand had slain, be carried home on wains. Whoever
saw it gave him great laud. Hagen of Troneg now foully broke his troth
to Siegfried. When they would hence to the broad linden, he spake: "It
hath oft been told me, that none can keep pace with Kriemhild's husband
when he be minded for to race. Ho, if he would only let us see it here!"

Bold Siegfried from Netherland then answered: "Ye can well test that,
and ye will run a race with me to the spring. When that is done, we call
give the prize to him who winneth."

"So let us try it then," quoth Hagen, the knight.

Spake the sturdy Siegfried: "Then will I lay me down on the green sward
at your feet." (9)

How lief it was to Gunther, when he heard these words! Then the bold
knight spake again: "I'll tell you more. I'll take with me all my
trappings, my spear and shield and all my hunting garb." Around him he
quickly girded his quiver and his sword.

Then they drew the clothes from off their limbs; men saw them stand in
two white shifts. Like two wild panthers through the clover they ran,
but men spied bold Siegfried first at the spring. In all things he bare
away the prize from many a man. Quickly he ungirt his sword and laid
aside his quiver and leaned the stout spear against a linden bough.
The lordly stranger stood now by the flowing spring. Passing great was
Siegfried's courtesie. He laid down his shield where the spring gushed
forth, but the hero drank not, albeit he thirsted sore until the king
had drunk, who gave him evil thanks. Cool, clear, and good was the
spring. Gunther stooped down then to the flowing stream, and when he had
drunken straightened up again. Bold Siegfried would fain also have done
the same, but now he paid for his courtesie. Hagen bare quite away from
him both bow and sword and bounded then to where he found the spear;
then he looked for the mark on bold Siegfried's coat. As Lord Siegfried
drank above the spring, he pierced him through the cross, so that
his heart's blood spurted from the wounds almost on Hagen's clothes.
Nevermore will hero do so foul a deed. Hagen left the spear a-sticking
in his heart and fled more madly than he ever in the world had run from
any man.

When Lord Siegfried felt the mighty wound, up from the spring he started
in a rage. From betwixt his shoulder blades a long spear-shaft towered.
He weened to find his bow or his sword, and then had Hagen been repaid
as he deserved. But when the sorely wounded hero found no trace of his
sword, then had he naught else but his shield. This he snatched from the
spring and ran at Hagen; nor could King Gunther's man escape him. Albeit
he was wounded unto death, yet he smote so mightily that a plenty of
precious stones were shaken from the shield. The shield itself burst
quite apart. Fain would the lordly stranger have avenged him. Now was
Hagen fallen to the ground at his hands, and from the force of the blow
the glade rang loudly. Had he had a sword in hand, then had it been
Hagen's death, so sore enraged was the wounded man. Forsooth he had good
cause thereof. His hue grew pale, he could not stand; his strength of
body melted quite away, for in bright colors he bore the signs of death.
Thereafter he was bewailed by fair dames enow.

Kriemhild's husband fell now among the flowers. Fast from his wounds his
blood was seen to gush. He began to rail, as indeed he had great cause,
at those who had planned this treacherous death. The deadly wounded
spake: "Forsooth, ye evil cowards, what avail my services now that ye
have slain me? This is my reward that I was always faithful to you.
Alas, ye have acted ill against your kinsmen. Those of them who are born
in after days will be disgraced. Ye have avenged your wrath too sore
upon me. With shame shall ye be parted from all good warriors."

The knights all ran to where he lay slain. For enow of them it was a
hapless day. He was bewailed by those who had aught of loyalty, and
this the brave and lusty knight had well deserved. The king of the
Burgundians bemoaned his death. Quoth the deadly wounded: "There is no
need that he should weep who hath done the damage; he doth merit mickle
blame. It had been better left undone."

Then spake the fierce Hagen: "Forsooth I wot not what ye now bewail. All
our fear and all our woe have now an end. We shall find scant few who
dare withstand us now. Well is me, that to his rule I have put an end."

"Ye may lightly boast you," Siegfried then replied. "Had I wist your
murderous bent, I had well guarded my life against you. None doth rue
me so sore as Lady Kriemhild, my wife. Now may God have pity that I
ever had a son to whom the reproach will be made in after days, that his
kindred have slain a man with murderous intent. If I might," so spake
Siegfried, "I should rightly make complaint of this." Piteously the
deadly wounded spake again: "Noble king, if ye will keep your troth to
any in the world, then let my dear love be commended to your grace and
let it avail her that she be your sister. For the sake of your princely
courtesie protect her faithfully. My father and my men must wait long
time for me. Never was woman sorer wounded in a loving friend."

The flowers on every side were wot with blood. With death he struggled,
but not for long, sith the sword of death had cut him all too sorely.
Then the lusty warrior and a brave could speak no more.

When the lordlings saw that the knight was dead, they laid him on a
shield of ruddy gold and took counsel how they might conceal that Hagen
had done the deed. Enow of them spake: "Ill hath it gone with us. Ye
must all hide it and aver alike that robbers slew Kriemhild's husband as
he rode alone a-hunting through the pine wood."

Then Hagen of Troneg spake: "I'll bring him home; I care not if it be
known to her, for she hath saddened Brunhild's heart. Little doth it
trouble me however much she weep."


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Lion."  It is hardly necessary to state that lions did not
        roam at large in the forests of Germany.  They were,
        however, frequently exhibited in the Middle Ages, and the
        poet introduced one here to enhance Siegfried's fame as a
        hunter.
   (2)  "Ure-oxen", the auerochs, or European bison, now practically
        extinct.
   (3)  "Shelk" (M.H.G. "schelch"), probably a species of giant
        deer.
   (4)  "Fragrance".  It was believed that the odor of the panther
        attracted the game.  Compare the description of the panther
        in the older "Physiologus", where the odor is said to
        surpass that of all ointments.
   (5)  "Otter" translates here M.H.G. "ludem", whose exact
        connotation is not known.  Some interpret it to meau the
        fish otter, others the "Waldschrat", a kind of faun.
   (6)  "Balmung", see Adventure III, note 7.
   (7)  "Spessart wood" lies forty to fifty miles east of Worms and
        is therefore too distant for a day's hunt, but such trifles
        did not disturb the poet.
   (8)  "Mulled wine", see Adventure VIII, note 5.
   (9)  "Feet".  This was probably done as a handicap.  The time
        consumed in rising to his feet would give his opponent quite
        a start.




ADVENTURE XVII. How Kriemhild Mourned Her Husband And How He Was Buried.

Then they waited for the night and crossed the Rhine. Never had heroes
hunted worse. Noble maids bewept the game they slew. Forsooth many good
warriors must needs atone for this in after days. Now ye may hear a tale
of great overweening and dire revenge. Hagen bade carry Siegfried of the
Nibelung land, thus dead, before the bower where Kriemhild lodged. He
bade place him stealthily against the door, that she might find him when
she went forth before the break of day to matins, which Lady Kriemhild
full seldom missed through sleep.

Men rang the minster bells according to their custom. Lady Kriemhild,
the fair, now waked her many maids and bade them bring a light and her
vesture, too. Then came a chamberlain and found Siegfried there. He saw
him red with blood, his clothes all wet. He wist not it was his lord,
but with the light in his hand he hasted to the bower and through this
Lady Kriemhild learned the baneful tale. As she would set out with her
ladies for the minster, the chamberlain spake: "Pray stay your feet,
there doth lie before the chamber a knight, slain unto death."

Kriemhild gan make passing sore wail, or ever she heard aright that it
was her husband. She began to think of Hagen's question, of how he might
protect him. Then first she suffered dole; she renounced all pleasure
at his death. To the earth she sank, not a word she spake, and here they
found lying the hapless fair. Passing great grew Kriemhild's woe. After
her faint, she shrieked, that all the chamber rang. Then her meiny said:
"Perchance it is a stranger knight."

The blood gushed from her mouth, from dole of heart; she spake: "'Tis
Siegfried, mine own dear husband. Brunhild hath counseled this and Hagen
hath done the deed."

The lady bade them lead her to where the hero lay. With her white hand
she raised his head, and though it was red with blood, she knew him
soon. There lay the hero of the Nibelung land in piteous guise. The
gracious queen cried sadly: "Oh, woe is me of my sorrow! Thy shield is
not carved with swords, thou liest murdered here. Wist I who hath done
the deed, I'd ever plot his death."

All her maids made mourn and wailed with their dear lady, for they
grieved full sore for their noble lord whom they had lost. Hagen had
cruelly avenged the wrath of Brunhild.

Then spake the grief-stricken dame: "Go now and wake with haste all
Siegfried's men. Tell Siegmund also of my grief, mayhap he'll help me
bewail brave Siegfried."

A messenger ran quickly to where lay Siegfried's warriors from the
Nibelung land, and with his baleful tidings stole their joy. They could
scarce believe it, till they heard the weeping. Right soon the messenger
came to where the king did lie. Siegmund, the lord, was not asleep. I
trow his heart did tell him what had happed. Never again might he see
his dear son alive.

"Awake, Sir Siegmund; Kriemhild, my lady, bade me go to fetch you. A
wrong hath been done her that doth cut her to the heart, more than all
other ills. Ye must help her mourn, for much it doth concern you."

Siegmund sat up; he spake: "What are fair Kriemhild's ills, of which
thou tellest me?"

Weeping the messenger spake: "I cannot hide them from you; alas, bold
Siegfried of Netherland is slain."

Quoth Siegmund: "For my sake let be this jesting and such evil tales,
that thou shouldst tell any that he be dead, for I might never bewail
him fully before my death."

"If ye will believe naught of what ye hear me say, then you may hear
yourself Kriemhild and all her maids bewailing Siegfried's death."

Siegmund then was sore affrighted, as indeed he had great need, He and
a hundred of his men sprang from their beds and grasped with their hands
their long sharp swords. In sorrow they ran toward the sound of wail.
Then came a thousand men-at-arms, bold Siegfried's men. When they heard
the ladies wail so pitifully, some first grew ware that they should
dress them. Forsooth they lost their wits for very sorrow. Great
heaviness was buried in their hearts.

Then King Siegmund came to where he found Kriemhild. He spake: "Alas
for the journey hither to this land! Who hath so foully bereft me of my
child and you of your husband among such good friends?"

"Oh, if I knew him," spake the noble wife, "neither my heart nor soul
would ever wish him well. I would plan such ill against him that his kin
must ever weep because of me."

Around the prince Lord Siegmund threw his arms. So great grew the sorrow
of his kin, that the palace, the hall, and the town of Worms resounded
from the mighty wail and weeping. None might now comfort Siegfried's
wife. They stripped off the clothes from his fair body; they washed his
wounds and laid him on the bier. Woe were his people from their mighty
grief. Then spake his warriors from the Nibelung land: "Our hands be
ever ready to avenge him; he liveth in this castle who hath done the
deed."

All of Siegfried's men hasted then to arms. These chosen knights came
with their shields, eleven hundred men-at-arms, whom Lord Siegmund had
in his troop. He would fain avenge the death of his son, as indeed he
had great need. They wist not to whom they should address their strife,
unless it be to Gunther and his men, with whom Lord Siegfried had ridden
to the hunt.

Kriemhild saw them armed, which rued her sore. However great her grief
and how dire her need, yet she did so mightily fear the death of the
Nibelungs at the hands of her brothers' liegemen, that she tried to
hinder it. In kindly wise she warned them, as kinsmen do to loving kin.
The grief-stricken woman spake: "My Lord Siegmund, what will ye do? Ye
wot naught aright; forsooth King Gunther hath so many valiant men, ye
will all be lost, and ye would encounter these knights."

With their shields uncovered, the men stood eager for the fight. The
noble queen both begged and bade that the lusty knights avoid it. When
they would not give it over, sorely it grieved her. She spake: "Lord
Siegmund, ye must let it be until more fitting time, then I'll avenge my
husband with you. An' I receive proof who hath bereft me of him, I'll do
him scathe. There be too many haughty warriors by the Rhine, wherefore I
will not counsel you to fight. They have full well thirty men to each of
ours. Now God speed them, as they deserve of us. Stay ye here and bear
with me my dole. When it beginneth to dawn, help me, ye lusty knights,
to coffin the dear husband of mine."

Quoth the knights: "That shall be done."

None might tell you all the marvel of knights and ladies, how they were
heard to wail, so that even in the town men marked the sound of weeping.
The noble burghers hasted hither. With the guests they wept, for they,
too, were sore aggrieved. None had told them of any guilt of Siegfried,
or for what cause the noble warrior lost his life. The wives of the
worthy burghers wept with the ladies of the court. Men bade smiths haste
to work a coffin of silver and of gold, mickle and strong, and make it
firm with strips of good hard steel. Sad of heart were all the folk.

The night was gone, men said the day was dawning. Then the noble lady
bade them bear Lord Siegfried, her loved husband, to the minster.
Whatever friends he had there were seen weeping as they went. Many bells
were ringing as they brought him to the church. On every side one heard
the chant of many priests. Then came King Gunther with his men and grim
Hagen also toward the sound of wail. He spake: "Alas for thy wrongs,
clear sister, that we may not be free from this great scathe. We must
ever lament for Siegfried's death."

"That ye do without cause," spake the sorrow-laden wife. "Were this loth
to you, it never would have happed. I may well aver, ye thought not on
me, when I thus was parted from my dear husband. Would to God," quoth
Kriemhild, "that it had happed to me."

Firmly they made denial. Kriemhild gan speak: "Whoso declareth him
guiltless, let him show that now. He must walk to the bier before all
the folk; thereby one may know the truth eftsoon."

This is a great marvel, which oft doth hap; whenever the blood-stained
murderer is seen to stand by the dead, the latter's wounds do bleed, (1)
as indeed happed here, whereby one saw the guilt was Hagen's. The wounds
bled sore, as they had done at first. Much greater grew the weeping of
those who wailed afore.

Then spake King Gunther: "I'd have you know that robbers slew him; Hagen
did not do the deed."

"I know these robbers well," quoth she. "Now may God yet let his friends
avenge it. Certes, Gunther and Hagen, 'twas done by you."

Siegfried's knights were now bent on strife. Then Kriemhild spake again:
"Now share with me this grief."

Gernot, her brother, and young Giselher, these twain now came to where
they found him dead. They mourned him truly with the others; Kriemhild's
men wept inly. Now should mass be sung, so on every side, men, wives,
and children did hie them to the minster. Even those who might lightly
bear his loss, wept then for Siegfried. Gernot and Giselher spake:
"Sister mine, now comfort thee after this death, as needs must be. We'll
try to make it up to thee, the while we live."

Yet none in the world might give her comfort. His coffin was ready well
towards midday. From the bier whereon he lay they raised him. The
lady would not have that he be buried, so that all the folk had mickle
trouble. In a rich cloth of silk they wound the dead. I ween, men found
none there that did not weep. Uta, the noble dame, and all her meiny
mourned bitterly the stately man. When it was noised abroad that men
sang in the minster and had encoffined him, then rose a great press of
folk. What offerings they made for his soul's sake! He had good friends
enow among these foes. Poor Kriemhild spake to her chamberlains: "Ye
must now be put to trouble for my sake, ye who wished him well and be my
friends. For Siegfried's soul shall ye deal out his gold."

No child, however small, that had its wits, but must go to service, or
ever he was buried. Better than a hundred masses were sung that day.
Great throng was there of Siegfried's friends.

When that mass was sung, the folk went hence. Then Lady Kriemhild spake:
"Pray let me not hold vigil over the chosen knight this night alone.
With him all my joys have come to fall. I will let him lie in state
three days and nights, until I sate me with my dear lord. What if God
doth bid that death should take me too. Then had ended well the grief of
me, poor Kriemhild."

The people of the town returned now to their lodgeings. She begged the
priests and monks and all his retinue, that served the knight, to stay.
They spent full evil nights and toilsome days; many a man remained
without all food and drink. For those who would partake, it was made
known that men would give them to the full. This Sir Siegmund purveyed.
Then were the Nibelungs made acquaint with mickle toil. During the three
days, as we hear tell, those who knew how to sing, were made to bear a
deal of work. What offerings men brought them! Those who were very poor,
grew rich enow. Whatever of poor men there were, the which had naught,
these were bid go to mass with gold from Siegfried's treasure chamber.
Since he might not live, many thousand marks of gold were given for his
soul. She dealt out well-tilled lands, wherever cloisters and pious folk
were found. Enow of gold and silver was given to the poor. By her deeds
she showed that she did love him fondly.

Upon the third morning at time of mass, the broad churchyard by the
minster was full of weeping country folk. They served him after death,
as one should do to loving kin. In the four days, as hath been told,
full thirty thousand marks or better still were given to the poor for
his soul's sake. Yet his great beauty and his life lay low. When God
had been served and the chants were ended, much people fought 'gainst
monstrous grief. Men bade bear him from the minster to the grave. Those
were seen to weep and wail who missed him most. With loud laments the
people followed hence; none was merry, neither wife nor man. They sang
and read a service before they buried him. Ho, what good priests were
present at his burial! Ere Siegfried's wife was come to the grave, her
faithful heart was rung with grief, so that they must needs oft sprinkle
her with water from the spring. Her pain was passing great; a mickle
wonder it was that she ever lived. Many a lady helped her in her plaint.

Then spake the queen: "Ye men of Siegfried, by your loyalty must ye
prove your love to me. Let me receive this little favor after all my
woe, that I may see once more his comely head."

She begged so long, with griefs strong will, that they must needs break
open the lordly casket. Then men brought the lady to where he lay. With
her white hand she raised his fair head and kissed the noble knight and
good, thus dead. Tears of blood her bright eyes wept from grief. Then
there happed a piteous parting. Men bare her hence, she could not walk,
and soon they found the high-born lady lying senseless. Fain would the
lovely fair have died of grief.

When they had now buried the noble lord, those who were come with him
from the Nibelung land were seen to suffer from unmeasured grief. Men
found Siegmund full seldom merry then. There were those that for three
days would neither eat nor drink for passing grief. Yet might they not
so waste away their bodies, but that they recovered from their sorrows,
as still happeneth oft enow.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Bleed".  This was not only a popular superstition, but also
        a legal practice in case of a murder when the criminal had
        not been discovered, or if any one was suspected.  The
        suspected person was requested to approach the bier and
        touch the body, in the belief that the blood would flow
        afresh if the one touching the body were guilty.  Our
        passage is the first instance of its mention in German
        literature.  A similar one occurs in "Iwein", 1355-1364.
        The usage was also known in France and England.  See the
        instances quoted by Jacob Grimm in his "Rechtsaltertumer",
        930.




ADVENTURE XVIII. How Siegmund Journeyed Home Again.

Kriemhild's husband's father went to where he found her. Unto the queen
he spake: "We must unto our land; by the Rhine, I ween, we be unwelcome
guests. Kriemhild, dear lady, now journey with me to my lands. Albeit
treachery here in these lands hath bereft us of your noble husband, yet
should ye not requite this. I will be friendly to you for my dear son's
sake, of this shall ye have no doubt. Ye shall have, my lady, all the
power which Siegfried, the bold knight, gave you aforetime. The land and
also the crown shall be subject to you. All Siegfried's men shall serve
you gladly."

Then the squires were told that they must ride away. A mickle hurrying
for steeds was seen, for they were loth to stay with their deadly foes.
Men bade dames and maidens seek their robes. When that King Siegmund
would fain have ridden forth, Kriemhild's mother gan beg her that she
stay there with her kindred.

The royal lady answered: "That might hardly hap. How could I bear the
sight of him from whom such great wrong hath happed to me, poor wife?"

Then spake young Giselher: "Dear sister mine, by thy troth thou shouldst
stay here with thy mother. Thou dost need no service of them that have
grieved thee and saddened thy mood. Live from my goods alone."

To the warrior she spake: "Certes, it may not hap, for I should die of
dole whenever I should gaze on Hagen."

"I'll give thee rede for that, dear sister mine. Thou shalt live with
thy brother Giselher, and of a truth I'll comfort thee of thy husband's
death."

Then answered the hapless wife: "Of that hath Kriemhild need."

When the youth had made her such kindly offer, then gan Uta and Gernot
and her faithful kin entreat. They begged her to tarry there, for but
little kith she had among Siegfried's men.

"They be all strangers to you," spake Gernot; "none that liveth is so
strong but that he must come to die. Consider that, dear sister, and
console your mind. Stay with your kinsfolk; ye shall fare well in
truth."

Then she made vow to Giselher that she would stay. The steeds were
brought for Siegfried's men, sith they would ride to the Nibelung land.
Also all the trappings of the knights were packed upon the sumpters.
Then the Lord Siegmund hied him to Kriemhild's side. To the lady he
spake: "Siegfried's men are waiting by the steeds. Now must we ride
away, for I be ill content in Burgundy."

The Lady Kriemhild then replied: "All that I have of faithful kin advise
me that I stay here with them; I have no kith in the Nibelung land."

Loth it was to Siegmund, when that he found Kriemhild of this mind. He
spake: "Let no one tell you that. Before all my kinsmen ye shall wear
the crown with such sovran power as ye did aforetime. Ye shall not
suffer, because we have lost the knight. Ride also with us home again,
for the sake of your little child. Lady, ye should not leave him
orphaned. When your son groweth up, he will comfort your heart.
Meanwhile many bold heroes and good shall serve you."

"Sir Siegmund," quoth she, "forsooth I like not for to ride. Whatever
fortune, here must I tarry with my kindred, who help me mourn."

These tales gan now displease the doughty warriors. All spake alike: "We
might well aver that now first hath ill befallen us. If ye would
stay here with our foes, then have heroes never ridden to court more
sorrowfully."

"Ye shall journey free of care, commended unto God; ye shall be given
safe-conduct to Siegmund's land, I'll bid them guard you well. To the
care of you knights shall my dear child be given."

When they marked that she would not go hence, then wept all of
Siegmund's men alike. How right sorrowfully Siegmund parted then from
Lady Kriemhild! He became acquaint with grief. "Woe worth this courtly
feasting," spake the noble king. "Through pastime will nevermore hap to
king or to his kinsmen, what here hath happed to us. Men shall see us
nevermore in Burgundy."

Then Siegfried's men spake openly: "A journey to this land might still
take place, if we discovered aright him who slew our lord. Enow of his
kinsmen be their deadly foes."

He kissed Kriemhild; how sorrowfully he spake, when he perceived aright
that she would stay: "Now let us ride joyless home unto our land, now
first do I feel all my sorrow."

Down to the Rhine from Worms they rode without an escort. They were
surely of the mind that they, the bold Nibelungs, could well defend
them, should they be encountered in hostile wise. Leave they asked of
none, but Gernot and Giselher were seen to go to Siegmund in loving
wise. These brave and lusty knights convinced him that they mourned his
loss. Courteously Prince Gernot spake: "God in heaven knoweth well that
I be not to blame for Siegfried's death, nor heard I ever that any was
his foe. I mourn him justly."

Giselher, the youth, gave them then safe-conduct. Sorrowly he led them
from the land home to Netherland. How few kinsman were found joyous
then!

How they now fared at Worms I cannot tell. All time men heard Kriemhild
mourn, so that none might comfort her heart nor mind, save Giselher
alone; loyal he was and good. Brunhild, the fair, sate in overweening
pride. How Kriemhild wept, she recked not, nor did she ever show her
love or troth. Lady Kriemhild wrought her in after days the bitterest
woe of heart.




ADVENTURE XIX. How The Nibelung Hoard Was Brought to Worms.

When the noble Kriemhild thus was widowed, the Margrave Eckewart with
his vassals stayed with her in the land, and served her alway. He also
often helped his mistress mourn his lord. At Worms, hard by the minster,
they built for her a dwelling, broad and passing large, costly and
great, where, with her maids, she since dwelt joyless. She liked for to
go to church and did this willingly. Where her love lay buried, thither
she went all time in mournful mood (how seldom she gave that over). She
prayed the good God to have mercy on her soul. With great fidelity she
bewept the knight full oft. Uta and her meiny comforted her all time,
but so sorely wounded was her heart, that it booted naught, whatever
comfort men did offer her. She had the greatest longing for her dear
love, that ever wife did have for loving husband. One might see thereby
her passing virtue; until her end she mourned, the while life lasted. In
after days brave Siegfried's wife avenged herself with might.

Thus she dwelt after her sorrow, after her husband's death, and this is
true, well three and one half years, that she spake no word to Gunther,
nor did she see her foeman Hagen in all this time.

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "If ye could compass it to make your sister
friendly, then might come to these lands the gold of Nibelung. Of this
might ye win great store, an' the queen would be our friend."

The king made answer: "Let us try. My brothers bide with her; we will
beg them to bring it to pass that she be our friend, if perchance she
might gladly see us win the hoard."

"I trow not," spake Hagen, "that it will ever hap."

Then he bade Ortwin and the Margrave Gere go to court. When that was
done, Gernot and Giselher, the youth, were also brought. They tried
it with the Lady Kriemhild in friendly wise. Brave Gernot of Burgundy
spake: "Lady, ye mourn too long for Siegfried's death. The king will
give you proof that he hath not slain him. We hear you mourn all time so
greatly."

She spake: "None chargeth him with this. 'Twas Hagen's hand that struck
him, where he could be wounded. When he learned this of me, how could
I think that he did bear him hate? Else had I guarded against this full
well," spake the queen, "so that I had not betrayed his life; then would
I, poor wife, leave off my weeping. I'll never be a friend of him that
did the deed." Then Giselher, the full stately man, began implore.

When at last she spake: "I will greet the king," men saw him stand
before her with his nearest kin, but Hagen durst not come before her.
Well he wot his guilt; 'twas he had caused her dole. When now she would
forego her hate of Gunther, so that he might kiss her, it had befitted
him better had she not been wronged by his advice; then might he have
gone boldly unto Kriemhild. Nevermore was peace between kindred brought
to pass with so many tears; her loss still gave her woe. All, save the
one man alone, she pardoned. None had slain him, had not Hagen done the
deed.

Not long thereafter they brought it to pass that Lady Kriemhild gained
the hoard from the Nibelung land and brought it to the Rhine. It was
her marriage morning gift (1) and was hers by right. Giselher and Gernot
rode to fetch it. Kriemhild ordered eighty hundred men, that they should
bring it from where it lay hid, where it was guarded by the knight
Alberich (2) and his nearest kin. When they saw those from the Rhine
coming for the hoard, Alberich, the bold, spake to his friends: "Naught
of the treasure dare we withhold from her, sith the noble queen averreth
it to be her marriage morning gift. Yet should this never be done,"
quoth Alberich, "but that with Siegfried we have foully lost the good
Cloud Cloak, for fair Kriemhild's love did wear it alway. Now, alas,
it hath fared ill with Siegfried, that the hero bereft us of the Cloud
Cloak and that all this land did have to serve him."

Then went the warder to where he found the keys. Before the castle stood
Kriemhild's liegemen and a deal of her kinsfolk. Men bade carry the
treasure hence to the sea, down to the boats; one bare it then upon
the waves to the mountains on the Rhine. Now may ye hear marvels of the
hoard, the which twelve huge wains, packed full, were just able to bear
away from the hill in four days and nights and each must make the trip
three times a day. There was naught else but gems and gold, and had men
paid therewith the wage of all the world, not a mark less had it been
in worth. Forsooth Hagen did not crave it so without good cause. The
greatest prize of all was a wishing-rod (3) of gold. He who knew its
nature, might well be master over any man in all the world.

Many of Alberich's kinsmen journeyed with Gernot hence. When they
stored away the hoard in Gunther's land and the queen took charge of
everything, chambers and towers were filled therewith. Never did men
hear tales told of such wondrous store of goods. And had it been a
thousand times as much, if the Lord Siegfried were but alive again,
Kriemhild would fain have stood empty-handed at his side. No more
faithful wife did hero ever win. Now that she had the hoard, she brought
many unknown warriors to the land. In truth the lady's hand gave in
such wise that men have never seen such bounty more. She used great
courtesie; men owned this of the queen. To the rich and the poor she
began to give so greatly that Hagen said, should she live yet a while,
she would gain so many a man for her service that they would fare full
ill.

Then spake King Gunther: "Her life and her goods be hers. How shall I
hinder that she do with them as she will? Forsooth I hardly compassed
it, that she became thus much my friend. Let us not reck to whom she
deal out her silver and her gold."

Spake Hagen to the king: "No doughty man should leave to any wife aught
of the heard. With her gifts she'll bring about the day when it well may
rue the brave Burgundians sore."

Then spake King Gunther: "I swore an oath, that nevermore would I do her
harm, and will keep it further, for she is my sister."

Spake then Hagen: "Let me be the guilty one."

Few of their oaths were kept. From the widow they took the mighty
store and Hagen made him master of all the keys. This vexed her brother
Gernot, when he heard the tale aright. Lord Giselher spake: "Hagen hath
done my sister much of harm; I should prevent it. It would cost him his
life, were he not my kin."

Siegfried's wife shed tears anew. Then spake the Lord Gernot: "Or ever
we be imperiled by the gold, we should have it sunk entirely in the
Rhine, that it belong to none."

Full pitifully she went before her brother Giselher. She spake: "Dear
brother, thou shouldst think of me and be the guardian of both my life
and goods."

Quoth he then to the lady: "That shall be done when we return again, for
now we think to ride."

The king and his kindred voided then the land, the very best among them
that one might find. Only Hagen alone remained at home, through the
hatred he bare to Kriemhild, and did so willingly. Before the king was
come again, Hagen had taken the treasure quite and sunk it all at
Loche, (4) in the Rhine. He weened to use it, but that might not be. The
lordings came again and with them many men. With her maids and ladies
Kriemhild gan bewail her passing loss, for sore it grieved them. Gladly
would Giselher have helped in all good faith. All spake alike: "He hath
done wrong."

Hagen avoided the princes' wrath, until he gained their favor. They
did him naught, but Kriemhild might never have borne him greater hate.
Before Hagen of Troneg thus hid the treasure, they had sworn with mighty
oaths that it should lie concealed as long as any one of them might
live. Later they could not give it to themselves or any other.

Kriemhild's mind was heavy with fresh sorrow over her husband's end, and
because they had taken from her all her wealth. Her plaints ceased not
in all her life, down to her latest day. After Siegfried's death, and
this is true, she dwelt with many a grief full thirteen years, that she
could not forget the warrior's death. She was true to him, as most folk
owned.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Marriage morning gift" was the gift which it was customary
        for the bridegroom to give the bride on the morning after
        the bridal night.  On this custom see Weinhold, "Deutsche
        Frauen im Mittelalter", i, p. 402.
   (2)  "A1berich", see Adventure III, note 8.  It is characteristic
        of the poem that even this dwarf is turned into a knight.
   (3)  "Wishing-rod", a magic device for discovering buried
        treasure.  Cf. Grimm, "Deutsche Mythologie," ii, 813.
   (4)  "Loche", according to Piper, is the modern "Locheim" in the
        Rhine province.




ADVENTURE XX. How King Etzel (1) Sent To Burgundy For Kriemhild.

That was in a time when Lady Helca (2) died and the king Etzel sought
another wife, that his friends advised his marriage to a proud widow in
the Burgundian land, hight Lady Kriemhild. Since fair Helca was dead,
they spake: "Would ye gain a noble wife, the highest and the best king
ever won, then take this same lady; the stalwart Siegfried was her
husband."

Then spake the mighty king: "How might that chance, sith I am heathen
and be christened not a whit, whereas the lady is a Christian and
therefore would not plight her troth? It would be a marvel, and that
ever happed."

The doughty warriors answered: "What if she do it, perchance, for the
sake of your high name and your mickle goods? One should at least make a
trial for the noble dame. Well may ye love the stately fair."

The noble king then spake: "Which of you be acquaint with the people and
the land by the Rhine?"

Up spake then the good knight Rudeger of Bechelaren: (3) "I have known
from a child the three noble and lordly kings, Gunther and Gernot, the
noble knights and good; the third hight Giselher. Each of them doth use
the highest honors and courtesie, as their forebears, too, have always
done."

Then answered Etzel: "Friend, I prithee, tell me whether she should wear
the crown in this my land. An' she be so fair, as hath been told me, it
shall never rue my dearest kin."

"She compareth well in beauty with my Lady Helca, the royal queen.
Certes, there might not be in all this world a king's bride more fair.
He may well be of good cheer to whom she plight her troth."

He spake: "So bring it to pass, Rudeger, as I be dear to thee; and if
ever I do lie at Kriemhild's side, I will requite thee for it as best
I may. Then hast thou done my will in fullest wise. From my treasure
chambers I will bid thee be given such store of horses, of clothes and
all thou wilt, that thou and thy fellowship may live full merrily. I'll
bid full plenty of these things be made ready against thine errand."

To this the lordly margrave Rudeger replied: "Craved I thy goods, that
were not worthy of praise. With mine own goods, which I have from thy
hands, will I gladly be thy envoy to the Rhine."

Then spake the mighty king: "Now when wilt thou ride for the fair? May
God keep thee and my lady in all worship on the journey. May fortune
help me, that she look with favor on my suit."

Rudeger made answer: "Ere we void the land, we must first make ready
arms and trappings, that we may stand with honor before princes. I will
lead to the Rhine five hundred stately men, that wherever in Burgundy I
and mine be seen, all may say of thee: `Never did any king send afar so
many men in better wise than thou hast done to the Rhine.' If thou, O
mighty king, wilt not turn back on this account, I'll tell thee that
her noble love was subject unto Siegfried, Siegmund's son. Him thou hast
seen here. (4) Men could in right truth ascribe to him great worship."

Then spake King Etzel: "Tho' she was the warrior's wife, yet was the
noble prince so peerless that I should not disdain the queen. She liketh
me well for her passing beauty."

The margrave answered: "Then I will tell thee that we will start hence
in four and twenty days. I'll send word to Gotelind, my dear lady, that
I myself will be the messenger to Kriemhild."

Rudeger sent word to Bechelaren, at which the margravine grew both
sorrowful and proud. He told her he should woo for the king a wife.
Lovingly she thought on Helca, the fair. When the margravine heard the
message, a deal she rued it; weeping beseemed her at the thought whether
she should gain a lady as afore. When she thought on Helca, it grieved
her heart full sore.

Rudeger should ride in seven days from Hungary; lusty and merry King
Etzel was at this. There in the town of Vienna men prepared their
weeds. Then might he no longer delay his journey. At Bechelaren Gotelind
awaited him; the young margravine, too, Rudeger's child, gladly saw her
father and his men. Many fair maids awaited them with joy. Ere the noble
Rudeger rode from the city of Vienna to Bechelaren, all their clothes
were placed upon the sumpters. They journeyed in such wise that not a
whit was taken from them.

When they were come to tho town of Bechelaren, the host full lovingly
bade lodge his fellowship and ease them well. The noble Gotelind saw
the host come gladly, as likewise his dear daughter did, the young
margravine. To her his coming could not be liefer. How fain she was to
see the heroes from the Hunnish land! With smiling mien the noble maiden
spake: "Now be my father and his men full welcome here."

Then great thanks were given to the young margravine by many a doughty
knight in courteous wise. Well wot Gotelind Sir Rudeger's mood. When at
night she lay close by his side, what kindly questions the margravine
put, whither the king of the Huns had sent him. He spake: "My Lady
Gotelind, I'll gladly make this known to thee. I must woo another
lady for my lord, sith that the fair Helca hath died. I will ride for
Kriemhild to the Rhine; she shall become a mighty queen here among the
Huns."

"Would to God," spake Gotelind, "an' that might hap, sith we do hear
such speech of her many honors, that she might perchance replace our
lady for us in our old age, and that we might be fain to let her wear
the crown in Hungary."

Then spake the margrave: "My love, ye must offer to those who are to
ride with me to the Rhine, your goods in loving wise. When heroes travel
richly, then are they of lofty mood."

She spake: "There be none that taketh gladly from my hand, to whom I
would not give what well beseemeth him, or ever ye and your men part
hence."

Quoth the margrave: "That doth like me well."

Ho, what rich cloths of silk were borne from their treasure chambers!
With enow of this the clothing of the noble warriors was busily lined
from the neck down to their spurs. Rudeger had chosen only men that
pleased him well.

On the seventh morning the host and his warriors rode forth from
Bechelaren. Weapons and clothes a plenty they took with them through the
Bavarian land. Seldom did men assail them on the highways for robbery's
sake, and within twelve days they reached the Rhine. Then might the
tidings not be hid; men told it to the king and to his liegemen, that
stranger guests were come. The host gan say, if any knew them, he should
tell him so. One saw their sumpters bear right heavy loads. 'Twas seen
that they were passing rich.

Anon in the broad town men purveyed them quarters. When that the many
strangers had been lodged, these same lords were gazed upon full oft.
The people wondered from whence these warriors were come to the Rhine.
The host now sent for Hagen, if perchance they might be known to him.
Then spake the knight of Troneg: "None of them have I ever seen, but
when we now gaze upon them, I can tell you well from whence they ride
hither to this land. They must indeed be strangers, an' I know them not
full soon." (5)

Lodgings were now taken for the guests. The envoy and his fellowship
were come in passing costly vesture. To the court they rode wearing good
garments, cut in full cunning wise. Then spake the doughty Hagen: "As
well as I can tell, for I have not seen the lord long time, they ride as
if 'twere Rudeger from the Hunnish land, a lordly knight and a brave."

"How can I believe," spake at once the king, "that the lord of
Bechelaren be come to this land?"

When King Gunther had ended his speech, Hagen, the brave, espied the
good knight Rudeger. He and his friends all ran to meet them. Then five
hundred knights were seen dismounting from their steeds. Fair were the
men from Hungary greeted; messengers had never worn such lordly clothes.
Then Hagen of Troneg spake full loudly: "Now be these knights, the lord
of Bechelaren and all his men, welcome in God's name."

With worship the speedy knights were greeted. The next of kin to the
king went to where they stood. Ortwin of Metz spake to Rudeger: "Never
have we seen guests so gladly here at any time. This I can truly say."

On all sides they thanked the warriors for their greeting. With all
their fellowship they hied them to the hall, where they found the
king and with him many a valiant man. The lords rose from their seats;
through their great chivalry this was done. How right courteously he met
the messengers! Gunther and Gernot greeted the stranger and his vassals
warmly, as was his due. He took the good knight Rudeger by the hand
and led him to the seat where he sat himself. Men bade pour out for the
guests (full gladly this was done) passing good mead and the best of
wine that one might find in the land along the Rhine. Giselher and Gere
both were come; Dankwart and Folker, too, had heard about the strangers.
Merry they were of mood and greeted before the king the noble knights
and good.

Then spake Hagen of Troneg to his lord: "These thy knights should ever
requite what the margrave for our sake hath done; for this should the
husband of fair Gotelind receive reward."

King Gunther spake: "I cannot hold my peace; ye must tell me how fare
Etzel and Helca of the Hunnish land."

To this the margrave now made answer: "I'll gladly let you know." He
rose from his seat with all his men and spake to the king: "An' may that
be that ye permit me, O prince, so will I not conceal the tidings that I
bring, but will tell them willingly."

Quoth the king: "The tidings that have been sent us through you, these
I'll let you tell without the rede of friends. Pray let me and my
vassals hear them, for I begrudge you no honor that ye here may gain."

Then spake the worthy envoy: "My great master doth commend to you upon
the Rhine his faithful service and to all the kinsmen ye may have. This
message is sent in all good faith. The noble king bade complain to you
his need. His folk is joyless; my lady, the royal Helca, my master's
wife, is dead. Through her hath many a high-born maid been orphaned,
daughters of noble princes, whom she hath trained. Therefore it standeth
full piteously in his land; they have alas none that might befriend them
faithfully. The king's grief, I ween, will abate but slowly."

"Now God reward him," spake Gunther, "that he so willingly commendeth
his service to me and to my kin. Full gladly have I here heard his
greeting, and this both my kindred and my men shall fain requite."

Then spake the warrior Gernot of Burgundy: "The world must ever rue fair
Helca's death, for her many courtesies, which she well knew how to use."

With this speech Hagen, the passing stately knight, agreed.

Then answered Rudeger, the noble and lordly envoy: "Sith ye permit me,
O king, I shall tell you more, the which my dear lord hath hither sent
you, sith he doth live so right sorrowfully in longing after Helca. Men
told my lord that Kriemhild be without a husband, that Sir Siegfried be
dead. If this be so, then shall she wear a crown before Etzel's knights,
would ye but permit her. This my sovran bade me say."

Then spake the mighty king, full courteous was his mood: "And she care
to do this, she shall hear my pleasure. This will I make known to you in
these three days. Why should I refuse King Etzel before I've learned her
wish?"

Meanwhile men bade purvey good easement for the guests. They were served
so well that Rudeger owned he had good friends there among Gunthers men.
Hagen served him gladly, as Rudeger had done to him of yore. Till the
third day Rudeger thus remained. The king sent for his counsel (full
wisely he acted) to see whether his kinsmen would think it well that
Kriemhild take King Etzel to husband. All together they advised it, save
Hagen alone. He spake to Gunther, the knight: "Have ye but the right
wit, ye will take good care that ye never do this, tho' she were fain to
follow."

"Why," spake then Gunther, "should I not consent? Whatever pleasure
happen to the queen, I should surely grant her this; she is my sister.
We ourselves should bring it to pass, if perchance it might bring her
honor."

Then answered Hagen: "Give over this speech. Had ye knowledge of Etzel
as have I, and should she harry him, as I hear you say, then first hath
danger happed to you by right."

"Why?" quoth Gunther. "I'll take good care that I come not so near
him that I must suffer aught of hatred on his part, an' she become his
wife."

Said Hagen: "Never will I give you this advice."

For Gernot and Giselher men bade send to learn whether the two lords
would think it well that Kriemhild should take the mighty and noble
king. Hagen still gainsaid, but no one other. Then spake the knight
Giselher of Burgundy: "Friend Hagen, ye may still show your fealty. Make
her to forget the wrongs that ye have done her. Whatever good fortune
she may have, this ye should not oppose. Ye have in truth done my sister
so many an ill," continued Giselher, the full lusty knight, "that she
hath good cause, if she be angry with you. Never hath one bereft a lady
of greater joys."

Quoth Hagen: "I'll do you to wit what well I know. If she take Etzel and
live long enow, she'll do us still much harm in whatever way she can.
Forsooth full many a stately vassal will own her service."

To this brave Gernot answered: "It may not happen, that we ever ride to
Etzel's land before they both be dead. Let us serve her faithfully, that
maketh for our honor."

Again Hagen spake: "None can gainsay me, an' the noble Kriemhild wear
the crown of Helca, she will do us harm as best she may. Ye should give
it over, 'twould beseem you knights far better."

Wrathfully then spake Giselher, fair Uta's son: "Let us not all act as
traitors. We should be glad of whatever honors may be done her. Whatever
ye may say, Hagen, I shall serve her by my troth."

Gloomy of mood grew Hagen when he heard these words. Gernot and
Giselher, the proud knights and good, and Gunther, the mighty, spake at
last, if Kriemhild wished it, they would let it hap without all hate.

Then spake Prince Gere: "I will tell the lady that she look with favor
upon King Etzel, to whom so many knights owe dread obedience. He can
well requite her of all the wrongs that have been done her."

Then the doughty warrior hied him to where he saw Kriemhild. Kindly she
received him. How quickly then he spake: "Ye may well greet me gladly
and give me a messenger's meed. Fortune is about to part you from all
your woes. For the sake of your love, my lady, one of the very best that
ever gained a kingdom with great honors, or should wear a crown, hath
sent envoys hither. Noble knights be wooing; this my brother bade me
tell you."

Then spake the sorrow-laden dame: "God should forbid you and all my
kinsmen that ye make a mock of me, poor woman. What could I be to a man
who had ever gained heartfelt love from a faithful wife?"

Sorely she gainsaid it, but then came Gernot, her brother, and Giselher,
the youth, and lovingly bade her ease her heart. It would do her good in
truth, could she but take the king.

None might persuade the lady that she should marry any man. Then the
knights begged: "If ye do naught else, pray let it hap that ye deign to
see the messengers."

"I'll not deny," spake the noble dame, "but that I should gladly see
the Margrave Rudeger for his passing courtesie. Were he not sent hither,
whoever else might be the messenger, never should he become acquainted
with me. Pray bid him come to-morrow to my bower. I'll let him hear my
will in full and tell it him myself." At this her great laments brake
forth anew.

The noble Rudeger now craved naught else but that he might see the
high-born queen. He wist himself to be so wise that she could not but
let the knight persuade her, if it should ever be. Early on the morrow
when mass was sung, the noble envoys came. A great press arose; of those
who should go to court with Rudeger, many a lordly man was seen arrayed.
Full sad of mood, the high-born Kriemhild bided the noble envoy and
good. He found her in the weeds she wore each day, whereas her handmaids
wore rich clothes enow. She went to meet him to the door and greeted
full kindly Etzel's liegeman. Only as one of twelve he went to meet her.
Men offered him great worship, for never were come more lofty envoys.
They bade the lording and his vassals seat them. Before her were seen to
stand the two Margraves Eckewart and Gere, the noble knights and good.
None they saw merry of mood, for the sake of the lady of the house. Many
fair women were seen to sit before her, but Kriemhild only nursed her
grief; her dress upon her breast was wot with scalding tears. This the
noble margrave noted well on Kriemhild.

Then spake the high-born messenger: "Most noble princess, I pray you,
permit me and my comrades that are come with me, to stand before you and
tell you the tidings for the sake of which we have ridden hither."

"Now may ye speak whatso ye list," spake the queen. "I am minded to hear
it gladly; ye be a worthy messenger."

The others noted well her unwilling mood.

Then spake Prince Rudeger of Bechelaren: "Etzel, a high-born king,
hath in good faith sent you a friendly greeting, my lady, by messengers
hither to this land. Many good knights hath he sent hither for your
love. Great joy without grief he doth offer you most truly. He is ready
to give you constant friendship, as he did afore to Lady Helca, who lay
within his heart. Certes, through longing for her virtues he hath full
often joyless days."

Then spake the queen: "Margrave Rudeger, were there any who knew my
bitter sorrow, he would not bid me marry any man. Of a truth I lost the
best of husbands that ever lady won."

"What may comfort grief," the bold knight replied, "but married joy.
When that any gan gain this and chooseth one who doth beseem him, naught
availeth so greatly for woe of heart. And ye care to love my noble
master, ye shall have power over twelve mighty crowns. Thereto my lord
will give you the lands of thirty princes, all of which his doughty hand
hath overcome. Ye shall become the mistress over many worthy liegemen,
who were subject to my Lady Helca, and over many dames of high and
princely race, who owned her sway." Thus spake the brave knight and
bold. "Thereto my lord will give you (this he bade me say), if ye would
deign to wear with him the crown, the very highest power which Helca
ever won; this shall ye rule before all Etzel's men."

Then spake the queen: "How might it ever list me to become a hero's
bride? Death hath given me in the one such dole that I must ever live
joyless unto mine end."

To this the Huns replied: "O mighty queen, your life at Etzel's court
will be so worshipful that it will ever give you joy, an' it come to
pass, for the mighty king hath many a stately knight. Helca's damosels
and your maids shall together form one retinue, at sight of which
warriors may well be blithe of mood. Be advised, my lady, ye will fare
well in truth."

With courtesie she spake: "Now let be this speech until the morrow
early, when ye shall come here again. Then will I give you answer to
what ye have in mind."

The bold knights and good must needs obey.

When all were now come to their lodgings, the noble dame bade send for
Giselher and for her mother, too. To the twain she said, that weeping
did beseem her and naught else better.

Then spake her brother Giselher: "Sister, it hath been told me, and I
can well believe it, that King Etzel would make all thy sorrows vanish,
and thou takest him to be thy husband. Whatever others may advise, this
thinketh me well done. He is well able to turn thy grief to joy," spake
Giselher again; "from the Rhone to the Rhine, from the Elbe down to the
sea, there be no other king as mighty as he. Thou mayst well rejoice,
an' he make thee his wife."

She spake: "My dear brother, why dost thou advise me this? Weeping
and wailing beseem me better far. How should I go to court before his
knights? Had I ever beauty, of this I am now bereft."

To her dear daughter the Lady Uta spake: "Whatever thy brothers counsel
thee, dear child, that do. Obey thy kindred and it will go well with
thee. I have seen thee now too long in thy great grief."

Then she prayed God full oft to grant her such store of goods that she
might have gold, silver, and clothes to give, as at her husband's side
of yore, when that he was still alive and well. Else would she never
have again such happy hours. She thought within her mind: "And shall
I give my body to a paynim (6) (I am a Christian wife), forever in the
world must I bear shame. An' he gave me all the kingdoms in the world
still 1 would not do it."

Thus she let the matter rest. All night until the break of day the lady
lay upon her bed in thought. Her bright eyes never grew dry, till on the
morn she went to matins. Just at the time for mass the kings were come
and took their sister again in hand. In truth they urged her to wed the
king of the Hunnish land; little did any of them find the lady merry.
Then they bade fetch hither Etzel's men, who now would fain have taken
their leave, whatever the end might be, whether they gained or lost
their suit. Rudeger came now to court; his heroes urged him to learn
aright the noble prince's mind. To all it seemed well that this be done
betimes, for long was the way back into their land. Men brought Rudeger
to where Kriemhild was found. Winningly the knight gan beg the noble
queen to let him hear what message she would send to Etzel's land. I
ween, he heard from her naught else than no, that she nevermore would
wed a man. The margrave spake: "That were ill done. Why would ye let
such beauty wither? Still with honor may ye become the bride of a worthy
man."

Naught booted that they urged, till Rudeger told the noble queen in
secret that he would make amends for all that ever happed to her. At
this her great sorrow grew a deal more mild. To the queen he spake: "Let
be your weeping. If ye had none among the Huns but me and my faithful
kin and liegemen, sore must he repent it who had ever done you aught."

At this the lady's mood grew gentler. She spake: "Then swear me an
oath, that whatever any do to me that ye will be the first to amend my
wrongs."

Quoth the margrave: "For this, my lady, I am ready."

Rudeger with all his vassals swore that he would ever serve her
faithfully and pledged his hand, that the noble knights from Etzel's
land would ne'er refuse her aught.

Then the faithful lady thought: "Sith I, wretched wife, have won so many
friends, I'll let the people say whatso they choose. What if my dear
husband's death might still be avenged?" She thought: "Sith Etzel hath
so many men-at-arms, I can do whatso I will, an' I command them. He is
likewise so rich that I shall have wherewith to give; the baleful Hagen
hath bereft me of my goods."

To Rudeger she spake: "Had I not heard that he were a paynim, gladly
would I go whithersoever he listed and would take him to my husband."

Then spake the margrave: "Lady, give over this speech. He hath so many
knights of Christian faith, that ye'll ever be joyful at his court.
What if ye bring it to pass, that he should let himself be christened?
Therefore may ye fain become King Etzel's wife."

Then her brothers spake again: "Now pledge your troth, dear sister. Ye
should now give over your sadness."

They begged her till she sadly vowed before the heroes to become King
Etzel's bride. She spake: "I will obey you, I poor queen, and fare to
the Huns as soon as ever that may be, whenever I have friends who will
take me to his land."

Of this fair Kriemhild pledged her hand before the knights.

Then spake the margrave: "If ye have two liegemen, I have still more.
'Twill be the best, that with worship we escort you across the Rhine.
No longer, lady, shall ye tarry here in Burgundy. I have five hundred
vassals and kinsmen, too; they shall serve you, lady, and do whatso ye
bid, both here and there at home. I'll do by you the same whenever ye
do mind me of the tale and never feel ashamed. Now bid the housings for
your horses be made ready (Rudeger's counsel will never irk you) and
tell it to your maids, whom ye would take along, for many a chosen
knight will meet us on the road."

She still had harness with which they rode afore in Siegfried's time, so
that she might take with her many maidens now with worship, whenever she
would hence. Ho, what good saddles they fetched for the comely dames!
Albeit they had aye worn costly robes, many more were now made ready,
for much had been told them of the king. They opened up the chests,
which stood afore well locked. For four and one half days they were
aught but idle; from the presses they brought forth the stores that lay
therein. Kriemhild now began to open up her treasure rooms, she fain
would make all Rudeger's liegemen rich. Of the gold from the Nibelung
land she still had such store that a hundred horses might not bear it;
she weened her hand should deal it out among the Huns.

This tale Hagen heard told of Kriemhild. He spake: "Sith Kriemhild will
not become my friend, so Siegfried's gold must stay behind. For why
should I give to my foes such great store of goods? Well I wot what
Kriemhild will do with this hoard. I can well believe, an' she take it
with her, that it will be doled out to call forth hate against me. Nor
have they steeds enow to bear it hence. Hagen doth intend to keep it,
pray tell Kriemhild that."

When that she heard this tale, it irked her sore. It was likewise told
to all three kings. Fain would they have changed it, but as this did not
hap, the noble Rudeger spake full blithely: "Mighty queen, why mourn ye
for the gold? King Etzel doth bear you such great love, that when his
eyes do light upon you, such store he'll give you that ye can never
spend it all; this will I swear to you, my lady."

Then spake the queen: "Most noble Rudeger, never hath king's daughter
gained such wealth as that, of which Hagen hath bereft me."

Then came her brother Gernot to the treasure chamber. By leave of the
king in the door he thrust the key. Kriemhild's gold was handed forth, a
thousand marks or more. He bade the strangers take it; much this pleased
King Gunther.

Then spake Gotelind's knight from Bechelaren: "And had my Lady Kriemhild
all the hoard that was brought from the Nibelung land, little of it
would mine or the queen's hand touch. Now bid them keep it, for I will
none of it. Forsooth I brought from home such store of mine that we can
lightly do without this on the road, for we be furnished for the journey
in full lordly wise."

Aforr this her maids had filled twelve chests at leisure with the very
best of gold that anywhere might be. This they took with them and great
store of women's trinkets, which they should wear upon the road. Her
thought too great the might of Hagen. Of her gold for offerings (7) she
had still a thousand marks. For her dear husband's soul she dealt it
out. This Rudeger thought was done in faithful love. Then spake the
mournful lady: "Where be now my friends who for my sake would live in
exile? Let those who would ride with me to the Hunnish land, take now my
treasure and purchase horses and trappings."

Then spake the margrave Eckewart to the queen: "Since the day I first
became your vassal, I have served you faithfully," spake the knight,
"and aye will do the same by you until mine end. I will take with
me also five hundred of my men and place them in your service right
loyally. Naught shall ever part us, save death alone."

For this speech Kriemhild bowed her thanks; forsooth she had full need.

Men now led forth the palfreys; for they would ride away. Then many
tears were shed by kinsfolk. Royal Uta and many a comely maiden showed
that they were sad at Kriemhild's loss. A hundred high-born maids she
took with her hence, who were arrayed as well befit them. Then from
bright eyes the tears fell down, but soon at Etzel's court they lived
to see much joy. Then came Lord Giselher and Gernot, too, with their
fellowship, as their courtesie demanded. Fain would they escort their
dear sister hence; of their knights they took with them full a thousand
stately men. Then came Orwin and the doughty Gere; Rumolt, the master
of the kitchen, must needs be with them, too. They purveyed them night
quarters as far as the Danube's shore, but Gunther rode no further than
a little from the town. Ere they fared hence from the Rhine, they had
sent their messengers swiftly on ahead to the Hunnish land, who
should tell the king that Rudeger had gained for him to wife the noble
high-born queen.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Etzel", see Adventure I, note 7.
   (2)  "Helca" (M.H.G. "Helche") or "Herka", Etzel's wife, is the
        daughter of king "Oserich" or "Osantrix", as the
        "Thidreksaga" calls him.  In the latter work (chap. 73-80)
        we read how Rudeger (Rodingeir) took her by force from her
        father and brought her to Etzel to be the latter's bride.
        On her identity with the historical "Kerka" of Priscus, see
        Bleyer, PB. "Beit." xxxi, 542.
   (3)  "Rudeger of Bechelaren", or, as the name reads in the
        "Thidreksaga", "Rodingeir of Bakalar", is probably not an
        historical personage, but the hero of a separate legend.
        Evidence of this is seen in the fact that he calls himself
        an exile, though he is Etzel's mightiest vassal, with
        castles and lands in fief.  He may have been introduced, as
        Wilmanns ("Anz." xviii 101) thinks, to play a role
        originally assigned to Dietrich, who is also an exile.
        Mullenhoff considered him to have been a mythical person.
        Bechelaren, or Pechlarn, lies at the junction of the Erlach
        with the Danube.
   (4)  "hast seen here".  "Biterolf", 9471, relates that Dietrich
        had carried Siegfried, when young, by force to Etzel's
        court.
   (5)  "full soon".  See Adventure III, note 4.
   (6)  "Paynim" (O F. "paienime", late Latin "paganismus"),
        'heathen'.
   (7)  "gold for offerings".  This was the gold to be used as
        offering when masses were sung for Siegfried's soul.




ADVENTURE XXI. How Kriemhild Journeyed To The Huns.

Let now the messengers ride. We will do you to wit, how the queen
journeyed through the lands and where Giselher and Gernot parted from
her. They had served her as their fealty bade them. Down to Vergen (1)
on the Danube they rode; here they gan crave leave of the queen, for
they would ride again to the Rhine. Without tears these faithful kinsmen
might not part. Doughty Giselher spake then to his sister: "Whenever,
lady, thou shouldst need me, when aught doth trouble thee, let me but
know, and I will ride in thy service to Etzel's land."

Those who were her kin she kissed upon the mouth. Lovingly they took
their leave of Margrave Rudeger's men. The queen had with her many a
fair-fashioned maid, full a hundred and four, that wore costly robes
of rich, gay-colored silks. Many broad shields were borne close by the
ladies on the road, but many a lordly warrior turned then from her.

They journeyed soon from thence down through Bavarian land. Here the
tale was told that many unknown strangers had gathered there, where
still a cloister standeth and where the Inn floweth into the Danube. In
the town of Passau, where lived a bishop, lodgings were soon emptied and
the prince's court as well, as they hurried forth to meet the strangers
in the Bavarian land, where the Bishop Pilgrim (2) found fair Kriemhild.
The knights of the land were little loth, when in her train they saw so
many comely maids; with their eyes they courted the daughters of noble
knights. Later good lodgings were given the noble guests.

With his niece the bishop rode toward Passau. When it was told the
burghers of the town that Kriemhild was come, their prince's sister's
child, well was she greeted by the merchants. The bishop had the hope
that they would stay. Then spake Sir Eckewart: "That may not be. We must
fare further down to Rudeger's land. Many knights await us, for all wot
well the news."

Well wist fair Gotelind the tale. She tired her and her noble child with
care. Rudeger had sent her word that it thought him good that she should
cheer the mind of the queen by riding forth, with his vassals to the
Enns (3) for to meet her. When this message had been given, one saw
on every side the roads alive; on foot and horse they hastened to meet
their guests. Now was the queen come to Efferding. (4) Enow there were
from the Bavarian land who might perchance have done the guests much
harm, had they robbed upon the roads, as was their wont. That had been
forestalled by the lordly margrave: he led a thousand knights or more.

Now Gotelind, the wife of Rudeger, was come; with her there rode many a
noble knight in lordly vise. When they were come across the Traun, (5)
upon the plain by Enns, one saw erected huts and tents, where the guests
should have their lodgings for the night. Rudeger gave the vitaille to
his guests. Fair Gotelind left her lodgings far behind her; along the
road there trotted many a shapely palfrey with jingling bridle. Fair
was the welcome; right well was Rudeger pleased. Among those who rode to
meet them on the way, on either side, in praiseworthy wise, was many a
knight. They practised chivalry, the which full many a maiden saw. Nor
did the service of the knights mislike the queen. When that Rudeger's
liegemen met the guests, many truncheons (6) were seen to fly on high
from the warriors' hands in knightly custom. As though for a prize they
rode before the ladies there. This they soon gave over and many warriors
greeted each other in friendly wise. Then they escorted fair Gotelind
from thence to where she saw Kriemhild. Scant leisure had they who wot
how to serve the ladies.

The lord of Bechelaren rode now to his wife. Little it irked the noble
margravine that he was come so well and sound from the Rhine. In part
her cares had given way to joy. When she had welcomed him, he bade
her dismount with the ladies of her train upon the sward. Many a
noble knight bestirred him and served the ladies with eager zeal. Then
Kriemhild spied the margravine standing with her meiny. No nearer she
drew, but checked the palfrey with the bridle and bade them lift her
quickly from the saddle. Men saw the bishop with Eckewart lead his
sister's child to Gotelind. All stood aside at once. Then the exiled
queen kissed Gotelind upon the mouth. Full lovingly spake Rudeger's
wife: "Now well is me, dear lady, that I have ever seen with mine own
eyes your charming self in these our lands. Naught liefer might hap to
me in all these times."

"Now God requite you," quoth Kriemhild, "most noble Gotelind. Shall I
and Botelung's (7) son remain alive and well, it may be lief to you that
ye have seen me here."

Neither knew what must needs later hap. Many maidens went to meet each
other in courtly wise. The warriors, too, were full ready with their
service. After the greeting they sat them down upon the clover. With
many they became acquaint, who were full strange to them aforetime. As
it was now high noon, men bade pour out wine for the ladies. The
noble meiny no longer tarried, but rode to where they found many broad
pavilions; there ample service stood ready for the guests.

That night they had repose till early on the morn. Those from Bechelaren
made ready for to lodge the worthy guests. So well had Rudeger planned,
that little enow they lacked. The embrasures in the walls stood open,
the castle at Bechelaren was opened wide. In rode the guests whom men
were fain to see; the noble host bade purvey them proper easement. Most
lovingly Rudeger's daughter with her meiny went to welcome the queen.
There, too, stood her mother, the margrave's wife; many a high-born maid
was greeted with delight. They took each other by the hand and hied
them hence to a broad hall, fashioned full fair, under which the Danube
flowed along. Towards the breeze they sate and held great pastime. What
more they did I cannot tell, save that Kriemhild's men-at-arms were
heard to grumble that they fared so slowly on their way, for much it
irked them. Ho, what good knights rode with them hence from Bechelaren!

Rudeger offered them much loving service. The queen gave Gotelind's
daughter twelve ruddy armlets, and raiment too, as good as any that she
brought to Etzel's land. Although the Nibelung gold was taken from her,
yet she did win the hearts of all that saw her with the little she still
might have. Great gifts were given to the courtiers of the host. In
turn the Lady Gotelind offered the guests from the Rhine worship in such
friendly wise, that men found passing few of the strangers that did not
wear her jewels or her lordly robes.

When they had eaten and should depart, faithful service was proffered by
the lady of the house to Etzel's bride. The fair young margravine, too,
was much caressed. To the queen she spake: "Whenso it thinketh you
good, I know well that my dear father will gladly send me to you to
the Hunnish land." How well Kriemhild marked that the maiden loved her
truly.

The steeds were harnessed and led before the castle of Bechelaren
and the noble queen took leave of Rudeger's wife and daughter. With
a greeting many a fair maid parted too. Full seldom did they see each
other since these days. From Medelick (8) the folk bare in their hands
many a rich cup of gold, in which they offered wine to the strangers
on the highway. Thus they made them welcome. A host dwelt there, hight
Astolt, (9) who showed them the road to the Austrian land, towards
Mautern (10) down the Danube. There the noble queen was later served
full well. From his niece the bishop parted lovingly. How he counseled
her that she should bear her well and that she should purchase honor
for herself, as Helca, too, had done! Ho, what great worship she later
gained among the Huns!

To the Traisem (11) they escorted hence the guests. Rudeger's men
purveyed them zealously, until the Huns came riding across the land.
Then the queen became acquaint with mickle honor. Near the Traisem the
king of the Hunnish land did have a mighty castle, hight Zeisenmauer,
(12) known far and wide. Lady Helca dwelt there aforetime and used such
great virtues that it might not lightly ever hap again, unless it be
through Kriemhild. She wist so how to give, that after all her sorrow
she had the joy that Etzel's liegemen gave her great worship, of which
she later won great store among the heroes. Etzel's rule was known far
and wide, so that all time one found at his court the boldest warriors
of whom men ever heard, among Christian or among paynim. They were all
come with him. All time there were at his court, what may not so lightly
hap again, Christian customs and also heathen faith. In whatsoever wise
each lived, the bounty of the king bestowed on all enow.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Vergen" is the modern Pforing, below Ingolstadt.  A ferry
        across the river existed here from ancient times.
   (2)  "Pilgrim", or "Pilgerin", as he is variously called, is an
        historical personage.  He was bishop of Passau from 971 to
        991.  Without doubt he is a late introduction, according to
        Boer between 1181 and 1185.  See Boer, ii, 204, and E.L.
        Dummler, "Pilgrim von Passau", Leipzig, 1854.
   (3)  "Enns" (M.H.G. "Ens") is one of the tributaries of the
        Danube, flowing into it about eleven miles southeast of
        Linz.
   (4)  "Efferding" (M.H.G. "Everdingen") is a town on the Danube,
        about thirteen miles west of Linz.
   (5)  "Traun" (M.H.G. "Trune") is a river of Upper Austria,
        forty-four miles southeast of Linz.
   (6)  "Truncheons", see Adventure II, note 8.
   (7)  "Botelung's son" is Attila, who is so called in our poem, in
        the "Klage", and in "Biterolf".  In the earlier Norse
        version "Atli" is the son of "Budli".  (On this point see
        Mullenhoff, "Zur Geschichte der Nibelungensage", p. 106, and
        Zsfd A., x, 161, and Bleyer, PB. Beit. xxxi, 459, where the
        names are shown to be identical.
   (8)  "Medelick" is the modern Molk, or Melk, a town on the Danube
        near the influx of the Bilach.  It lies at the foot of a
        granite cliff on which stands a famous Benedictine abbey.
   (9)  "Astolt" appears only in this passage; nothing else is known
        of him.
   (10) "Mantern" is situated at the influx of the Flanitz, opposite
        Stein in Lower Austria.
   (11) "Traisem", Traisen, is a tributary of the Danube in Lower
        Austria, emptying near Traismauer.
   (12) "Zeisenmauer" (M.H.G. "Zeizenmure").  All the MSS. but C and
        D have this reading.  The latter have "Treysenmoure" and
        "treisem moure", which corresponds better to the modern
        name, as Zeiselmauer lies between Tulln and Vienna.  It is
        possible, however, that the town on the Traisem was
        originally called Zeiselmauer, as the road leading from
        Traismauer to Tulln still bears the name of Zeiselstrasse.
        See Laehmann, "Anmerkungen", 1272, 3, and Piper, ii, 289,
        note to str. 1333.




ADVENTURE XXII. How Etzel Made Kriemhild His Bride.

Until the fourth day she stayed at Zeisenmauer. The while the dust upon
the highway never came to rest, but rose on every side, as if it were
burning, where King Etzel's liegemen rode through Austria. Then the
king was told aright how royally Kriemhild fared through the lands; at
thought of this his sorrows vanished. He hasted to where he found the
lovely Kriemhild. Men saw ride before King Etzel on the road many bold
knights of many tongues and many mighty troops of Christians and of
paynims. When they met the lady, they rode along in lordly wise. Of
the Russians and the Greeks there rode there many a man. The right good
steeds of the Poles and Wallachians were seen to gallop swiftly, as they
rode with might and main. Each did show the customs of his land.
From the land of Kiev (1) there rode many a warrior and the savage
Petschenegers. (2) With the bow they often shot at the birds which flew
there; to the very head they drew the arrows on the bows.

By the Danube there lieth in the Austrian land a town that men call
Tulna. (3) There she became acquaint with many a foreign custom, the
which size had never seen afore. She greeted there enow who later came
through her to grief. Before Etzel there rode a retinue, merry and
noble, courtly and lusty, full four and twenty princes, mighty and of
lofty birth. They would fain behold their lady and craved naught more.
Duke Ramung (4) of Wallachia, with seven hundred vassals, galloped up
before her; like flying birds men saw them ride. Then came Prince Gibeek
with lordly bands. The doughty Hornbog, (5) with full a thousand men,
wheeled from the king away towards the queen. Loudly they shouted after
the custom of their land. Madly too rode the kinsmen of the Huns. Then
came brave Hawart (6) of Denmark and the doughty Iring, (7) free of
guile was he, and Irnfried (8) of Thuringia, a stately man. With twelve
hundred vassals, whom they had in their band, they greeted Kriemhild,
so that she had therefrom great worship. Then came Sir Bloedel, (9)
King Etzel's brother, from the Hunnish land, with three thousand men.
In lordly wise he rode to where he found the queen. Then King Etzel
came and Sir Dietrich, too, with all his fellowship. There stood many
worshipful knights, noble, worthy, and good. At this Dame Kriemhild's
spirits rose.

Then Sir Rudeger spake to the queen: "Lady, here will I receive the
high-born king; whomso I bid you kiss, that must ye do. Forsooth ye may
not greet alike King Etzel's men."

From the palfrey they helped the royal queen alight. Etzel, the mighty,
bode no more, but dismounted from his steed with many a valiant man.
Joyfully men saw them go towards Kriemhild. Two mighty princes, as we
are told, walked by the lady and bore her train, when King Etzel went
to meet her, where she greeted the noble lording with a kiss in gracious
wise. She raised her veil and from out the gold beamed forth her rosy
hue. Many a man stood there who vowed that Lady Helca could not have
been more fair than she. Close by stood also Bloedel, the brother of the
king. Him Rudeger, the mighty margrave, bade her kiss and King Gibeek,
too. There also stood Sir Dietrich. Twelve of the warriors the king's
bride kissed. She greeted many knights in other ways.

All the while that Etzel stood at Kriemhild's side, the youthful
warriors did as people still are wont to do. One saw them riding many a
royal joust. This Christian champions did and paynim, too, according
to their custom. In what right knightly wise the men of Dietrich made
truncheons from the shafts fly through the air, high above the shields,
from the hands of doughty knights! Many a buckler's edge was pierced
through and through by the German strangers. Great crashing of breaking
shafts was heard. All the warriors from the land were come and the
king's guests, too, many a noble man.

Then the mighty king betook him hence with Lady Kriemhild. Hard by them
a royal tent was seen to stand; around about the plain was filled with
booths, where they should rest them after their toils. Many a comely
maid was shown to her place thereunder by the knights, where she then
sate with the queen on richly covered chairs. The margrave had so well
purveyed the seats for Kriemhild, that all found them passing good; at
this King Etzel grew blithe of mood. What the king there spake, I know
not. In his right lay her snow-white hand; thus they sate in lover's
wise, since Rudeger would not let the king make love to Kriemhild
secretly.

Then one bade the tourney cease on every side; in courtly wise the
great rout ended. Etzel's men betook them to the booths; men gave them
lodgings stretching far away on every side. The day had now an end; they
lay at ease, till the bright morn was seen to dawn again, then many a
man betook him to the steeds. Ho, what pastimes they gan ply in honor of
the king! Etzel bade the Huns purvey all with fitting honors. Then they
rode from Tulna to the town of Vienna, where they found many a dame
adorned. With great worship these greeted King Etzel's bride. There was
ready for them in great plenty whatever they should have. Many a lusty
hero rejoiced at prospect of the rout.

The king's wedding feast commenced in merry wise. They began to lodge
the guests, but quarters could not be found for all within the town.
Rudeger therefore begged those that were not guests to take lodgings in
the country round about. I ween men found all time by Lady Kriemhild,
Sir Dietrich and many another knight. Their rest they had given over
for toil, that they might purvey the guests good cheer. Rudeger and his
friends had pastime good. The wedding feast fell on a Whitsuntide,
when King Etzel lay by Kriemhild in the town of Vienna. With her first
husband, I trow, she did not win so many men for service. Through
presents she made her known to those who had never seen her. Full many
among them spake to the guests: "We weened that Lady Kriemhild had
naught of goods, now hath she wrought many wonders with her gifts."

The feasting lasted seventeen days. I trow men can no longer tell of any
king whose wedding feast was greater. If so be, 'tis hidden from us.
All that were present wore brand-new garments. I ween, she never dwelt
before in Netherland with such retinue of knights. Though Siegfried was
rich in goods, I trow, he never won so many noble men-at-arms, as she
saw stand 'fore Etzel. Nor hath any ever given at his own wedding feast
so many costly mantles, long and wide, nor such good clothes, of which
all had here great store, given for Kriemhild's sake. Her friends and
the strangers, too, were minded to spare no kind of goods. Whatever any
craved, this they willingly gave, so that many of the knights through
bounty stood bereft of clothes. Kriemhild thought of how she dwelt with
her noble husband by the Rhine; her eyes grew moist, but she hid it full
well, that none might see it. Great worship had been done her after
many a grief. Whatever bounty any used, 'twas but a wind to that of
Dietrich. What Botelung's son had given him, was squandered quite.
Rudeger's lavish hand did also many wonders. Prince Bleedel of Hungary
bade empty many traveling chests of their silver and their gold; all
this was given away. The king's champions were seen to live right
merrily. Werbel and Swemmel, (10) the minstrels of the king, each gained
at the wedding feast, I ween, full thousand marks, or even better, when
fair Kriemhild sate crowned at Etzel's side.

On the eighteenth morning they rode forth from Vienna. Many shields were
pierced in tilting by spears, which the warriors bare in hand. Thus King
Etzel came down to the Hunnish land. They spent the night at ancient
Heimburg. (11) No one might know the press of folk, or with what force
they rode across the land. Ho, what fair women they found in Etzel's
native land! At mighty Misenburg (12) they boarded ship. The water which
men saw flowing there was covered with steeds and men, as if it were
solid earth. The wayworn ladies had their ease and rest. Many good ships
were lashed together, that neither waves nor flood might do them harm.
Upon them many a goodly tent was spread, as if they still had both land
and plain.

From thence tidings came to Etzelburg, (13) at which both men and
wives therein were glad. Helca's meiny, that aforetime waited on their
mistress, passed many a happy day thereafter at Kriemhild's side. There
many a noble maid stood waiting, who had great grief through Helca's
death. Kriemhild found still seven royal princesses there, through whom
all Etzel's land was graced. For the meiny the high-born maiden Herrat
(14) cared, the daughter of Helca's sister, beseen with many courtly
virtues, the betrothed of Dietrich, a royal child, King Nentwin's (15)
daughter; much worship she later had. Blithe of heart she was at the
coming of the guests; for this, too, mighty treasures were prepared.
Who might tell the tale of how the king held court? Never had men lived
better among the Huns with any queen.

When that the king with his wife rode from the shore, the noble
Kriemhild was told full well who each one was; she greeted them the
better. Ho, how royally she ruled in Helca's stead! She became acquaint
with much loyal service. Then the queen dealt out gold and vesture, silk
and precious stones. Whatever she brought with her across the Rhine to
Hungary must needs be given all away. All the king's kinsmen and all
his liegemen then owned her service, so that Lady Helca never ruled so
mightily as she, whom they now must serve till Kriemhild's death. The
court and all the land lived in such high honors, that all time men
found the pastimes which each heart desired, through the favor of the
king and his good queen.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Kiev" (M.H.G. "Kiew") is now a government in the
        southwestern part of Russia.  Its capital of the same name,
        situated on the Dnieper, is the oldest of the better known
        cities of Russia, and in the latter Middle Ages was an
        important station of the Hanseatic league.
   (2)  "Petschenegers", a Turkish tribe originally dwelling to the
        north of the Caspian.  By conquest they acquired a kingdom
        extending from the Don to Transylvania.  They were feared
        for their ferociousness and because they continually invaded
        the surrounding countries, especially Kiev.
   (3)  "Tulna" (M.H.G. "Tulne") is the modern Tulln, a walled town
        of Lower Austria, seventeen milos northwest of Vienna on the
        Danube.
   (4)  "Ramung and Gibeck" (M.H.G. "Gibeche") appear only in our
        poem, nothing else is known of them.
   (5)  "Hornbog" is frequently mentioned in the "Thidreksaga", but
        nothing otherwise is known of him.
   (6)  "Hawart" is perhaps identical with the Saxon duke Hadugot,
        who is reputed to have played an important part in the
        conquest of Thuringia.  He evidently comes from the Low
        German version.
   (7)  "Iring" is considered by Wilmanns to have been originally an
        ancient deity, as the Milky Way is called "Iringe straze" or
        "Iringi".  He occurs in a legend of the fall of the
        Thuringian kingdom, where he played such a prominent role
        that the Milky Way was named after him.  See W. Grimm,
        "Heldensage", p. 394, who thinks, however, that the
        connection of Iring with the Milky Way is the result of a
        confusion.
   (8)  "Irnfried" is considered to be Hermanfrid of Thuringia, who
        was overthrown and killed in A.D. 535 by Theuderich with the
        aid of the Saxons.  See Felix Dahn, "Urgeschichte", iii,
        73-79.  He, too, comes from the Low German tradition.
   (9)  "Bloedel" is Bleda, the brother of Attila, with whom he
        reigned conjointly from A.D. 433 to 445.  In our poem the
        name appears frequently with the diminutive ending, as
        "Bloedelin".
   (10) "Werbel and Swemmel", who doubtless owe their introduction
        to some minstrel, enjoy special favor and are intrusted with
        the important mission of inviting the Burgundians to Etzel's
        court, an honor that would hardly be accorded to persons of
        their rank.  Swemmel appears mostly in the diminutive form
        "Swemmelin".
   (11) "Heimburg" lies on the Danube near the Hungarian border.
   (12) "Misenburg" is the modern Wieselburg on the Danube,
        twenty-one miles southeast of Pressburg.
   (13) "Etzelburg" was later identified with the old part of
        Budapest, called in German "Ofen", through the influence of
        Hungarish legends, but, as G. Heinrich has shown, had no
        definite localization in the older M.H.G. epics.  See
        Bleyer, PB. Belt. xxxi 433 and 506.  The name occurs in
        documents as late as the fifteenth century.
   (14) "Herrat", the daughter of King "Nentwin" is frequently
        mentioned in the "Thidreksaga" as Dietrich's betrothed.  She
        is spoken of as the exiled maid.
   (15) "Nentwin" is not found in any other saga, and nothing else
        is known of him.  See W. Grimm, "Heldensage", 103.




ADVENTURE XXIII. How Kriemhild Thought To Avenge Her Wrongs.

With great worship of a truth they lived together until the seventh
year. In this time the queen was delivered of a son, at which King Etzel
could not have been more joyful. She would not turn back, until she
brought it to pass that Etzel's child was christened after the Christian
rite. Men named it Ortlieb; (1) at this great joy arose over all of
Etzel's lands. Whatever courtly breeding Lady Helca had possessed, Dame
Kriemhild practiced this full many a day. Herrat, the exiled maid, who
in secret grieved full sore for Helca, taught her the customs. Well was
she known to the strangers and the home-folk. They vowed that never had
a kingdom had a better or more bounteous queen. This they held for true.
She bare this praise among the Huns until the thirteenth year. Now wot
she well, that none would thwart her, as royal men-at-arms still do to a
prince's wife, and that all time she saw twelve kings stand before
her. Over many a wrong she brooded, that had happed to her at home. She
thought likewise on the many honors in the Nibelung land, which she
had there enjoyed and of which Hagen's hand had quite bereft her at
Siegfried's death, and if perchance she might not make him suffer for
his deed. "That would hap, if I might but bring him to this land." She
dreamed that Giselher, her brother, walked often with her hand in hand.
Alway she kissed him in her gentle slumber; later suffering came to
both. I ween, the foul fiend did counsel Kriemhild this, that she
withdrew her friendship from Giselher, whom for forgiveness' sake she
had kissed in the Burgundian land. At this hot tears again gan soil her
robe. Early and late it lay within her heart, how without fault of hers
they had made her wed a heathen man. Hagen and Gunther had brought her
to this pass. This wish she seldom gave over in her heart. She thought:
"I am so mighty and have such great wealth, that I can do my foes an
injury yet. Full ready would I be for this towards Hagen of Troneg. My
heart doth often yearn for my faithful kin. Might I be with those who
did me wrong, my lover's death would be well avenged. Scarce can I abide
this," spake Etzel's wife.

All the king's men, Kriemhild's warriors, bare her love in duty bound.
Of the chamber Eckewart had charge, which won him friends. None might
gainsay Dame Kriemhild's will. All time she thought: "I will beg the
king, that he in kindly wise may grant me to bring my kinsmen to the
Hunnish land." None marked the evil purpose of the queen. One night when
she lay by the king, and he did hold her in his arms, as he was wont
to love the noble dame, who was dear to him as life, the high-born lady
thought her of her foes. To the king she spake: "Dear my lord, I would
fain beseech you, by your grace, that ye would show me that ye did love
my kinsfolk, if I have earned the favor."

Then spake the king (true was his heart): "I'll give you to know however
well the knights may fare, I may well have joy of this, for never have I
won better kin through woman's love."

Again the queen spake: "It hath been well told you, that I have
high-born kin; therefore do I grieve that they so seldom reck to see me
here. I hear the folk aver that I be banished."

Then spake king Etzel: "Dear lady mine, and it think you not too far,
I'll bid hither to my lands, from across the Rhine, whomso ye be fain to
see."

The lady joyed her when she heard his will. She spake: "Would ye show me
your faith, my lord, then send envoys to Worms across the Rhine, through
whom I may tell my kinsfolk what I have in mind. Thus there will come
hither to our land many a noble knight and a good."

He answered: "It shall hap whenso ye bid. Ye might not be more glad to
see your kin than I to see the sons of the noble Uta. It doth irk me
sore, that they have been strangers to us so long a time. If it please
you, dear lady mine, I would fain send my minstrels for your kinsmen to
the Burgundian land."

He bade the good minstrels be fetched straightway. Quickly they hasted
to where the king sate by the queen. He told the twain they should be
envoys to the Burgundian land and bade full lordly weeds be made ready
for them. Clothing was prepared for four and twenty warriors, and the
message was told them by the king, how they should bid Gunther and his
liegemen hither. Kriemhild, the queen, talked with them apart. Then
spake the mighty king: "I'll tell you what to say. I offer to my kin my
love and service, that it may please them to ride hither to my land. But
few such welcome guests have I known, and if they perchance will fulfill
my wish, tell Kriemhild's kinsmen that they must not fall to come this
summer to my feast, for much of my joy doth lie upon the kinsmen of my
wife."

Then spake the minstrel, the proud Swemmel: "When shall your feasting be
in these lands, that I may tell it yonder to your kin?"

King Etzel answered: "On next midsummer's day."

"We'll do as ye command," spake then Werbel.

The queen bade them be brought secretly unto her bower, where she
then talked with the envoys. From this but little joy happed to many a
knight. To the two messengers she spake: "Now earn ye mickle goods, in
that ye do my pleasure full willingly and give the message which I send
to my native land. I'll make you rich in goods and give you the lordly
robes. And if ye see any of my kin at Worms upon the Rhine, ye must not
tell them that ye ever saw me sad of heart. Tender my service to the
heroes brave and good. Beg that they do as the king doth bid and thus
part me from all my grief. The Huns ween, I be without kith and kin.
Were I a knight, I'd visit them myself at times. And say to Gernot, too,
the noble brother of mine, that none in the world doth love him more.
Beg him to bring with him to this land our best of friends, that it may
be to our honor. Say also to Giselher, that he remember well, I never
gained grief through fault of his. Therefore would mine eyes fain sue
him. For his great loyalty I would gladly have him here. Tell my mother
also of the honors which I have, and if Hagen of Troneg be minded to
stay at home, who then should lead them through the lands? From a child
he knoweth the roads to Hungary." (2)

The envoys wist not, why it was done, that they should not let Hagen of
Troneg stay upon the Rhine. Later it repented them full sore. With him
many a knight was doomed to a savage death. Letters and messages had now
been given them. They rode forth rich in goods, and well could lead a
sumptuous life. Of Etzel and his fair wife they took their leave, their
persons adorned full well with goodly weeds.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Ortlieb" is not historical, and in the "Thidreksaga"
        Etzel's son is called Aldrian.  Bleyer, "Die germanischen
        Elemente der ungarischen, Hunnensage", PB. Beit. xxxi, 570,
        attempt to prove the identity of the names by means of a
        form "Arda", giving on the one hand Hungarian "Aladar",
        "Aldrian", on the other German "Arte", "Orte".
   (2)  "Hungary".  According to the account in "Waltharius", Hagen
        spent his youth as a hostage at Etzel's court.




ADVENTURE XXIV. How Werbel And Swemmel Brought The Message.

When that Etzel had sent his envoys to the Rhine, these tidings flew
from land to land. Through full speedy messengers he begged and bade to
his high feasting. From this many a one met there his death. The envoys
rode away from the Hunnish land to Burgundy. They were sent thither for
three noble kings and for their men, that these should come to Etzel;
therefore all gan haste. To Bechelaren they came a-riding, where served
them gladly. Rudeger and Gotelind and the child of them twain delayed
not to send their service through the envoys to the Rhine. Nor did
they let them part hence without gifts, that Etzel's men might fare
the better. To Uta and her sons Rudeger sent word that they had no more
loyal margrave than he. To Brunhild, also, they tendered service and
good wishes, constant fealty and a loving mind. When they heard the
speech that the envoys would ride, the margravine begged God in heaven
to keep them well.

Before the messengers were quite come through Bavarian land, the doughty
Werbel sought out the good Bishop Pilgrim. What word he sent to his kin
upon the Rhine, that I know not, but naught but ruddy gold he gave the
messengers for love and let them ride.

Then spake the bishop: "And might I see them here, my sister's sons, I
should be blithe of mood, for full seldom can I come to them upon the
Rhine."

What roads they traveled to the Rhine, I cannot tell. None robbed them
of their silver and their weeds; men feared their master's wrath. Certes
the noble high-born king was a mighty lord.

Within a twelfth night Werbel and Swemmel came to the Rhine, to the land
of Worms. To the kings and their liegemen tidings were told that there
came strange messengers. Gunther, the lord of the Rhineland, gan ask:
"Who will do us to wit, from whence these strangers ride into our land?"

This none wist, till Hagen of Troneg saw them, who then spake to
Gunther: "New tidings be come to us, as I will vouch, for I have seen
King Etzel's minstrels here. Them your sister hath sent to the Rhine;
for their master's sake we must give them a kindly welcome."

Already they were riding up before the palace; never did a prince's
minstrels journey in more lordly wise. Straightway the king's meiny
bade them welcome. Men gave them lodgings and bade take in charge their
trappings. Their traveling clothes were rich and so well fashioned that
with honor they might come before the king, but they would not wear them
longer there at court, and asked if there were any that desired them.
At the selfsame moment folk were found who fain would take them, and to
these they were sent. Then the strangers donned far better weeds, such
as well befitted king's messengers for to wear.

Then Etzel's retainers went by leave to where the king was sitting; men
saw this gladly. Hagen sprang courteously towards the messengers and
greeted them in loving wise. For this the squires did say him thanks.
That he might know their tidings, he gan ask how Etzel fared and all his
men. Then spake the minstrel: "Never did the land stand better, nor were
the folk more merry; now know that of a truth."

To the host they went; the hall was full. There men received the guests,
as one must do by right, when kindly greetings be sent to the lands of
other kings. Werbel found full many warriors there at Gunther's side.
In courteous wise the king gan greet them: "Ye minstrels of the Huns
and all your fellowship, be ye welcome. Hath the mighty Etzel sent you
hither to the Burgundian land?"

To the king they bowed; then spake Werbel: "My dear lord, and also
Kriemhild, your sister, do send you loyal service to this land. They
have sent us to you knights in all good faith."

Spake the mighty prince: "Merry am I at this tale. How fareth Etzel," so
asked the knight, "and Kriemhild, my sister, of the Hunnish land?"

Quoth the minstrel: "This tale I'll tell you; ye should know that never
have folk fared better than the twain and all their followers, their
kinsmen and their vassals. They joyed them of the journey, as we
departed hence."

"Gramercy for his greetings which he hath sent me, and for those of
my sister, sith it standeth so that the king and his men live thus in
happiness, for I did ask the news in fear and trembling."

The two young princes were now also come, for they had but just heard
the tale. For the sake of his sister Giselher, the youth, was fain to
see the envoys. He spake to them in loving wise: "Ye messengers, be
very welcome to us. An' ye would ride more often hither to the Rhine,
ye would find friends here whom ye would be glad to see. Little of harm
shall hap you in this land."

"We trust you in all honor," spake then Swemmel. "I could not convey to
you with all my wits, how lovingly king Etzel and your noble sister, who
live in such great worship, have sent their greetings. The queen doth
mind you of your love and fealty, and that your heart and mind did ever
hold her dear. But first and foremost we be sent to the king, that ye
may deign to ride to Etzel's land. The mighty Etzel enjoined us strictly
to beg you this and sent the message to you all, that if ye would not
let your sister see you, he fain would know what he had done you that
ye be so strange to him and to his lands. An' ye had never known the
queen, yet would he fain bring it to pass that consent to come and see
him. It would please him well if that might hap."

Then spake King Gunther: "In a sennight I will tell you the tale of what
I have bethought me with my friends. Meanwhile hie you to your lodgings
and rest you well."

Quoth Werbel again: "And could that be that we might see my lady, the
royal Uta, afore we take our easement?"

The noble Giselher spake then full courteously: "None shall hinder that.
An' ye would go before her, ye will do in full my mother's wish, for she
will gladly see you for my sister's sake, the Lady Kriemhild; she will
make you welcome."

Giselher led them to where they found the queen. Gladly she gazed upon
the envoys from the Hunnish land. Through her courtesie she gave them
gentle greeting. The good and courtly messengers then told their tale.
"My lady offereth you of a truth," so spake Swemmel, "her love and duty.
Might that be that she could see you oft, ye may well believe she had no
better joy in all the world."

Then spake the queen: "That may not be. However gladly I would often
see the dear daughter of mine, yet doth the wife of the noble king live,
alas, too far from me. May she and Etzel be ever blessed. Pray let me
know before ye leave, when ye would hence again; not in a long time have
I seen messengers so gladly as I have you." The squires vowed that this
should hap.

Those from the Hunnish land now rode to their lodgings. Meanwhile the
mighty king had sent to fetch his friends. The noble Gunther asked his
liegemen how they liked the speech. Many a one gan say that the king
well might ride to Etzel's land. The very best among them advised him
this, save Hagen alone; him misliked it sore. Privily he spake to the
king: "Ye fight against yourself; ye know full well what we have done.
We may well be ever on our guard with Kriemhild, for with mine own hand
I slew her husband to death. How durst we ride to Etzel's land?"

Then spake the mighty king: "My sister gave over her wrath; with a kiss
she lovingly forgave what we had done her, or ever she rode away. Unless
be that the feud doth stand against you alone."

Quoth Hagen: "Now let the messengers from the Huns beguile you not,
whatsoever they say. Would ye visit Kriemhild, easily may ye lose there
both life and honor. Full long of vengeance is King Etzel's wife."

Then spake Prince Gernot to the council: "Why should we give it over,
because ye rightly fear death in the Hunnish lands? It were an ill deed
not to go to see our sister."

Then spake Prince Giselher to the knight: "Sith ye know you to be
guilty, friend Hagen, ye should stay at home and guard you well, and let
those who dare ride with us to my sister."

At this the knight of Troneg grew wroth of mood. "I will not that ye
take any with you on the way, who durst better ride to court than I.
Sith ye will not turn you, I will well show you that."

Then spake the master of the kitchen, Rumolt, the knight: "Ye can well
have the strangers and the home-folk cared for here, after your own
desire, for ye have full store of goods. I ween, Hagen hath never given
you for a hostage; (1) but if ye will not follow him, Rumolt adviseth
you, for I be bound to you in fealty and duty, that for my sake ye abide
here and leave King Etzel there with Kriemhild. How might it fare more
gently with you in all the world? Ye be well able to stand before your
foes; so deck your body out with brave attire, drink the best of wine,
and pay court to stately ladies. Thereto ye be served with the best of
food that ever king did gain in the world. And were this not so, yet
should ye tarry here for your fair wife's sake, before ye risk your life
so childishly. Wherefore I do counsel you to stay at home. Your lands be
rich, and one can redeem his pledges better at home than among the Huns.
Who knoweth how it standeth there? Ye should stay at home, Sire, that is
Rumolt's counsel."

"We will not stay," quoth Gernot. "Sith my sister and the mighty Etzel
have bidden us in such friendly wise, why should we not accept? He that
liketh not to go may stay at home."

To This Hagen answered: "Take not my speech amiss, however ye may fare.
In all truth I counsel you, would ye guard your lives, then ride to the
Huns well armed. Sith ye will not turn you, send for your men-at-arms,
the best ye have or can find in any part; from among them all I'll
choose a thousand doughty knights. Then Kriemhild's evil mood can bring
you naught of harm."

"This rede I'll gladly follow," spake straightway the king. He then
bade messengers ride far and wide throughout his lands. Three thousand
champions or more they fetched. Little they weened to gain such grievous
woe. Full merrily they rode to Gunther's court. Men bade give all that
were to ride forth from Burgundy both steeds and trappings. The king
gained full many a one with willing mood. Then Hagen of Troneg bade his
brother Dankwart lead eighty of their warriors to the Rhine. In knightly
guise they came; these doughty men took with them harness and trappings
into Gunther's land. Then came bold Folker, a noble minstrel he,
with thirty of his men for the journey to Kriemhild's court. They had
clothing such as a king might wear. Gunther bade make known, he would to
the Hunnish land. I'll do you now to wit who Folker was. He was a noble
lord, the liege of many doughty knights in Burgundy. A minstrel he was
called, for that he wist how to fiddle. Hagen chose a thousand whom
he well knew; oft had he seen what their hands had wrought in press of
battle, or in whatever else they did. None might aver aught else of them
than doughtiness.

The tarrying irked Kriemhild's envoys sore, for great was their fear of
their lord. Daily they craved leave to go; this Hagen would not grant
through craftiness. To his master he spake: "We should well guard
against letting them ride away, until we ourselves fare forth a sennight
later to Etzel's land. If any beareth us ill will, the better shall we
wot it. Nor may Lady Kriemhild then make ready that through any plan of
hers, men do us harm. An' this be her will, she'll fare full ill, for
many a chosen liegeman had we hence."

Shields and saddles, and all the garments that they would take with them
to Etzel's land, were now full ready for many a brave man-at-arms. Now
men bade Kriemhild's messengers go before King Gunther. When they were
come, Gernot spake: "The king will do as Etzel asked us, we will gladly
come to his high feast to see our sister; be no more in doubt of that."

Then King Gunther spake: "Wist ye how to tell us, when this feast shall
be, or in what time we should go thither?"

Swemmel replied: "Of a truth it shall be on next midsummer's day."

The king gave them leave (this had not happed as yet), if they would
fain see Lady Brunhild, to go before her with his free will. This Folker
hindered, which pleased her much. "Forsooth, my Lady Brunhild is not
so well of mood, that ye may see her," spake the good knight. "Bide the
morrow, and men will let you see her." When they weened to gaze upon
her, it might not hap.

Then the mighty prince, who liked the envoys well, through his own
courtesie, bade his gold be carried forth on the broad shields of which
he had great store. Rich gifts were also given them by his kinsmen
Giselher and Gernot, Gere and Ortwin. Well they showed, that they were
generous, too. They offered the messengers such rich gifts, that for
fear of their lord they durst not take them.

Now spake the envoy Werbel to the king: "Sir King, let your gifts stay
here at home. We may carry none away; our lord forbade that we take
aught of gifts. Then too, there is but little need."

Then the ruler of the Rhine waxed wroth, that they should thus refuse
the gifts of so mighty a king. At last they were forced to take his gold
and weeds, the which they later bare to Etzel's land. They would fain
see the Lady Uta, or ever they departed hence, so the doughty Giselher
brought the minstrels before his mother Uta. The lady sent the message,
that whatever honors her daughter had, this gave her joy. Then the queen
bade give the minstrels of her edgings and her gold, for the sake of
King Etzel and Kriemhild whom she loved. Gladly they took the gifts; in
good faith 'twas done.

The messengers had now taken their leave from thence, from wives and
men. Merrily they rode away to Swabia. Thither Gernot bade his knights
escort them, that none might do them harm. When they parted from those
who should have them in their care, Etzel's power did guard them on all
their ways, so that none bereft them of either horse or trappings. With
great speed they hasted towards Etzel's land. To all the friends they
wot of, they made known that in a short time the Burgundians would come
hither from the Rhine to the Hunnish land. To the Bishop Pilgrim too,
the tale was told. As they rode adown the highway before Bechelaren, men
delayed not to tell Rudeger and Gotelind, the margrave's wife. Merry she
grew that she should see them. Men saw the minstrels hasting with the
tidings. They found King Etzel in the town of Gran. (2) Greeting after
greeting they gave the king, of which full many had been sent him. He
blushed for very joy.

Happy of mood was the queen, when she heard the tale aright that her
brothers should come into the land. She gave the minstrels great gifts
as meed. This was done for honor's sake. She spake: "Now tell me, both
of you, Werbel and Swemmel, which of my kin are minded to be at the
feast? Will the best of those we bade come hither to this land? Pray
tell me what Hagen said when he heard the tale."

The minstrel answered: "He came on a morning early to the council,
and but little of fair speech he spake thereby. When they pledged the
journey hither to the Hunnish lands, that was as words of death to the
wrathful Hagen. Your brothers, the three kings, will come in lordly
mood. Whoever else may come, this tale I know not of a surety. The brave
minstrel Folker vowed to ride along."

"Little do I reck," spake the queen, "whether I ever see Folker here. Of
Hagen I be fond, he is a doughty hero. My spirits stand high that we may
see him here."

Then the queen went to where she saw the king. How lovingly Dame
Kriemhild spake: "How like you these tales, dear my lord? What I have
ever craved, shall now be brought to pass."

"Thy wish is my joy," spake then the king. "Never have I been so blithe
of mine own kin, when they should come hither to my lands. Through the
kindness of thy kinsmen my care hath fled away."

King Etzel's officers bade everywhere palace and hall be purveyed with
benches for the guests which were to come. Thereafter the king heard
from them mickle weeping.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Hostage", i.e., he has never betrayed you to your enemies.
   (2)  "Gran", royal free city of Hungary, on the right bank of the
        Danube opposite the influx of the Gran, twenty-four miles
        northwest of Budapest.




ADVENTURE XXV. How The Lords All Journeyed To The Huns.

Now let us leave the tale of how they lived at Etzel's court. More
high-mettled warriors never rode in such lordly wise to the land of any
king; they had whatever they listed, both of weapons and of weeds. The
ruler of the Rhineland clad his men, a thousand and sixty knights, (1)
as I have heard, and nine thousand footmen, for the courtly feast. Those
they left at home bewailed it in after time. The trappings were now
borne across the court at Worms; then spake an aged bishop from Speyer
to fair Uta: "Our friends would journey to the feasting. May God
preserve their honor there."

The noble Lady Uta then spake to her sons: "Pray tarry here, good
knights. Me-dreamed last night of direst woe, how all the fowls in this
land lay dead."

"Who recketh aught of dreams," quoth Hagen, "he wotteth not how to say
the proper words, when 'twould bring him great store of honors. I wish
that my lord go to court to take his leave. We must gladly ride to
Etzel's land. The arms of doughty heroes may serve kings there full
well, where we shall behold Kriemhild's feast."

Hagen counseled the journey, but later it rued him sore. He would have
advised against it, but that Gernot encountered him with such rude
words. Of Siegfried, Lady Kriemhild's husband, he minded him; he spake:
"Because of him Hagen will not make the journey to the court."

At this Hagen of Troneg spake: "I do it not from fear. Heroes, when
it please you, begin the work. Certes I will gladly ride with you to
Etzel's land." Later he carved to pieces many a helm and shield.

The skiffs were now made ready; many a knight stood there. Thither men
bare whatever clothes they had. Busy they were until the even tide, then
full merrily they set forth from home. Tents and pavilions were raised
upon the green beyond the Rhine. When this had happed, the king bade
his fair wife tarry with him. That night she still embraced her stately
knight. Trumpeting and fluting rose early on the morn, as sign that they
should ride. Then to the work they went. Whoso held in his arms his love
caressed the fair. Later King Etzel's wife parted them with woe.

Fair Uta's sons, they had a liegeman, brave and true. When they would
hence, he spake to the king in secret wise his mind. Quoth he: "I must
bewail that ye make this journey to the court." He was hight Rumolt and
was a hero of his hands. He spake: "To whom will ye leave your folk and
lands? O that none can turn you warriors from your mind! These tidings
from Kriemhild have never thought me good."

"Be the land and my little child, too, commended to thy care; serve well
the ladies, that is my wish. Comfort any thou dost see in tears. Certes
King Etzel's bride will never do us harm."

The steeds were now ready for the kings and their men. Many a one who
lived there high of spirit, parted thence with loving kisses. This many
a stately dame must later needs bewail. When the doughty knights were
seen go toward the steeds, men spied full many ladies standing sadly
there. Their hearts did tell them that this long parting boded them
great harm. This doth never ease the heart.

The doughty Burgundians started on their way. Then in the land a mighty
turmoil rose; on either side of the mountains there wept both men and
wives. But however the folk might bear them, the knights jogged merrily
along. With them rode the men of Nibelung, a thousand hauberks strong,
who had left many comely dames at home whom they never saw again.
Siegfried's wounds gave Kriemhild pain.

Gunther's liegemen now wended their way towards the river Main, up
through Eastern Frankland. (2) Thither Hagen led them, for well he wot
the way. Dankwart was their marshal, the hero from Burgundian land. As
they rode away from the Eastern Frankland towards Swanfield, (3) men
could tell the princes and their kin, the worshipful knights, by their
lordly bearing. On the twelfth morning the king came to the Danube.
Hagen of Troneg rode foremost of them all, giving to the Nibelungs
helpful cheer. On the sandy shore the bold knight dismounted and bound
his steed full soon to a tree. The river was swollen, the skiffs hidden
away. Great fear the Nibelungs had, as to how they might come across,
for the stream was much too broad. Full many a lusty knight alighted on
the ground.

"Ill may it lightly hap with thee here," quoth Hagen, "O ruler of the
Rhine. Now mayst thou thyself see the river is swollen, its flood is
mighty. Certes, I ween, we shall lose here many a worthy knight to-day."

"Why dost thou rebuke me, Hagen?" spake the lordly king. "For thine own
prowess' sake discomfit me no more, but seek us the ford across to the
other bank, that we may take hence both steeds and trappings."

"Forsooth," quoth Hagen, "I be not so weary of life, that I would drown
me in these broad waves. Sooner shall men die by my hands in Etzel's
lands. That will I well. Stay by the water's side, ye proud knights and
good, and I will seek the ferryman myself along the stream, who shall
ferry us across to Gelfrat's (4) land."

Then the stalwart Hagen seized his good shield. Well was he armed. The
shield he bare along, his helmet bound upon his head, bright enow it
was. Above his breastplate he bare a sword so broad that most fiercely
it cut on either edge. To and fro he sought the ferryman. He heard the
splash of water and began to listen. In a fair spring wise women (5)
were bathing for to cool them off. Now Hagen spied them and crept toward
them stealthily. When they grew ware of this, they hurried fast to
escape him; glad enow they were of this. The hero took their clothes,
but did them naught else of harm.

Then spake one of the mermaids (Hadburg she was called): "Sir Knight
Hagen, we'll do you here to wit, an' ye give us our weeds again, bold
knight, how ye will fare upon this journey to the Hunnish court."

Like birds they floated before him on the flood. Therefore him-thought
their senses strong and good; he believed the more what they would tell
him. Well they answered what he craved of them. Hadburg spake again: "Ye
may safely ride to Etzel's land. I'll stake my troth at once as pledge,
that heroes never rode better to any realm for such great honors. Now
believe that in truth."

In his heart Hagen was joyous at this rede. He gave them back their
clothes and no longer tarried. As they donned their strange attire, they
told him rightly of the journey to Etzel's land. The other mermaid spake
(Siegelind she hight): "I will warn thee, Hagen, son of Aldrian. (6) For
the sake of her weeds mine aunt hath lied to thee. An' thou comest to
the Huns, thou wilt be sore deceived. Time is, that thou shouldst turn
again, for ye heroes be bidden, that ye may die in Etzel's land. Whose
rideth hither, hath taken death by the hand."

Answered Hagen: "Ye deceive us needlessly. How might it come to pass
that we should all die there, through anybody's hate?"

Then gan they tell him the tale still more knowingly. The same one spake
again: "It must needs be that none of you shall live, save the king's
chaplain; this we know full well. He will come again safe and sound to
Gunther's land."

Then spake bold Hagen, fierce of mood: "It were not well to tell my
lords that we should all lose our lives among the Huns. Now show us over
the stream, thou wisest of all wives."

She answered: "Sith ye will not turn you from the journey, up yonder
where an inn doth stand, by the waterside, there is a ferryman and
elsewhere none."

At once he ceased to ask for further tidings. After the angry warrior
she called: "Pray bide a time, Sir Hagen! Forsooth ye are too much in
haste. List further to the tale of how ye may cross to the other bank.
The lord of these marches beareth the name of Else. (7) His brother is
hight Knight Gelfrat, a lord in the Bavarian land. 'Twill go hard with
you, an' ye will cross his land. Ye must guard you well and deal full
wisely with the ferryman. So grim of mood is he that he'll not let you
live, unless be that ye have your wits about you with the knight. An'
ye will that he guide you, then give him his meed. He guardeth this land
and is liegeman unto Gelfrat. And cometh he not betimes, so call across
the flood and say, ye hight Amelrich. (8) He was a doughty here that;
because of a feud did void this land. The ferryman will come when he
heareth this name."

Haughty Hagen bowed then to the dames; he spake no more, but held his
peace. Then by the river he hied him higher up upon the sandy shore,
to where he found an inn upon the other bank. Loudly he began to call
across the flood: "Now come and fetch me, ferryman," quoth the good
knight, "and I will give thee as meed an arm ring of ruddy gold. Know,
that of this passage I have great need in truth."

So noble was the ferryman that it behooved him not to serve, therefore
he full seldom took wage of any wight. His squires, too, were full lofty
of mood. All this time Hagen still stood alone, this side of the flood.
He called with might and main, that all the water rang, for mickle and
great was the hero's strength. "Now fetch me. I am Amelrich, Else's
liegeman, that because of a great feud did void these lands."

High upon his spear (9) he offered him an arm band, bright and fair it
was, of ruddy gold, that one should ferry him over to Gelfrat's land.
The haughty ferryman, the which was newly wed himself, did take the oar
in hand. As he would earn Hagen's gold so red, therefore he died the
sword-grim death at the hands of the knight. The greed for great goods
(10) doth give an evil end. Speedily the boatman rowed across to the
sandy bank. When he found no trace of him whose name he heard, wroth he
grew in earnest. When he spied Hagen, with fierce rage he spake to the
hero: "Ye may perchance hight Amelrich, but ye are not like him whom
I weened here. By father and by mother he was my brother. Sith ye have
bewrayed me, ye may stay on this hither shore."

"No, by the mighty God," spake then Hagen, "I am a stranger knight and
have warriors in my care. Now take ye kindly my meed to-day and ferry me
over. I am in truth your friend."

The ferryman replied: "This may not be. My dear lords have foes,
wherefore I never ferry strangers to this land. If ye love your life,
step out quickly on the sand."

"Now do it not," spake Hagen; "sad is my mind. Take this good gold from
me as a token of my love and ferry us across: a thousand horse and just
as many men."

The grim boatman answered: "'Twill ne'er be done." He raised a mighty
rudder oar, mickle and broad, and struck at Hagen (full wroth he grew
at this), so that he fell upon his knees in the boat. The lord of Troneg
had never met so fierce a ferryman. Still more the boatman would vex the
haughty stranger. He smote with an oar, so that it quite to-broke (11)
over Hagen's head (a man of might was he); from this the ferryman of
Else took great harm. Hagen, fierce of mood, seized straightway his
sheath, wherein he found his sword. His head he struck off and cast
it on the ground. Eftsoon these tidings were made known to the proud
Burgundians. At the very moment that he slew the boatman, the skiff gan
drifting down the stream. Enow that irked him. Weary he grew before he
brought it back. King Gunther's liegeman pulled with might and main.
With passing swift strokes the stranger turned it, until the sturdy oar
snapped in his hand. He would hence to the knights out upon the shore.
None other oar he had. Ho, how quickly he bound it with a shield strap,
a narrow band! Towards a wood he floated down the stream, where he found
his sovran standing by the shore.

Many a stately man went down to meet him. The doughty knights and good
received him with a kindly greeting. When they beheld in the skiff the
blood reeking from a gaping wound which he had dealt the ferryman, Hagen
was plied enow with questions by the knights. When that King Gunther
spied the hot blood swirling in the skiff, how quickly he spake:
"Wherefore tell ye me not, Hagen, whither the ferryman be come? I ween
your prowess hath bereft him of his life."

At this he answered craftily: "When I found the skiff hard by a willow
tree, I loosed it with my hand. I have seen no ferryman here to-day, nor
hath harm happed to any one through fault of mine."

Then spake Sir Gernot of Burgundy: "I must needs fear the death of dear
friends to-day. Sith we have no boatmen here at hand, how shall we come
over? Therefore I must perforce stand sad."

Loudly then called Hagen: "Ye footmen, lay the trappings down upon the
grass. I bethink me that once I was the very best of boatmen that one
might find along the Rhine. I trow to bring you all safe across to
Gelfrat's land."

They struck the horses, that these might the sooner come across the
flood; passing well they swam, for the mighty waves bereft them of not
a one. Some few drifted far adown the stream, as did befit their
weariness. Then the knights bare to the skiff their gold and weeds, sith
there was no help for the crossing. Hagen played the steersman, and so
he ferried full many mighty warriors over to the sandy shore, into the
unknown land. First he took across a thousand noble knights, then his
own men-at-arms. Still there were more to come. Nine thousand footmen he
ferried over to the land. Aught but idle was Hagen's hand that day. When
he had carried them all safe across the flood, the doughty knight and
good bethought him of the strange tales which the wild mermaids had told
him afore. For this cause the king's chaplain near lost his life. He
found the priest close by the chapel luggage, leaning with his hand upon
the relics. Little might that boot him. When Hagen spied him, ill fared
it with the hapless priest; he threw him from the skiff in haste. Enow
of them called out: "Hold on, Sir Hagen, hold!"

Giselher, the youth, gan rage, but Hagen let none come between. Then
spake Sir Gernot of Burgundy: "What availeth you now, Hagen, the
chaplain's death? Had another done the deed, 'twould have irked you
sore. For what cause have ye sworn enmity to the priest?"

The clerk (12) now tried to swim with might and main, for he would fain
save his life, if perchance any there would help him. That might not be,
for the stalwart Hagen was wroth of mood. He thrust him to the bottom,
the which thought no one good. When the poor priest saw naught of help,
he turned him back again. Sore was he discomfited, but though he could
not swim, yet did God's hand help him, so that he came safe and sound
to the land again. There the poor clerk stood and shook his robe. Hagen
marked thereby that naught might avail against the tidings which the
wild mermaids told him. Him-thought: "These knights must lose their
lives."

When the liegemen of the three kings unloaded the skiff and had borne
all away which they had upon it, Hagen brake it to pieces and threw it
in the flood, at which the bold knights and good did marvel much.

"Wherefore do ye that, brother," quoth Dankwart, "how shall we come
over, when we ride homeward from the Huns, back to the Rhine?"

Later Hagen told him that might not be. The hero of Troneg spake: "I
do it in the hope that if we have a coward on this journey, who through
faint-heartedness would run away, that in this stream he may die a
shameful death."

They had with them from Burgundy land a hero of his hands, the which
was named Folker. Wisely he spake all his mind. Whatever Hagen did,
it thought the fiddler good. Their steeds were now ready, the sumpters
laden well. On the journey they had taken no harm that irked them, save
the king's chaplain alone. He must needs wander back on foot to the
Rhine again.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "a thousand and sixty".  This does not agree with the
        account in Adventure XXIV, witere we read of a thousand of
        Hagen's men, eighty of Dankwart's, and thirty of Folker's.
        The nine thousand foot soldiers mentioned here are a later
        interpolation, as the "Thidreksaga" speaks of only a
        thousand all told.
   (2)  "Eastern Frankland", or East Franconia, is the ancient
        province of "Franconia Orientalis", the region to the east
        of the Spessart forest, including the towns of Fulda,
        Wurzburg and Barnberg.  In "Biterolf" Dietlich journeys
        through Eastern Frankland to the Danube.
   (3)  "Swanfield" (M.H.G. "Swanevelde") is the ancient province of
        "Sualafeld" between the Rezat and the Danube.
   (4)  "Gelfrat" is a Bavarian lord and the brother of "Else",
        mentioned below.  Their father's name was also Else.
   (5)  "Wise women", a generic name for all supernatural women of
        German mythology.  While it is not specifically mentioned,
        it is probable that the wise women, or mermaids, as they are
        also called here, were 'swan maidens', which play an
        important role in many legends and are endowed with the gift
        of prophecy.  They appear in the form of swans, and the
        strange attire of the wise women mentioned here refers to
        the so-called swan clothes which they wore and which enabled
        Hagen to recognize them as supernatural beings.  On bathing
        they lay aside this garment, and he who obtains possession
        of it has them in his power.  This explains their eagerness
        to give Hagen information, if he will return their garments
        to them.  For an account of them see Grimm's "Mythologie",
        355.
   (6)  "Aldrian" is not an historical personage; the name is merely
        a derivative of "aldiro", 'the elder', and signifies
        'ancestor', just as Uta means 'ancestress'.  In the
        "Thidreksaga" Aldrian is the king of the Nibelung land and
        the father of Gunther, Giselher, and Gernot, whereas Hagen
        is the son of an elf by the same mother.
   (7)  Else appears also in "Biterolf"; in the "Thidreksaga" he is
        called "Elsung", the younger, as his father bore the same
        name.  See Adventure XXV, note 4.
   (8)  "Amelrich" is the ferryman's brother.
   (9)  "Spear".  It was the custom to offer presents on a spear
        point, perhaps to prevent the recipient from treacherously
        using his sword.  Compare the similar description in the
        "Hildebrandslied", 37, where we are told that gifts should
        be received with the spear.
   (10) "Goods".  In the "Thidreksaga" the ferryman desires the ring
        for his young wife, which explains better the allusion to
        marriage and the desire for wealth.
   (11) "To-broke", see Adventure II, note 9.
   (12) "Clerk", 'priest'.




ADVENTURE XXVI (1) How Gelfrat Was Slain By Dankwart.

Now when all were come upon the shore, the king gan ask: "Who will show
us the right roads through this land, that we go not astray?"

Then the sturdy Folker spake: "For this I alone will have a care."

"Now hold," quoth Hagen, "both knight and squire. Certes, me-thinketh
right that we should heed our friends. With full monstrous tales I'll
make you acquaint: we shall never come again to the Burgundian land.
Two mermaids told me early in the morning that we should not come back
again. I will now counsel you what ye do: ye must arm you, ye heroes,
for we have mighty foes. Ye must guard you well and ride in warlike
guise. I thought to catch these mermaids in a lie. They swore that none
of us would come home safe and sound, save the chaplain alone. Therefore
would I fain have drowned him to-day."

These tidings flew from band to band and valiant heroes grew pale from
woe, as they began to fear a grewsome death on this journey to Etzel's
court. Forsooth they had great need. When they had crossed at Moering,
(2) where Else's ferryman had lost his life, Hagen spake again: "Sith I
have gained me foes upon the way, we shall surely be encountered. I slew
this same ferryman early on the morn to-day. Well they wot the tale. Now
lay on boldly, so that it may go hard with Gelfrat and Else, should they
match our fellowship here to-day. I know them to be so bold that 'twill
not be left undone. Let the steeds jog on more gently, that none ween we
be a-fleeing on the road."

"This counsel I will gladly follow," quoth Giselher, the knight; "but
who shall guide the fellowship across the land?"

They answered: "This let Felker do; the valiant minstrel knoweth both
road and path."

Ere the wish was fully spoken, men saw the doughty fiddler standing
there well armed. On his head he bound his helmet, of lordly color was
his fighting gear. On his spear shaft he tied a token, the which was
red. Later with the kings he fell into direst need.

Trustworthy tidings of the ferryman's death were now come to Gelfrat's
ears. The mighty Else had also heard the tale. Loth it was to both; they
sent to fetch their heroes, who soon stood ready. In a passing short
time, as I'll let you hear, one saw riding towards them those who
had wrought scathe and monstrous wounds in mighty battles. Full seven
hundred or more were come to Gelfret. When they began to ride after
their savage foes, their lords did lead them, of a truth. A deal too
strong they hasted after the valiant strangers; they would avenge their
wrath. Therefore many of the lordings' friends were later lost.

Hagen of Troneg had well planned it (how might a hero ever guard his
kinsmen better), that he had in charge the rear guard, with his liegemen
and his brother Dankwart. This was wisely done.

The day had passed away; the night was come. For his friends he feared
both harm and woe, as beneath their shields they rode through the
Bavarian land. A short time thereafter the heroes were assailed. On
either side of the highway and in the rear hard by they heard the beat
of hoofs. Their foes pressed on too hard. Then spake hold Dankwart:
"They purpose to attack us here, so hind on your helmets, for that be
well to do."

They stayed their journey, as though it must needs he; in the gloom
they spied the gleam of shining shields. Hagen would no longer keep his
peace; he called: "Who chaseth us upon the highway?"

To this Gelfrat must needs give answer. Quoth the margrave of Bavaria:
"We seek our foes and have galloped on behind you. I know not who slew
my ferryman to-day, but it doth rue me enow, for he was a hero of his
hands."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "And was then the ferryman thine? The fault
was mine, he would not ferry us over, so I slew the knight. Forsooth I
had great need, for I had sheer gained at his hands my death. As meed I
offered him gold and trappings, that he ferry me across to thy land, Sir
Knight. This angered him so greatly that he smote me with a mighty oar.
At this I waxed grim enow. I seized my sword and fended him his anger
with a grievous wound. Thus the hero met his death. I'll make amends, as
doth think thee best."

"Well I wist," spake Gelfrat, "when Gunther and his fellowship rode
hither, that Hagen of Troneg would do us harm. Now he shall not live;
the knight must stand for the ferryman's life."

Over the bucklers Gelfrat and Hagen couched their spears for the thrust;
each would charge the other. Else and Dankwart rode full gloriously;
they tested who they were, fierce was the fight. How might heroes ever
prove each other better? From a mighty thrust Hagen was unhorsed by
Gelfrat's hand. His martingale snapped, he learnt what it was to fall.
The crash of shafts resounded from their fellowship. Hagen, who from the
thrust afore had come to earth, down on the grass, sprang up again. I
trow, he was not gentle of mood towards Gelfrat then. Who held their
steeds, I know not; both Hagen and Gelfrat had alighted on the sand and
rushed together. Their fellowship helped thereby and became acquaint
with strife. Albeit Hagen sprang at Gelfrat fiercely, the noble margrave
smote from his shield a mickle piece, so that the sparks flew wide. Full
nigh did Gunther's liegeman die therefrom. He began to call to Dankwart:
"O help, dear brother! Certes, a hero of his hands hath matched me, he
will not spare my life."

At this hold Dankwart spake: "I'll play the umpire here."

The hero then sprang nearer and with a sharp sword smote Gelfrat such a
blow that he fell down dead. Else then would fain avenge the knight, but
he and his fellowship parted from the fray with scathe. His brother had
been slain, he himself was wounded; full eighty of his knights remained
with grim death behind upon the field. Their lord must needs turn in
flight from Gunther's men.

When those from the Bavarian land gave way and fled, one heard the
savage blows resound behind them. Those of Troneg chased their foes;
they were in passing haste, who had not weened to make amends. Then
spake Dankwart, the knight, in their pursuit: "Let us turn soon on this
road and let them ride, for they be wot with blood. Haste we to our
friends, this I advise you of a truth."

When they were come again, where the scathe had happed, Hagen of Troneg
spake: "Heroes, prove now what doth fail us here, or whom we have lost
in the strife through Gelfrat's wrath."

Four they had lost whom they must needs bewail. But they had been paid
for dearly; for them a hundred or better from the Bavarian land were
slain. From their blood the shields of the men of Troneg were dimmed
and wet. Through the clouds there partly broke the gleam of the shining
moon, as Hagen spake again: "Let none make known to my dear lords what
we have wrought here to-day. Let them rest without care until the morn."

When those who just had fought were now come again, the fellowship was
full weary from the way. "How long must we still ride?" asked many a
man.

Then spake the bold Dankwart: "We may not find lodgings here, ye must
all ride until the day be come."

The doughty Folker, who had charge of the fellowship, bade ask the
marshal: "Where may we find a place to-night, where our steeds may rest
and our dear lords as well?"

Bold Dankwart answered: "I cannot tell you that, we may not rest till
it begin to dawn. Wherever then we find a chance, we'll lay us down upon
the grass."

How loth it was to some when they heard this tale! They remained
unmarked with their stains of warm red blood, until the sun shot his
gleaming light against the morn across the hills. Then the king beheld
that they had fought. Wrathfully the hero spake: "How now, friend Hagen?
I ween, ye scorned to have me with you when your rings grew wet with
blood? Who hath done this?"

Quoth he: "This Else did, who encountered us by night. We were attacked
because of his ferryman. Then my brother's hand smote Gelfrat down. Else
soon escaped us, constrained thereto by mickle need. A hundred of them
and but four of ours lay dead in the strife."

We cannot tell you where they laid them down to rest. All of the folk
of the land learned soon that the sons of the noble Uta rode to court.
Later they were well received at Passau. The uncle of the noble king,
the Bishop Pilgrim, was blithe of mood, as his nephews came to his land
with so many knights. That he bare them good will, they learned full
soon. Well were they greeted, too, by friends along the way, sith men
could not lodge them all at Passau. They had to cross the stream to
where they found a field on which they set up pavilions and costly
tents. All one day they must needs stay there, and a full night too.
What good cheer men gave them! After that they had to ride to Rudeger's
land, to whom the tidings were brought full soon. When the way-worn
warriors had rested them and came nearer to the Hunnish land, they found
a man asleep upon the border, from whom Hagen of Troneg won a sturdy
sword. The same good knight hight Eckewart (3) in truth; sad of mood he
grew, that he lost his weapon through the journey of the knights. They
found Rudeger's marches guarded ill.

"Woe is me of this shame," spake Eckewart. "Certes this journey of the
Burgundians rueth me full sore. My joy hath fled, sith I lost Knight
Siegfried. Alas, Sir Rudeger, how I have acted toward thee!"

When Hagen heard the noble warrior's plight, he gave him back his sword
and six red arm bands. "These keep, Sir Knight, as a token that thou art
my friend. A bold knight thou art, though thou standest alone upon the
marches."

"God repay you for your arm bands," Eckewart replied. "Yet your journey
to the Huns doth rue me sore. Because ye slew Siegfried, men hate you
here. I counsel you in truth, that ye guard you well."

"Now may God protect us," answered Hagen. "These knights, the kings and
their liegemen, have forsooth no other care, save for their lodgement,
where we may find quarters in this land to-night. Our steeds be spent by
the distant way and our food run out," quoth Hagen, the knight. "We
find naught anywhere for sale, and have need of a host, who through his
courtesie would give us of his bread to-night."

Then Eckewart made answer: "I'll show you a host so good that full
seldom have ye been lodged so well in any land, as here may hap you, an'
ye will seek out Rudeger, ye doughty knights. He dwelleth by the highway
and is the best host that ever owned a house. His heart giveth birth to
courtesie, as the sweet May doth to grass and flowers. He is aye merry
of mood, when he can serve good knights."

At this King Gunther spake: "Will ye be my messenger and ask whether my
dear friend Rudeger will for my sake keep us, my kinsmen and our men? I
will repay thee this, as best I ever can."

"Gladly will I be the messenger," Eckewart replied. With a right good
will he gat him on the road and told Rudeger the message he had heard,
to whom none such pleasing news had come in many a day.

At Bechelaren men saw a knight pricking fast. Rudeger himself descried
him; he spake: "Upon the road yonder hasteth Eckewart, a liegeman of
Kriemhild."

He weened the foes had done him scathe. Before the gate he went to meet
the messenger, who ungirt his sword and laid it from his hand. The
tales he brought were not hidden from the host and his friends, but were
straightway told them. To the margrave he spake: "Gunther, the lord of
the Burgundian land, and Giselher, his brother, and Gernot, too, have
sent me hither to you. Each of the warriors tendered you his service.
Hagen and Folker, too, eagerly did the same in truth. Still more I'll
tell you, that the king's marshal sendeth you by me the message, that
the good knights have passing need of your lodgement."

Rudeger answered with a smile: "Now well is me of these tales, that
the high-born kings do reck of my service. It shall not be denied them.
Merry and blithe will I be, an' they come unto my house."

"Dankwart, the marshal, bade let you know whom ye should lodge in your
house with them: sixty doughty champions, a thousand good knights, and
nine thousand men-at-arms."

Merry of mood grew Rudeger; he spake: "Now well is me of these guests,
that these noble warriors be coming to my house, whom I have served as
yet full seldom. Now ride ye forth for to meet them, my kinsmen and my
men."

Knights and squires now hied them to their horses; it thought them
right, which their lord did bid. All the more they hasted with their
service. As yet Lady Gotelind wist it not, who sate within her bower.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Adventure XXVI".  This adventure is a late interpolation,
        as it is not found in the "Thidreksaga".  Originally the
        river must be thought of as separating them from Etzel's
        kingdom.
   (2)  "Moering" (M.H.G. "Moeringen") lies between Pforing and
        Ingolstadt.  In the "Thidreksaga" we are told that the
        mermaids were bathing in a body of water called "Moere",
        whereas in our poem they bathe in a spring.  This may be the
        original form of the account and the form here contaminated.
        See Boer, i, 134.
   (3)  "Eckewart", see Adventure I, note 15.  It will be remembered
        that he accompanied Kriemhild first to the Netherlands, then
        stayed with her at Worms after Siegfried's death, and
        finally journeyed with her to Etzel's court.  Originally he
        must be thought of as guarding the boundary of Etzel's land.
        Without doubt he originally warned the Burgundians, as in
        the early Norse versions, where Kriemhild fights on the side
        of her brothers, but since this duty was given to Dietrich,
        he has nothing to do but to announce their arrival to
        Rudeger.  His sleeping here may, however, be thought to
        indicate that it was too late to warn Gunther and his men.




ADVENTURE XXVII. How They Came To Bechelaren.

Then the margrave went to where he found the ladies, his wife with his
daughter, and told them straightway the pleasing tidings he had heard,
that the brothers of their lady were coming thither to their house.
"My dearest love," quoth Rudeger, "ye must receive full well the noble
high-born kings, when they come here to court with their fellowship. Ye
must give fair greeting, too, to Hagen, Gunther's man. With them there
cometh one also, hight Dankwart; the other is named Folker, well beseen
with courtesie. Ye and my daughter must kiss these and abide by the
knights with gentle breeding." This the ladies vowed; quite ready they
were to do it. From the chests they hunted out the lordly robes in which
they would go to meet the warriors. Fair dames were passing busy on
that day. Men saw but little of false colors on the ladies' cheeks;
upon their heads they wore bright bands of gold. Rich chaplets (1) these
were, that the winds might not dishevel their comely hair, and this is
true i' faith.

Let us now leave the ladies with these tasks. Much hasting over the
plain was done by Rudeger's friends, to where one found the lordings,
whom men then received well into the margrave's land. When the margrave,
the doughty Rudeger, saw them coming toward him, how joyfully he spake:
"Be ye welcome, fair sirs, and your liegemen, too. I be fain to see you
in my land." Low obeisance the knights then made, in good faith, without
all hate. That he bare them all good will, he showed full well. Hagen
he gave a special greeting, for him had he known of yore. (2) To Folker
from Burgundy land he did the same. Dankwart he welcomed, too. The bold
knight spake: "Sith ye will purvey us knights, who shall have a care for
our men-at-arms whom we have brought?"

Quoth the margrave: "A good night shall ye have and all your fellowship.
I'll purvey such guard for whatever ye have brought with you, of steeds
and trappings, that naught shall be lost, that might bring you harm, not
even a single spur. Ye footmen pitch the tents upon the plain. What ye
lose I'll pay in full. Take off the bridles, let the horses run."

Seldom had host done this for them afore. Therefore the guests made
merry. When that was done, the lordlings rode away and the footmen laid
them everywhere upon the grass. Good ease they had; I ween, they never
fared so gently on the way. The noble margravine with her fair daughter
was come out before the castle. One saw stand by her side the lovely
ladies and many a comely maid. Great store of armlets and princely
robes they wore. The precious stones gleamed afar from out their passing
costly weeds. Fair indeed were they fashioned.

Then came the guests and alighted there straightway. Ho, what great
courtesie one found among the Burgundian men! Six and thirty maids and
many other dames, whose persons were wrought as fair as heart could
wish, went forth to meet them with many a valiant man. Fair greetings
were given there by noble dames. The young margravine kissed all three
kings, as did her mother, too. Close at hand stood Hagen. Her father
bade her kiss him, but when she gazed upon him, he seemed so fearful
that she had fain left it undone. Yet she must needs perform what the
host now bade her do. Her color changed first pale then red. Dankwart,
too, she kissed, and then the minstrel. For his great prowess was this
greeting given. The young margravine took by the hand Knight Giselher
of the Burgundian land. The same her mother did to Gunther, the valiant
man. Full merrily they went hence with the heroes. The host walked at
Gernot's side into a broad hall, where the knights and ladies sate them
down. Soon they bade pour out for the guests good wine. Certes, heroes
might never be better purveyed than they. Rudeger's daughter was gazed
upon with loving glances, so fair she was. Forsooth many a good knight
caressed her in his mind. And well did she deserve this, so high she was
of mood. The knights thought what they would, but it might not come to
pass. Back and forth shot the glances at maids and dames. Of them sate
there enow. The noble fiddler bare the host good will.

Then they parted after the custom, knights and ladies going to different
sides. In the broad hall they set up the tables and served the strangers
in lordly wise. For the sake of the guests the noble margravine went
to table, but let her daughter stay with the maidens, where she sate by
right. The guests saw naught of her, which irked them sore, in truth.

When they had eaten and drunk on every side, men brought the fair again
into the hall; nor were merry speeches left unsaid. Many such spake
Folker, this brave and lusty knight. Before them all the noble minstrel
spake: "Mighty margrave, God hath dealt full graciously with you, for
he hath given you a passing comely wife and thereto a life of joy. An'
I were a prince," quoth the minstrel, "and should wear a crown, I would
fain have to wife your comely daughter. This my heart doth wish. She is
lovely for to see, thereto noble and good."

Then answered the margrave: "How might that be, that king should ever
crave the dear daughter of mine? My wife and I are exiles; what booteth
in such ease the maiden's passing comeliness?"

To this Gernot, the well-bred man, made answer: "An' I might have a love
after mine own desire, I should be ever glad of such a wife."

Hagen, too, replied in full kindly wise: "My lord Giselher must take
a wife. The margravine is of such high kin that I and all his liegemen
would gladly serve her, should she wear a crown in Burgundy land."

This speech thought Rudeger passing good, and Gotelind too, indeed
it joyed their mood. Then the heroes brought to pass that the noble
Giselher took her to wife, as did well befit a king. Who may part what
shall be joined together? Men prayed the margravine to go to court, and
swore to give him the winsome maid. He, too, vowed to wed the lovely
fair. For the maiden they set castles and land aside, and this the hand
of the noble king did pledge with an oath, and Lord Gernot, too, that
this should hap.

Then spake the margrave: "Sith I have naught of castles, I will
ever serve you with my troth. As much silver and gold will I give my
daughter, as an hundred sumpters may barely carry, that it may please
the hero's kin in honor."

After the custom men bade them stand in a ring. Over against her many a
youth stood, blithe of mood. In their minds they harbored thoughts,
as young folk still are wont to do. Men then gan ask the winsome maid
whether she would have the knight or no. Loth in part she was, and yet
she thought to take the stately man. She shamed her of the question, as
many another maid hath done. Her father Rudeger counseled her to answer
yes, and gladly take him. In a trice young Giselher was at her side, and
clasped her in his white hands, albeit but little time she might enjoy
him.

Then Spake the margrave: "Ye noble and mighty kings, when ye now ride
again (that is the custom) home to Burgundy, I will give you my child,
that ye may take her with you."

This then they vowed. Now men must needs give over all the noisy joy.
They bade the maiden hie her to her bower, and bade the guests to sleep
and rest them against the day. Meanwhile men made ready the food; the
host purveyed them well.

When now they had eaten, they would ride hence to the Hunnish lands.
"I'll guard against that well," spake the noble host. "Ye must tarry
still, for full seldom have I gained such welcome guests."

To this Dankwart replied: "Forsooth this may not be. Where would ye find
the food, the bread and wine, that ye must have for so many warriors
another night?"

When the host heard this, he spake: "Give o'er this speech. My dear
lords, ye must not say me nay. Forsooth I'd give you vittaile for a
fortnight, with all your fellowship that is come hither with you. King
Etzel hath taken from me as yet full little of my goods."

However much they demurred, still they must needs tarry there until the
fourth morning, when such deeds were done by the bounty of the host that
it was told after. He gave his guests both mounts and robes. No longer
might they stay, they must fare forth. Through his bounty bold Rudeger
wot how to save but little. Naught was denied that any craved, it could
not but please them all. Their noble meiny now brought saddled before
the gate the many steeds, and to them came forth thee stranger knights.
In their hands they bare their shields, for they would ride to Etzel's
land. Before the noble guests come forth from the hall, the host had
proffered everywhere his gifts. He wist how to live bountifully, in
mickle honors. To Giselher he had given his comely daughter; to Gunther,
the worshipful knight, who seldom took a gift, he gave a coat of mail,
which the noble and mighty king wore well with honor. Gunther bowed low
over noble Rudeger's hand. Then to Gernot he gave a weapon good enow,
the which he later bare full gloriously in strife. Little did the
margrave's wife begrudge him the gift, but through it good Rudeger was
forced to lose his life. Gotelind offered Hagen a loving gift, as well
befit her. He took it, sith the king had taken one, that he should
not fare forth from her to the feasting, without her present. Later he
gainsayed it. "Of all that I have ever seen," quoth Hagen, "I crave to
bear naught else save that shield on yonder wall; fain would I take that
with me into Etzel's land."

When the margravine heard Hagen's speech, it minded her of her
grief--tears became her well. She thought full dearly on Nudung's (3)
death, whom Wittich had slain; from this she felt the stress of sorrow.
To the knight she spake: "I'll give you the shield. Would to God in
heaven, that he still lived who bare it once in hand. He met his death
in battle; for him must I ever weep, which giveth me, poor wife, dire
woe."

The noble margravine rose from her seat and with her white hands she
seized the shield. To Hagen the lady bare it, who took it in his hand.
This gift was worthily bestowed upon the knight. A cover of shining silk
concealed its colors, for it was set with precious stones. In sooth the
daylight never shone on better shield. Had any wished to buy it at its
cost, 'twere well worth a thousand marks. (4) Hagen bade the shield be
borne away.

Then Dankwart came to court. To him the margrave's daughter gave great
store of rich apparel, the which he later wore among the Huns in passing
lordly wise. However many gifts were taken by them, naught would have
come into the hands of any, save through the kindness of the host,
who proffered them so fair. Later they became such foes that they were
forced to strike him dead.

Now the doughty Folker went courteously with his fiddle and stood before
Gotelind. He played sweet tunes and sang to her his songs. Thus he took
his leave and parted from Bechelaren. The margravine bade fetch a chest.
Now hear the tale of friendly gifts! Twelve rings she took out and
placed them on his hand. "These ye must bear hence to Etzel's land and
wear them at court for my sake, whithersoever ye turn, that men may tell
me how ye have served me yonder at the feast." What the lady craved, he
later carried out full well.

Then spake the host to his guests: "Ye shall journey all the gentlier,
for I myself will guide you and bid guard you well, that none may harm
you on the road."

Then his sumpters were laden soon. The host was well beseen with five
hundred men with steeds and vesture. These he took with him full
merrily hence to the feasting. Not one of them later ever came alive
to Bechlaren. With a loving kiss the host parted hence; the same did
Giselher, as his gentle breeding counseled him. In their arms they
clasped fair wives. This many a high-born maid must needs bewail in
later times. On every side they opened the casements, for the host with
his liegemen would now mount their steeds. I ween their hearts did tell
them of the bitter woes to come. Then wept many a dame and many a comely
maid. They pined for their dear kinsmen, whom nevermore they saw in
Bechelaren. Yet these rode merrily across the sand, down along the
Danube to the Hunnish land.

Then noble Rudeger, the full lusty knight, spake to the Burgundians:
"Certes, the tidings that we be coming to the Huns must not be left
unsaid, for king Etzel hath never heard aught that pleased him more."

So down through Austria the envoy sped, and to the folk on every side
'twas told that the heroes were coming from Worms beyond the Rhine.
Naught could have been liefer to the courtiers of the king. On before
the envoys hasted with the tidings, that the Nibelungs were already in
the Hunnish land.

"Thou must greet them well, Kriemhild, lady mine. Thy dear brothers be
coming in great state to visit thee."

Within a casement window Lady Kriemhild stood and looked out to see
her kin, as friend doth for friend. Many a man she spied from her
fatherland. The king, too, learned the tale and laughed for very
pleasure. "Now well is me of my joys," quoth Kriemhild, "my kinsmen
bring with them many a brand-new shield and white coat of mail. He who
would have gold, let him bethink him of my sorrows, and I'll ever be his
friend."


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Chaplets", see Adventure 10, note 1.
   (2)  "Of yore", see Adventure 23, note 2.
   (3)  "Nudung" was slain, according to the "Thidreksaga", chap.
        335, by "Vidg"a (here Wittich, M.H.G. "Witege", the son of
        Wielant, the smith, in the battle of Gronsport.  There,
        chap. 369, he is Gotelind's brother, but in "Biterolf" and
        the "Rosengarten" he is her son.
   (4)  "Marks", see Adventure V, note 5.




ADVENTURE XXVIII. How The Burgundians Came To Etzel's Castle.

When the Burgundians were come to the land, old Hildebrand (1) of Berne
did hear the tale, and sore it rued him. He told his lord, who bade him
welcome well the lusty knights and brave. The doughty Wolfhart (2) bade
fetch the steeds; then many a sturdy warrior rode with Dietrich, to
where he thought to meet them on the plain where they had pitched full
many a lordly tent. When Hagen of Troneg saw them riding from afar, to
his lords he spake in courteous wise: "Now must ye doughty warriors rise
from your seats and go to meet them, who would greet you here. Yonder
cometh a fellowship I know full well, they be full speedy knights from
the Amelung land, (3) whom the lord of Berne doth lead--high-mettled
warriors they. Scorn not the service that they proffer."

Then with Dietrich there alighted from the steeds, as was mickle right,
many a knight and squire. Towards the strangers they went, to where
they found the heroes; in friendly wise they greeted those from the
Burgundian land. Ye may now hear what Sir Dietrich said to the sons of
Uta, as he saw them coming toward him. Their journey rued him sore; he
weened that Rudeger wist it, and had told them the tale. "Be ye welcome,
fair sirs, Gunther and Giselher, Gernot and Hagen, likewise Folker and
the doughty Dankwart. Know ye not that Kriemhild still mourneth sorely
for the hero of the Nibelung land?"

"Let her weep long time," quoth Hagen. "He hath lain these many years,
done to death. Let her love now the Hunnish king. Siegfried cometh not
again, he hath long been buried."

"Let us not talk of Siegfried's wounds, but if Kriemhild still live,
scathe may hap again," so spake Sir Dietrich, the lord of Berne. "Hope
of the Nibelungs, guard thee well against this."

"Why should I guard me?" spake the high-born king. "Etzel sent us envoys
(why should I question more?) to say that we should ride to visit him,
hither to this land. My sister Kriemhild sent us many a message, too."

"Let me counsel you," quoth Hagen, "to beg Sir Dietrich and his good
knights to tell you the tidings further, and to let you know the Lady
Kriemhild's mood."

Then the three mighty kings, Gunther and Gernot and Sir Dietrich, too,
went and spake apart. "Pray tell us, good and noble knight of Berne,
what ye do know of the queen's mood?"

Answered the lord of Berne: "What more shall I tell you? Every morning I
hear King Etzel's wife wail and weep with piteous mind to the mighty God
of heaven over the stalwart Siegfried's death."

"That which we have heard," spake bold Folker, the fiddler, "cannot be
turned aside. We must ride to court and abide what may hap to us doughty
knights among the Huns."

The brave Burgundians now rode to court. In lordly wise they came after
the fashion of their land. Many a brave man among the Huns wondered what
manner of man Hagen of Troneg be. It was enough that men told tales,
that he had slain Kriemhild's husband the mightiest of all heroes. For
that cause alone much questioning about Hagen was heard at court. The
knight was fair of stature, that is full true; broad he was across the
breast; his hair was mixed with gray; his legs were long, and fierce his
glance; lordly gait he had.

Then one bade lodge the Burgundian men, but Gunther's fellowship was
placed apart. This the queen advised, who bare him much hate, and
therefore men later slew the footmen in their lodgings. Dankwart,
Hagen's brother, he was marshal. The king earnestly commended to him his
followers, that he purvey them well and give them enow to eat; The hero
of Burgundy bare them all good will. Kriemhild, the fair, went with her
maids-in-waiting to where, false of mood, she greeted the Nibelungs.
Giselher alone she kissed and took by the hand. That Hagen of Troneg
saw, and bound his helmet tighter. "After such a greeting," quoth Hagen,
"doughty knights may well bethink them. One giveth kings a greeting
different from their men. We have not made a good journey to this
feast." (4)

She spake: "Be welcome to him that be fain to see you; I greet you not
for your kinship. Pray tell me what ye do bring me from Worms beyond the
Rhine, that ye should be so passing welcome to me here?"

"Had I known," quoth Hagen, "that knights should bring you gifts, I had
bethought me better, for I be rich enow to bring you presents hither to
this land."

"Now let me hear the tale of where ye have put the Nibelung hoard? It
was mine own, as ye well know, and ye should have brought me that to
Etzel's land."

"I' faith, my Lady Kriemhild, it is many a day sith I have had the care
of the Nibelung hoard. My lords bade sink it in the Rhine, and there it
must verily lie till doomsday."

Then spake the queen: "I thought as much. Ye have brought full little of
it hither to this land, albeit it was mine own, and I had it whilom in
my care. Therefore have I all time so many a mournful day."

"The devil I'll bring you," answered Hagen. "I have enough to carry with
my shield and breastplate; my helm is bright, the sword is in my hand,
therefore I bring you naught."

Then the queen spake to the knights on every side: "One may not bring
weapons to the hall. Sir Knights, give them to me, I'll have them taken
in charge."

"I' faith," quoth Hagen, "never shall that be done. In sooth I crave not
the honor, O bounteous princess, that ye should bear my shield and other
arms to the lodgings; ye be a queen. This my father did not teach me, I
myself will play the chamberlain."

"Alack for my sorrows," spake Lady Kriemhild. "Why will Hagen and my
brother not let their shields be taken in charge? They be warned, and
wist I, who hath done this, I'd ever plan his death."

To this Sir Dietrich answered in wrath: "'Tis I, that hath warned the
noble and mighty princes and the bold Hagen, the Burgundian liegeman. Go
to, thou she-devil, thou durst not make me suffer for the deed."

Sore abashed was King Etzel's wife, for bitterly she feared Sir
Dietrich. At once she left him, not a word she spake, but gazed with
furious glance upon her foes. Two warriors then grasped each other
quickly by the hand, the one was Sir Dietrich, the other Hagen. With
gentle breeding the lusty hero spake: "Forsooth I rue your coming to the
Huns, because of what the queen hath said."

Quoth Hagen: "There will be help for that."

Thus the two brave men talked together. King Etzel saw this, and
therefore he began to query: "Fain would I know," spake the mighty
king, "who yonder warrior be, whom Sir Dietrich greeteth there in such
friendly wise. He carrieth high his head; whoever be his father, he is
sure a doughty knight."

A liegeman of Kriemhild made answer to the king: "By birth he is from
Troneg, his father hight Aldrian; however blithe he bear him here, a
grim man is he. I'll let you see full well that I have told no lie."

"How shall I know that he be so fierce?" replied the king. As yet he
wist not the many evil tricks that the queen should later play upon her
kin, so that she let none escape from the Huns alive.

"Well know I Aldrian, for he was my vassal (5) and here at my court
gained mickle praise and honor. I dubbed him knight and gave hint of my
gold. The faithful Helca loved him inly. Therefore I have since known
Hagen every whit. Two stately youths became my hostages, he and Walther
of Spain. (6) Here they grew to manhood; Hagen I sent home again,
Walther ran away with Hildegund."

He bethought him of many tales that had happed of yore. He had spied
aright his friend of Troneg, who in his youth had given him yeoman
service. Later in his old age he did him many a dear friend to death.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Hildebrand" is the teacher and armor bearer of Dietrich.
        He is the hero of the famous "Hildebrandslied".
   (2)  "Wolfhart" is Hildebrand's nephew.  In the "Thidreksaga" he
        falls in the battle of Gronsport.
   (3)  "Amelung land" is the name under which Dietrich's land
        appears.  Theodorich, the king of the East Goths, belonged
        to the race of the Amali.
   (4)  "Feast".  That Kriemhild kissed only Giselher, who was
        innocent of Siegfried's death, aroused Hagen's suspicions.
   (5)  "Vassal".  No other account speaks of Aldrian as being at
        Etzel's court.  He is probably confused here with his son,
        for Hagen's stay with Etzel in various legends, as also in
        our poem a few lines further down.
   (6)  "Walther of Spain" is Walther of Aquitania, a legendary
        personage of whom the O.E. fragment "Waldere", the Latin
        epic "Waltharius", a M.H.G. epic, and the "Thidreksaga"
        tell.  He flees with Hildegund, the daughter of the
        Burgundian King Herrich, from Etzel's court, as related
        here, but has to fight for his life against overpowering
        numbers, in the "Thidreksaga" against the pursuing Huns, in
        the other sources against the Burgundians.  In both cases
        Hagen is among his foes, but takes no part in the fight at
        first, out of friendship for Walther.




ADVENTURE XXIX. How Hagen Would Not Rise For Kriemhild.

Then the two worshipful warriors parted, Hagen of Troneg and
Sir Dietrich. Over his shoulder Gunther's liegeman gazed for a
comrade-at-arms, whom he then quickly won. Folker he saw, the cunning
fiddler, stand by Giselher, and begged him to join him, for well he knew
his savage mood. He was in all things a bold knight and a good. Still
they let the lordings stand in the court, only these twain alone men saw
walk hence far across the court before a spacious palace. These chosen
warriors feared the hate of none. They sate them down upon a bench
before the house over against a hall, the which belonged to Kriemhild.
Upon their bodies shone their lordly weeds. Enow who gazed upon them
would than have known the knights; as wild beasts the haughty heroes
were stared upon by the Hunnish men. Etzel's wife, too, gazed upon
them through a window, at which fair Kriemhild waxed sad again. Of her
sorrows it minded her and she began to weep. Much it wondered Etzel's
men what had so quickly saddened her mood. Quoth she: "That Hagen hath
done, ye heroes brave and good."

To the lady they spake: "How hath that happed, for but newly we did see
you joyful? None there be so bold, an' he hath done you aught, but it
will cost him his life, if ye bid us venge you."

"Ever would I requite it, if any avenged my wrongs. I would give him all
he craved. Behold me at your feet," spake he queen; "avenge me on Hagen,
that he lose his life."

Then sixty bold men made them ready eftsoon for Kriemhild's sake. They
would hence to slay the bold knight Hagen and the fiddler, too. With
forethought this was done. When the queen beheld the band so small, grim
of mood she spake to the knights: "What ye now would do, ye should give
over. With so few durst ye never encounter Hagen. And however strong
and bold Hagen of Troneg be, he who sitteth by his side, Folker, the
fiddler, is stronger still by far. He is an evil man. Certes, ye may not
so lightly match these knights."

When they heard this, four hundred doughty warriors more did make them
ready. The noble queen craved sore to do them harm. Thereby the heroes
later fell in mickle danger. When she saw her followers well armed, the
queen spake to the doughty knights: "Now bide a while, ye must stand
quite still in truth. Wearing my crown, I will go to meet my foes. List
ye to the wrongs that Hagen of Troneg, Gunther's man, hath done me. I
know him to be so haughty that he'll not deny a whit. Little I reek what
hap to him on this account."

Then the fiddler, a bold minstrel, spied the noble queen walk down the
flight of steps that led downward from a house. When bold Folker saw
this, to his comrade-at-arms he spake: "Now behold, friend Hagen, how
she walketh yonder, who hath faithlessly bidden us to this land. I have
never seen with a queen so many men bearing sword in hand march in such
warlike guise. Know ye, friend Hagen, whether she bear you hate? If
so be, I counsel you to guard the better your life and honor. Certes,
methinks this good. They be wroth of mood, as far as I can see, and
some be so broad of chest that he who would guard himself should do so
betimes. I ween there be those among them who wear bright breastplates.
Whom they would attack, I cannot say."

Then, angry of mood, the brave knight Hagen spake: "Well I wot that all
this be done against me, that they thus bear their gleaming swords in
hand. For aught of them, I still may ride to the Burgundian land.
Now tell me, friend Folker, whether ye will stand by me, if perchance
Kriemhild's men would fight me? Pray let me hear that, if so be ye hold
me dear. I'll aid you evermore with faithful service."

"I'll help you surely," spake the minstrel; "and should I see the king
with all his warriors draw near us, not one foot will I yield from fear
in aiding you, the while I live."

"Now may God in heaven requite you, noble Folker; though they strive
against me, what need I more? Sith ye will help me, as I hear you say,
let these warriors come on full-armed."

"Let us rise now from our seats," spake the minstrel. "Let us do her
honor as she passeth by, she is a high-born dame, a queen. We shall
thereby honor ourselves as well."

"For my sake, no," quoth Hagen. "Should I go hence, these knights would
think 'twas through fear. Not for one of them will I ever rise from my
seat. It beseemeth us both better, forsooth, to leave this undone, for
why should I honor one who doth bear me hatred? Nor will I do this, the
while I live; I reck not how King Etzel's wife doth hate me."

Haughty Hagen laid across his knees a gleaming sword from whose pommel
a sparkling jasper, greener than grass, did shine. Its hilt was golden,
its sheath an edging of red. That it was Siegfried's, Kriemhild knew
full well. She must needs grow sad when that she knew the sword, for it
minded her of her wrongs; she began to weep. I ween bold Hagen had done
it for this cause. Folker, the bold, drew nearer to the bench a fiddle
bow, strong, mickle, and long, like unto a broad, sharp sword, and there
the two lusty knights sate undaunted. These two brave men did think
themselves so lordly, that they would not leave their seats through fear
of any man. The noble queen walked therefore to their very feet and gave
them hostile greeting. She spake: "Now tell me, Hagen, who hath sent for
you, that ye durst ride hither to this land, sith ye know full well what
ye have done me? Had ye good wits, ye should have left it undone, by
rights."

"No one sent for me," quoth Hagen. "Men bade to this land three knights,
who hight my lords. I am their liegeman, and full seldom have I stayed
behind when they journeyed to any court."

Quoth she: "Now tell me further, why ye did this, through the which ye
have earned my hate? Ye slew Siegfried, my dear husband, for which I
have cause enow to weep until mine end."

Quoth he: "What booteth more, enow is already said. It is just I, Hagen,
who slew Siegfried, a hero of his hands. How sorely did he atone that
Lady Kriemhild railed at comely Brunhild. 'Tis not to be denied, O
mighty queen, I alone am to blame for this scathful scathe. (1) Let him
avenge it who will, be he wife or man. Unless be I should lie to you, I
have dons you much of harm."

Quoth she: "Now hear, ye knights, how he denieth no whit of my wrongs.
Men of Etzel, I care not what hap to him from this cause."

The proud warriors all gazed at one another. Had any began the fight,
it would have come about that men must have given the honors to the two
comrades, for they had oft wrought wonders in the fray. What the Huns
had weened to do must now needs be left undone through fear.

Then spake one of the men-at-arms: "Why gaze ye thus at me? What I afore
vowed, I will now give over. I will lose my life for no man's gift.
Forsooth King Etzel's wife would fain lead us into wrong."

Quoth another hard by: "Of the selfsame mind am I. An' any give me
towers of good red gold, I would not match this fiddler, for his fearful
glances, the which I have seen him cast. Hagen, too, I have known from
his youthful days, wherefore men can tell me little of this knight.
I have seen him fight in two and twenty battles, through which woe of
heart hath happed to many a dame. He and the knight from Spain trod many
a war path, when here at Etzel's court they waged so many wars in honor
of the king. Much this happed, wherefore one must justly honor Hagen. At
that time the warrior was of his years a lad. How gray are they who then
were young! Now is he come to wit and is a man full grim. Balmung, (2)
too, he beareth, the which he won in evil wise."

Therewith the strife was parted, so that no one fought, which mightily
rued the queen. The warriors turned them hence; in sooth they feared
their death at the fiddler's hands, and surely they had need of this.
Then spake the fiddler: "We have now well seen that we shall find foes
here, as we heard tell afore. Let us go to court now to the kings, then
dare none match our lords in fight. How oft a man doth leave a thing
undone through fear, the which he would not do, when friend standeth by
friend in friendly (3) wise, an' he have good wits. Scathe to many a man
is lightly warded off by forethought."

Quoth Hagen: "Now will I follow you."

They went to where they found the dapper warriors standing in the court
in a great press of welcoming knights.

Bold Folker gan speak loudly to his lords: "How long will ye stand and
let yourselves be jostled? Ye must go to court and hear from the king of
what mind he be."

Men then saw the brave heroes and good pair off. The prince of Berne
took by the hand the mighty Gunther of Burgundian land. Irnfried (4)
took the brave knight Gernot, while Rudeger was seen to go to court with
Giselher. But however any paired, Folker and Hagen never parted, save
in one fray, when their end was come, and this noble ladies must needs
greatly bewail in after time. With the kings one saw go to court a
thousand brave men of their fellowship, thereto sixty champions that
were come with them, whom the bold Hagen had taken from his land. Hawart
and Iring, (5) two chosen men, were seen to walk together near the
kings. Men saw Dankwart and Wolfhart, a peerless knight, display their
chivalry before all eyes.

When the lord of the Rhine had entered the hall, the mighty Etzel
delayed no longer, but sprang from his throne when he saw him
come. Never did so fair a greeting hap from any king. "Be welcome,
Sir Gunther, and Sir Gernot, too, and your brother Giselher. I sent
you truly my faithful service to Worms beyond the Rhine. All your
fellowship, too, I welcome. Now be ye passing welcome, ye two knights,
Folker, the brave, and Sir Hagen likewise, to me and to my lady, here in
this our land. She sent you many a messenger to the Rhine."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "I heard much talk of that, and were I not
come to the Huns for the sake of my lords, I should have ridden in your
honor to this land."

The noble host then took his dear guests by the hand and led them to the
settle where he sate himself. Busily they poured out for the guests in
broad bowls of gold, mead, morat, (6) and wine and bade those far from
home be welcome. Then spake King Etzel: "Let me tell you this; it might
not liefer hap to me in all this world, than through you heroes, that
ye be come to see me. Through this much sadness is also taken from the
queen. Me-wondereth greatly what I have done you noble strangers, that
ye never recked to come into my land. My sadness is turned to joy, since
now I see you here."

To this Rudeger, a high-mettled knight, made answer: "Ye may be glad to
see them. Good is the fealty which the kinsmen of my lady wot how to use
so well. They bring also to your house many a stately knight."

Upon a midsummer's eve the lords were come to the court of the mighty
Etzel. Seldom hath there been heard such lofty greeting as when he
welcomed the heroes. When now the time to eat was come, the king went
with them to the board. Never did host sit fairer with his guests. Men
gave them meat and drink to the full. All that they craved stood ready
for them, for mickle wonders had been told about these knights.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Scathful scathe" here imitates the M.H.G. "scaden
        scedelich".
   (2)  "Balmung", see Adventure III, note 7.
   (3)  "friend... friendly".  This repetition occurs in the
        original.
   (4)  "Irnfried", see Adventure XXII, note 8.
   (5)  "Hawart" and "Iring", Adventure XXII, notes 6 and 7.
   (6)  "Morat" (M.H.G. "moraz") from late Latin "moratum", mulberry
        wine, is a beverage composed of honey flavored with
        mulberry-juice.




ADVENTURE XXX. How They Kept The Watch.

The day had now an end, and the night drew nigh. Care beset the wayworn
travelers, as to when they should go to bed and rest them. This Hagen
bespake with Etzel, and it was told them soon.

Gunther spake to the host: "God be with you, we would fain go to our
sleep, pray give us leave. We will come early on the morrow, whensoever
ye bid."

Etzel parted then full merrily from his guests. Men pressed the
strangers on every side, at which brave Folker spake to the Huns: "How
dare ye crowd before the warriors' feet? An' ye will not leave this, ye
will fare full ill. I'll smite some man so heavy a fiddle blow, that
if he have a faithful friend he may well bewail it. Why give ye not way
before us knights? Methinks 'twere well. All pass for knights, but be
not of equal mettle."

As the fiddler spake thus in wrath, Hagen, the brave, looked behind him.
He spake: "The bold gleeman doth advise you right, ye men of Kriemhild,
ye should hie you to your lodgings. I ween none of you will do what ye
are minded, but would ye begin aught, come early on the morrow, and
let us wanderers have peace to-night. Certes, I ween that it hath never
happed with such good will on the part of heroes."

Then the guests were brought into a spacious hall, which they found
purveyed on every side with costly beds, long and broad, for the
warriors. Lady Kriemhild planned the very greatest wrongs against them.
One saw there many a cunningly wrought quilt from Arras (1) of shining
silken cloth and many a coverlet of Arabian silk, the best that might be
had; upon this ran a border that shone in princely wise. Many bed covers
of ermine and of black sable were seen, beneath which they should have
their ease at night, until the dawn of day. Never hath king lain so
lordly with his meiny.

"Alas for these night quarters," spake Giselher, the youth, "and alas
for my friends, who be come with us. However kindly my sister greeted
us, yet I do fear me that through her fault we must soon lie dead."

"Now give over your care," quoth Hagen, the knight. "I'll stand watch
myself to-night. I trow to guard us well, until the day doth come.
Therefore have no fear; after that, let him survive who may."

All bowed low and said him gramercy. Then went they to their beds. A
short while after the stately men had laid them down, bold Hagen, the
hero, began to arm him. Then the fiddler, Knight Folker, spake: "If it
scorn you not, Hagen, I would fain hold the watch with you to-night,
until the early morn."

The hero then thanked Folker in loving wise: "Now God of heaven requite
you, dear Folker. In all my cares, I would crave none other than you
alone, whenever I had need. I shall repay you well, and death hinder me
not."

Both then donned their shining armor and either took his shield in hand,
walked out of the house and stood before the door. Thus they cared for
the guests in faithful wise. The doughty Folker leaned his good shield
against the side of the hall, then turned him back and fetched his
fiddle and served his friends as well befit the hero. Beneath the door
of the house he sate him down upon a stone; bolder fiddler was there
never. When the tones of the strings rang forth so sweetly, the proud
wanderers gave Folker thanks. At first the strings twanged so that the
whole house resounded; his strength and his skill were both passing
great. Then sweeter and softer he began to play, and thus many a
care-worn man he lulled to sleep. When he marked that all had fallen
asleep, the knight took again his shield and left the room and took
his stand before the tower, and there he guarded the wanderers against
Kriemhild's men.

'Twas about the middle of the night (I know not but what it happed a
little earlier), that bold Folker spied the glint of a helmet afar in
the darkness. Kriemhild's men would fain have harmed the guests. Then
the fiddler spake: "Sir Hagen, my friend, it behooveth us to bear these
cares together. Before the house I see armed men stand, and err I not, I
ween, they would encounter us!"

"Be silent," quoth Hagen, "let them draw nearer before they be ware
of us. Then will helmets be dislodged by the swords in the hands of us
twain. They will be sent back to Kriemhild in evil plight."

One of the Hunnish warriors (full soon that happed) marked that the door
was guarded. How quickly then he spake: "That which we have in mind may
not now come to pass. I see the fiddler stand on guard. On his head he
weareth a glittering helmet, shining and hard, strong and whole. His
armor rings flash out like fire. By him standeth Hagen; in sooth the
guests be guarded well."

Straightway they turned again. When Folker saw this, wrathfully he spake
to his comrade-at-arms: "Now let me go from the house to the warriors. I
would fain put some questions to Lady Kriemhild's men."

"For my sake, no," quoth Hagen. "If ye leave the house, the doughty
knights are like to bring you in such stress with their swords, that I
must aid you even should it be the death of all my kin. As soon as we
be come into the fray, twain of them, or four, would in a short time run
into the house and would bring such scathe upon the sleepers, that we
might never cease to mourn."

Then Folker answered: "Let us bring it to pass that they note that I
have seen them, so that Kriemhild's men may not deny that they would
fain have acted faithlessly."

Straightway Folker then called out to them: "How go ye thus armed, ye
doughty knights? Would ye ride to rob, ye men of Kriemhild? Then must ye
have the help of me and my comrade-at-arms."

To this none made reply. Angry grew his mood. "Fy! Ye evil cowards,"
spake the good knight, "would ye have murdered us asleep? That hath been
done full seldom to such good heroes."

Then the queen was told that her messengers had compassed naught.
Rightly it did vex her, and with wrathful mood she made another plan.
Through this brave heroes and good must needs thereafter perish.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Arras", the capital of Artois in the French Netherlands.
        In older English "arras" is used also for tapestry.




ADVENTURE XXXI. (1) How They Went To Church.

"My coat of mail groweth cold," said Folker. "I ween the night hath run
its course. By the air I mark that day is near."

Then they waked the many knights who still lay sleeping. The light of
dawn shone into the hall upon the strangers. On all sides Hagen gan wake
the warriors, if perchance they would fain go to the minster for
mass. Men now loudly rang the bells in Christian fashion. Heathens and
Christians did not sing alike, so that it was seen full well that they
were not as one. Gunther's liegemen now would go to church, and all
alike had risen from their beds. The champions laced them into such
goodly garments, that never did hero bring better clothes to the land of
any king. This vexed Hagen. He spake: "Heroes, ye should wear here other
clothes. Certes, ye know full well the tales. Instead of roses, bear
weapons in your hands; instead of jeweled chaplets, your bright helms
and good, sith ye know full well the wicked Kriemhild's mood. Let
me tell you, we must fight to-day, so instead of silken shirts, wear
hauberks, and instead of rich cloaks, good shields and broad, so that if
any grow angry with you, ye be full armed. Dear my lords, and all my kin
and liegemen, go willingly to church and make plaint to the mighty God
of your fears and need, for know full sure that death draweth nigh us.
Nor must ye forget to confess aught that ye have done and stand full
zealously before your God. Of this I warn you, noble knights, unless God
in heaven so will, ye'll never more hear mass."

So the princes and their liegemen went to the minster. In the holy
churchyard bold Hagen bade them halt, that they might not be parted.
He spake: "Of a truth none knoweth what will hap to us from the Huns.
Place, my friends, your shields before your feet, and if any proffer
you cold greeting, repay it with deep and mortal wounds. That is Hagen's
counsel, that ye may so be found as doth befit your honor."

Folker and Hagen, the twain, then hied them to the spacious minster.
This was done that the queen might press upon them in the crowd. Certes,
she was passing grim. Then came the lord of the land and his fair wife,
her body adorned with rich apparel; Doughty warriors, too, were seen to
walk beside her. One saw the dust rise high from Kriemhild's band. When
mighty Etzel spied the kings and their fellowship thus armed, how quick
he spake: "Why do I see my friends thus go with helmets? Upon my troth,
it grieveth me, and hath any done them aught, I shall gladly make
amends, as doth think them good. Hath any made heavy their hearts or
mood, I'll show them well, that it doth irk me much. I am ready for
whatever they command me."

To this Hagen answered: "None hath done us aught; it is the custom of my
lordings that they go armed at all high feasts for full three days. We
should tell Etzel, had aught been done us."

Kriemhild heard full well what Hagen spake. How right hostilely she
gazed into his eyes! She would not tell the custom of their land, albeit
she had known it long in Burgundy. However grim and strong the hate
she bare them, yet had any told Etzel the truth, he would have surely
hindered what later happed. Because of their great haughtiness they
scorned to tell him. When the great crowd went past with the queen,
these twain, Hagen and Folker, would not step back more than two
hand-breadths, the which irked the Huns. Forsooth they had to jostle
with the lusty heroes. This thought King Etzel's chamberlains not good.
Certes, they would have fain angered the champions, but that they durst
not before the noble king. So there was much jostling, but nothing more.

When they had worshiped God and would hence again, many a Hunnish
warrior horsed him passing soon, At Kriemhild's side stood many a comely
maid, and well seven thousand knights rode with the queen. Kriemhild
with her ladies sate her down at the easements by the side of the mighty
Etzel, which was him lief, for they would watch the lusty heroes joust.
Ho, what stranger knights rode before them in the court! Then was come
the marshal with the squires. Bold Dankwart had taken to him his lord's
retainers from the Burgundian land; the steeds of the Nibelungs they
found well saddled. When now the kings and their men were come to horse,
stalwart Folker gan advise that they should ride a joust after the
fashion of their land. At this the heroes rode in lordly wise; none it
irked what the knight had counseled. The hurtling and the noise waxed
loud, as the many men rode into the broad court. Etzel and Kriemhild
themselves beheld the scene. To the jousts were come six hundred knights
of Dietrich's men to match the strangers, for they would have pastime
with the Burgundians. Fain would they have done it, had he given them
leave. Ho, what good champions rode in their train! The tale was told to
Sir Dietrich and he forbade the game with Gunther's men; he feared for
his liegemen, and well he might.

When those of Berne had departed thence, there came the men of Rudeger
from Bechelaren, five hundred strong, with shields, riding out before
the hall. It would have been lief to the margrave, had they left it
undone. Wisely he rode then to them through the press and said to his
knights, that they were ware that Gunther's men were evil-minded toward
them. If they would leave off the jousting, it would please him much.
When now these lusty heroes parted from them, then came those of
Thuringia, as we are told, and well a thousand brave men from Denmark.
From the tilting one saw many truncheons (2) flying hence. Irnfried and
Hawart now rode into the tourney. Proudly those from the Rhine awaited
them and offered the men of Thuringia many a joust. Many a lordly shield
was riddled by the thrusts. Thither came then Sir Bloedel with three
thousand men. Well was he seen of Etzel and Kriemhild, for the knightly
sports happed just before the twain. The queen saw it gladly, that the
Burgundians might come to grief. Schrutan (3) and Gibecke, Ramung and
Hornbog, (4) rode into the tourney in Hunnish wise. To the heroes from
Burgundian land they addressed them. High above the roof of the royal
hall the spear-shafts whirled. Whatever any there plied, 'twas but a
friendly rout. Palace and hall were heard resounding loud through the
clashing of the shields of Gunther's men. With great honor his meiny
gained the meed. Their pastime was so mickle and so great, that from
beneath the housings of the good steeds, which the heroes rode, there
flowed the frothy sweat. In haughty wise they encountered with the Huns.

Then spake the fiddler, Folker the minstrel: "I ween these warriors
dare not match us. I've aye heard the tale, that they bear us hate, and
forsooth it might never fortune better for them than now." Again Folker
spake: "Let our steeds be now led away to their lodgings and let us
joust again toward eventide, and there be time. Perchance the queen may
accord to the Burgundians the prize."

Then one was seen riding hither so proudly, that none of all the Huns
could have done the like. Certes, he must have had a sweetheart on the
battlements. As well attired he rode as the bride of any noble knight.
At sight of him Folker spake again: "How could I give this over? This
ladies' darling must have a buffet. None shall prevent me and it shall
cost him dear. In truth I reck not, if it vex King Etzel's wife."

"For my sake, No," spake straightway King Gunther. "The people will
blame us, if we encounter them. 'Twill befit us better far, an' we let
the Huns begin the strife."

King Etzel was still sitting by the queen.

"I'll join you in the tourney," quoth Hagen then. "Let the ladies and
the knights behold how we can ride. That will be well, for they'll give
no meed to King Gunther's men."

The doughty Folker rode into the lists again, which soon gave many a
dame great dole. His spear he thrust through the body of the dapper Hun;
this both maid and wife were seen thereafter to bewail. Full hard and
fast gan Hagen and his liegemen and sixty of his knights ride towards
the fiddler, where the play was on. This Etzel and Kriemhild clearly
saw. The three kings would not leave their minstrel without guard amidst
the foe. Cunningly a thousand heroes rode; with haughty bearing they did
whatso they would. When now the wealthy Hun was slain, men heard his kin
cry out and wail. All the courtiers asked: "Who hath done this deed?"

"That the fiddler did, Folker, the valiant minstrel."

The margrave's kindred from the Hunnish land called straightway for
their swords and shields, and would fain have done Folker to death. Fast
the host gan hasten from the windows. Great rout arose from the folk on
every side. The kings and their fellowship, the Burgundian men, alighted
before the hall and drove their horses to the rear. Then King Etzel came
to part the strife. From the hand of a kinsman of the Hun he wrenched
a sturdy weapon and drove them all back again, for full great was his
wrath. "Why should my courtesie to these knights go all for naught?
Had ye slain this minstrel at my court," spake King Etzel, "'twere evil
done. I saw full well how he rode, when he thrust through the Hun, that
it happed through stumbling, without any fault of his. Ye must let my
guests have peace."

Thus he became their safe-guard. To the stalls men led away the steeds;
many a varlet they had, who served them well with zeal in every service.
The host now hied him to his palace with his friends, nor would he let
any man grow wroth again. Then men set up the tables and bare forth
water for the guests. Forsooth the men from the Rhine had there enow of
stalwart foes. 'Twas long before the lords were seated.

Meanwhile Kriemhild's fears did trouble her passing sore. She spake: "My
lord of Berne, I seek thy counsel, help, and favor, for mine affairs do
stand in anxious wise."

Then Hildebrand, a worshipful knight, made answer to her: "And any slay
the Nibelungs for the sake of any hoard, he will do it without my aid.
It may well repent him, for they be still unconquered, these doughty and
lusty knights."

Then Spake Sir Dietrich in his courteous wise: "Let be this wish, O
mighty queen. Thy kinsmen have done me naught of wrong, that I should
crave to match these valiant knights in strife. Thy request honoreth
thee little, most noble queen, that thou dost plot against the life of
thy kinsfolk. They came in hope of friendship to this land. Siegfried
will not be avenged by Dietrich's hand."

When she found no whit of faithlessness in the lord of Berne, quickly
she promised Bloedel a broad estate, that Nudung (5) owned aforetime.
Later he was slain by Hagen, so that he quite forgot the gift. She
spake: "Thou must help me, Sir Bloedel, forsooth my foes be in this
house, who slew Siegfried, my dear husband. Ever will I serve him, that
helpeth me avenge this deed."

To this Bloedel replied: "My lady, now may ye know that because of Etzel
I dare not, in sooth, advise to hatred against them, for he is fain to
see thy kinsmen at his court. The king would ne'er forget it of me, and
I did them aught of wrong."

"Not so, Sir Bloedel, for I shall ever be thy friend. Certes, I'll give
thee silver and gold as guerdon and a comely maid, the wife of Nudung,
whose lovely body thou mayst fain caress. I'll give thee his land and
all his castles, too, so that thou mayst always live in joy, Sir knight,
if thou dost now win the lands where Nudung dwelt. Faithfully will I
keep, whatso I vow to thee to-day."

When Sir Bloedel heard the guerdon, and that the lady through her beauty
would befit him well, he weened to serve the lovely queen in strife.
Because of this the champion must needs lose his life. To the queen
he spake: "Betake you again to the hall, and before any be aware,
I'll begin a fray and Hagen must atone for what he hath done you. I'll
deliver to you King Gunther's liegeman bound. Now arm you, my men,"
spake Bloedel. "We must hasten to the lodgings of the foes, for King
Etzel's wife doth crave of me this service, wherefore we heroes must
risk our lives."

When the queen left Bloedel in lust of battle, she went to table with
King Etzel and his men. Evil counsels had she held against the guests.
Since the strife could be started in no other wise (Kriemhild's ancient
wrong still lay deep buried in her heart), she bade King Etzel's son
be brought to table. How might a woman ever do more ghastly deed for
vengeance' sake? Four of Etzel's men went hence anon and bare Ortlieb,
(6) the young prince, to the lordings' table, where Hagen also sat.
Because of this the child must needs die through Hagen's mortal hate.

When now the mighty king beheld his son, kindly he spake to the kinsmen
of his wife: "Now see, my friends, this is the only son of me and of
your sister. This may be of profit to you all, for if he take after
his kinsmen, he'll become a valiant man, mighty and noble, strong and
fashioned fair. Twelve lands will I give him, and I live yet a while.
Thus may the hand of young Ortlieb serve you well. I do therefore
beseech you, dear friends of mine, that when ye ride again to your
lands upon the Rhine, ye take with you your sister's son and act full
graciously toward the child, and bring him up in honor till he become
a man. Hath any done you aught in all these lands, he'll help you to
avenge it, when he groweth up."

This speech was also heard by Kriemhild, King Etzel's wife.

"These knights might well trust him," quoth Hagen, "if he grew to be a
man, but the young prince doth seem so fey, (7) that I shall seldom be
seen to ride to Ortlieb's court."

The king glanced at Hagen, for much the speech did irk him; and though
the gentle prince said not a word, it grieved his heart and made him
heavy of his mood. Nor was Hagen's mind now bent on pastime. But all the
lordings and the king were hurt by what Hagen had spoken of the child;
it vexed them sore, that they were forced to hear it. They wot not the
things as yet, which should happen to them through this warrior.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Adventure XXXI".  This adventure is of late origin, being
        found only in our poem.  See the introduction.
   (2)  "Truncheons", see Adventure II, note 8.
   (3)  "Schrutan".  This name does not occur elsewhere.  Piper
        suggests, that perhaps a Scotchman is meant, as "Skorottan"
        appears in the "Thidreksaga", chap. 28, as an ancient name
        of Scotland.
   (4)  "Gibecke", "Ramung" and "Hornbog", see Adventure XXII, notes
        4 and 5.
   (5)  "Nudung", see Adventure XXVII, note 3.
   (6)  "Ortlieb".  In the "Thidreksaga" Etzel's son is called
        Aldrian.  There, however, he is killed because he strikes
        Hagen in the face, here in revenge for the killing of the
        Burgundian footmen.
   (7)  "Fey", see Adventure V, note 2.




ADVENTURE XXXII (1) How Bloedel Was Slain.

Full ready were now Bloedel's warriors. A thousand hauberks strong, they
hied them to where Dankwart sate at table with the squires. Then the
very greatest hate arose among the heroes. When Sir Bloedel drew near
the tables, Dankwart, the marshal, greeted him in courteous wise.
"Welcome, Sir Bloedel, in our house. In truth me-wondereth at thy
coming. What doth it mean?"

"Forsooth, thou needst not greet me," so spake Bloedel; "for this coming
of mine doth mean thine end. Because of Hagen, thy brother, by whom
Siegfried was slain, thou and many other knights must suffer here among
the Huns."

"Not so, Sir Bloedel," quoth Dankwart, "else this journey to your court
might rue us sore. I was but a little child when Siegfried lost his
life. I know not what blame King Etzel's wife could put on me."

"Of a truth, I wot not how to tell you of these tales; thy kinsmen,
Gunther and Hagen, did the deed. Now ward you, ye wanderers, ye may not
live. With your death must ye become Kriemhild's pledge."

"And ye will not turn you," quoth Dankwart, "then do my entreaties rue
me; they had better far been spared."

The doughty knight and brave sprang up from the table; a sharp weapon,
mickle and long, he drew and dealt Bloedel so fierce a sword-stroke that
his head lay straightway at his feet. "Let that be thy marriage morning
gift," (2) spake Dankwart, the knight, "for Nudung's bride, whom thou
wouldst cherish with thy love. They call betroth her to another man upon
the morn. Should he crave the dowry, 'twill be given to him eftsoon."
A faithful Hun had told him that the queen did plan against them such
grievous wrongs.

When Bloedel's men beheld their lord lie slain, no longer would they
stand this from the guests. With uplifted swords they rushed, grim of
mood, upon the youthful squires. Many a one did rue this later. Loudly
Dankwart called to all the fellowship: "Ye see well, noble squires, how
matters stand. Now ward you, wanderers! Forsooth we have great need,
though Kriemhild asked us here in right friendly wise."

Those that had no sword reached down in front of the benches and lifted
many a long footstool by its legs. The Burgundian squires would now
abide no longer, but with the heavy stools they dealt many bruises
through the helmets. How fiercely the stranger youths did ward them!
Out of the house they drove at last the men-at-arms, but five hundred
of them, or better, stayed behind there dead. The fellowship was red and
wot with blood.

These grievous tales were told now to Etzel's knights; grim was their
sorrow, that Bloedel and his men were slain. This Hagen's brother and
his squires had done. Before the king had learned it, full two thousand
Huns or more armed them through hatred and hied them to the squires
(this must needs be), and of the fellowship they left not one alive.
The faithless Huns brought a mickle band before the house. Well the
strangers stood their ground, but what booted their doughty prowess?
Dead they all must lie. Then in a few short hours there rose a fearful
dole. Now ye may hear wonders of a monstrous thing. Nine thousand yeomen
lay there slain and thereto twelve good knights of Dankwart's men. One
saw him stand alone still by the foe. The noise was hushed, the din had
died away, when Dankwart, the hero, gazed over his shoulders. He spake:
"Woe is me, for the friends whom I have lost! Now must I stand, alas,
alone among my foes."

Upon his single person the sword-strokes fell thick and fast. The wife
of many a hero must later mourn for this. Higher he raised his shield,
the thong he lowered; the rings of many an armor he made to drip with
blood. "Woe is me of all this sorrow," quoth Aldrian's son. (3) "Give
way now, Hunnish warriors, and let me out into the breeze, that the air
may cool me, fight-weary man."

Then men saw the warrior walk forth in full lordly wise. As the
strife-weary man sprang from the house, how many added swords rang on
his helmet! Those that had not seen what wonders his hand had wrought
sprang towards the hero of the Burgundian land. "Now would to God,"
quoth Dankwart, "that I might find a messenger who could let my brother
Hagen know I stand in such a plight before these knights. He would help
me hence, or lie dead at my side."

Then spake the Hunnish champions: "Thou must be the messenger thyself,
when we bear thee hence dead before thy brother. For the first time
Gunther's vassal will then become acquaint with grief. Passing great
scathe hast thou done King Etzel here."

Quoth he: "Now give over these threats and stand further back, or I'll
wot the armor rings of some with blood. I'll tell the tale at court
myself and make plaint to my lords of my great dole."

So sorely he dismayed King Etzel's men that they durst not withstand
him with their swords, so they shot such great store of darts into his
shield that he must needs lay it from his hand for very heaviness. Then
they weened to overpower him, sith he no longer bare a shield. Ho, what
deep wounds he struck them through their helmets! From this many a brave
man was forced to reel before him, and bold Dankwart gained thereby
great praise. From either side they sprang upon him, but in truth a many
of them entered the fray too soon. Before his foes he walked, as doth a
boar to the woods before the dogs. How might he be more brave? His path
was ever wot with recking' blood. Certes, no single champion might ever
fight better with his foes than he had done. Men now saw Hagen's brother
go to court in lordly wise. Sewers (4) and cupbearers heard the ring of
swords, and full many a one cast from his hand the drink and whatever
food he bare to court. Enow strong foes met Dankwart at the stairs.

"How now, ye sewers," spake the weary knight. "Forsooth ye should serve
well the guests and bear to the lords good cheer and let me bring the
tidings to my dear masters."

Those that sprang towards him on the steps to show their prowess, he
dealt so heavy a sword-stroke, that for fear they must needs stand
further back. His mighty strength wrought mickle wonders.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  Adventure XXXII.  The details of the following scenes differ
        materially in the various sources.  A comparative study of
        them will be found in the works of Wilmanns and Boer.
   (2)  "Marriage morning gift" (M.H.G. "morgengabe") was given by
        the bridegroom to the bride on the morning after the
        wedding.  See Adventure XIX, note 1.
   (3)  "Aldrian's son", i.e., Dankwart.
   (4)  "Sewers" (O.F. "asseour", M.L. "adsessor" 'one who sets the
        table'; cf. F. "asseoir" 'to set', 'place', Lat. "ad
        sedere"), older English for an upper servant who brought on
        and removed the dishes from the table.




ADVENTURE XXXIII. How The Burgundians Fought The Huns.

When brave Dankwart was come within the door, he bade King Etzel's meiny
step aside. His garments dripped with blood and in his hand he bare
unsheathed a mighty sword. Full loud he called out to the knight:
"Brother Hagen, ye sit all too long, forsooth. To you and to God in
heaven do I make plaint of our woe. Our knights and squires all lie dead
within their lodgements."

He called in answer: "Who hath done this deed?"

"That Sir Bloedel hath done with his liegemen, but he hath paid for
it dearly, as I can tell you, for with mine own hands I struck off his
head."

"It is but little scathe," quoth Hagen, "if one can only say of a knight
that he hath lost his life at a warrior's hands. Stately dames shall
mourn him all the less. Now tell me, brother Dankwart, how comes it that
ye be so red of hue? Ye suffer from wounds great dole, I ween. If there
be any in the land that hath done you this, 'twill cost his life, and
the foul fiend save him not."

"Ye see me safe and sound; my weeds alone are wot with blood. This hath
happed from wounds of other men, of whom I have slain so many a one
to-day that, had I to swear it, I could not tell the tale."

"Brother Dankwart," he spake, "guard us the door and let not a single
Hun go forth. I will hold speech with the warriors, as our need
constraineth us, for our meiny lieth dead before them, undeserved."

"If I must be chamberlain," quoth the valiant man, "I well wet how to
serve such mighty kings and will guard the stairway, as doth become mine
honors." Naught could have been more loth to Kriemhild's knights.

"Much it wondereth me," spake Hagen, "what the Hunnish knights be
whispering in here. I ween, they'd gladly do without the one that
standeth at the door, and who told the courtly tale to us Burgundians.
Long since I have heard it said of Kriemhild, that she would not leave
unavenged her dole of heart. Now let us drink to friendship (1) and pay
for the royal wine. The young lord of the Huns shall be the first."

Then the good knight Hagen smote the child Ortlieb, so that the blood
spurted up the sword towards his hand and the head fell into the lap of
the queen. At this there began a murdering, grim and great, among
the knights. Next he dealt the master who taught the child a fierce
sword-stroke with both his hands, so that his head fell quickly beneath
the table to the ground. A piteous meed it was, which he meted out to
the master. Hagen then spied a gleeman sitting at King Etzel's board.
In his wrath he hied him thither and struck off his right hand upon the
fiddle. "Take this as message to the Burgundian land."

"Woe is me of my hand," spake the minstrel Werbel. "Sir Hagen of Troneg,
what had I done to you? I came in good faith to your masters' land. How
can I now thrum the tunes, sith I have lost my hand?"

Little recked Hagen, played he nevermore. In the hall he dealt out
fierce deadly wounds to Etzel's warriors, passing many of whom he slew.
Enow of folk in the house he did to death. The doughty Folker now sprang
up from the board; loud rang in his hands his fiddle bow. Rudely did
Gunther's minstrel play. Ho, what foes he made him among the valiant
Huns! The three noble kings, too, sprang up from the table. Gladly would
they have parted the fray, or ever greater scathe was done. With all
their wit they could not hinder it, when Folker and Hagen gan rage so
sore. When that the lord of the Rhine beheld the fray unparted, the
prince dealt his foes many gaping wounds himself through the shining
armor rings. That he was a hero of his hands, he gave great proof. Then
the sturdy Gernot joined the strife. Certes, he did many a hero of
the Huns to death with a sharp sword, the which Rudeger had given him.
Mighty wounds he dealt King Etzel's warriors. Now the young son of Lady
Uta rushed to the fray. Gloriously his sword rang on the helmets of
Etzel's warriors from the Hunnish land. Full mickle wonders were wrought
by bold Giselher's hand. But how so doughty they all were, the kings and
their liegemen, yet Folker was seen to stand before them all against
the foe; a good hero he. Many a one he made to fall in his blood through
wounds. Etzel's men did fend them, too, full well, yet one saw the
strangers go hewing with their gleaming swords through the royal hall
and on every side was heard great sound of wail. Those without would now
fain be with their friends within, but at the entrance towers they found
small gain. Those within had gladly been without the hall, but Dankwart
let none go either up or down the steps. Therefore there rose before
the towers a mighty press, and helmets rang loudly from the sword-blows.
Bold Dankwart came into great stress thereby; this his brother feared,
as his loyalty did bid him.

Loudly then Hagen called to Folker: "See ye yonder, comrade, my brother
stand before the Hunnish warriors amid a rain of blows? Friend, save my
brother, or ever we lose the knight."

"That will I surely," quoth the minstrel, and through the palace he went
a-fiddling, his stout sword ringing often in his hand. Great thanks were
tendered by the warriors from the Rhine. Bold Folker spake to Dankwart:
"Great discomfiture have ye suffered to-day, therefore your brother bade
me hasten to your aid. Will ye stand without, so will I stand within."

Sturdy Dankwart stood without the door and guarded the staircase against
whoever came, wherefore men heard the swords resound in the heroes'
hands. Folker of Burgundy land performed the same within. Across
the press the bold fiddler cried: "Friend Hagen, the hall is locked;
forsooth King Etzel's door is bolted well. The hands of two heroes guard
it, as with a thousand bars." When Hagen of Troneg beheld the door so
well defended, the famous hero and good slung his shield upon his back
and gan avenge the wrongs that had been done him there. His foes had now
no sort of hope to live.

When now the lord of Berne, the king of the Amelungs, (2) beheld aright
that the mighty Hagen broke so many a helm, upon a bench he sprang and
spake: "Hagen poureth out the very worst of drinks."

The host, too, was sore adread, as behooved him now, for his life was
hardly safe from these his foes. O how many dear friends were snatched
away before his eyes! He sate full anxious; what booted it him that he
was king? Haughty Kriemhild now cried aloud to Dietrich: "Pray help me
hence alive, most noble knight, by the virtues of all the princes of the
Amelung land. If Hagen reach me, I shall grasp death by the hand."

"How shall I help you, noble queen?" spake Sir Dietrich. "I fear for
myself in sooth. These men of Gunther be so passing wroth that at this
hour I cannot guard a soul."

"Nay, not so, Sir Dietrich, noble knight and good. Let thy chivalrous
mood appear to-day and help me hence, or I shall die." Passing great
cause had Kriemhild for this fear.

"I'll try to see if I may help you, for it is long since that I have
soon so many good knights so bitterly enraged. Of a truth I see blood
spurting through the helmets from the swords."

Loudly the chosen knight gan call, so that his voice rang forth as from
a bison's horn, until the broad castle resounded with his force. Sir
Dietrich's strength was passing great in truth.

When Gunther heard this man cry out in the heated strife, he began to
heed. He spake: "Dietrich's voice hath reached mine ears, I ween our
champions have bereft him of some friend to-day. I see him on the table,
he doth beckon with his hand. Ye friends and kinsmen from Burgundian
land, give over the strife. Let's hear and see what here hath fortuned
to the knight from my men-at-arms."

When Gunther thus begged and bade in the stress of the fray, they
sheathed their swords. Passing great was his power, so that none struck
a blow. Soon enow he asked the tidings of the knight of Berne. He spake:
"Most noble Dietrich, what hath happed to you through these my friends?
I am minded to do you remedy and to make amends. If any had done you
aught, 'twould grieve me sore."

Then spake Sir Dietrich: "Naught hath happed to me, but I pray you, let
me leave this hall and this fierce strife under your safe-guard, with my
men. For this favor I will serve you ever."

"How entreat ye now so soon," quoth Wolfhart (3) then. "Forsooth the
fiddler hath not barred the door so strong, but what we may open it enow
to let us pass."

"Hold your tongue," spake Sir Dietrich; "the devil a whit have ye ever
done."

Then: spake King Gunther: "I will grant your boon. Lead from the hall as
few or as many as ye will, save my foes alone; they must remain within.
Right ill have they treated me in the Hunnish land."

When Dietrich heard these words, he placed his arm around the high-born
queen, whose fear was passing great. On his other side he led King Etzel
with him hence; with Dietrich there also went six hundred stately men.

Then spake the noble Margrave Rudeger: "Shall any other who would gladly
serve you come from this hall, let us hear the tale, and lasting peace
shall well befit good friends."

To this Giselher of the Burgundian land replied: "Peace and friendship
be granted you by us, sith ye are constant in your fealty. Ye and all
your men, ye may go hence fearlessly with these your friends."

When Sir Rudeger voided the hall, there followed him, all told, five
hundred men or more, kinsmen and vassals of the lord of Bechelaren, from
whom King Gunther later gained great scathe. Then a Hunnish champion
spied Etzel walking close by Dietrich. He, too, would take this chance,
but the fiddler dealt him such a blow that his head fell soon before
King Etzel's feet. When the lord of the land was come outside the house,
he turned him about and gazed on Folker. "Woe is me of these guests.
This is a direful need, that all my warriors should lie low in death
before them. Alas for the feasting," quoth the noble king. "Like a
savage boar there fighteth one within, hight Folker, who is a gleeman. I
thank my stars that I escaped this fiend. His glees have an evil sound,
the strokes of his how draw blood; forsooth his measures fell many a
hero dead. I wot not, with what this minstrel twitteth us, for I have
never had such baleful guest."

They had permitted whom they would to leave the hall. Then there arose
within a mighty uproar; sorely the guests avenged what there had happed
them. Ho, what helmets bold Folker broke! The noble King Gunther turned
him toward the sound. "Hear ye the measures, Hagen, which Folker
yonder fiddleth with the Huns, when any draweth near the towers? 'Tis a
blood-red stroke he useth with the bow."

"It rueth me beyond all measure," quoth Hagen, "that in this hall I sate
me down to rest before the hero did. I was his comrade and he was mine;
and come we ever home again, we shall still be so, in loyal wise. Now
behold, most noble king, Folker is thy friend, he earneth gladly thy
silver and thy gold. His fiddle bow doth cut through the hardest steel,
on the helmets he breaketh the bright and shining gauds! (4) Never have
I seen fiddler stand in such lordly wise as the good knight Folker hath
stood to-day. His glees resound through shield and helmet. Certes he
shall ride good steeds and wear lordly raiment."

Of all the kinsmen of the Huns within the hall, not one of these
remained alive. Thus the clash of arms died out, since none strove with
them longer. The lusty knights and bold now laid aside their swords.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Friendship" translates the M.H.G. "minne trinken" 'to drink
        to the memory of a person', an old custom originating with
        the idea of pouring out a libation to the gods.  Later it
        assumed the form of drinking to the honor of God, of a
        saint, or of an absent friend.  See Grimm, "Mythologie", p.
        48.
   (2)  "Amelungs", see Adventure XXVIII, note 3.
   (3)  "Wolfhart", see Adventure XXVIII, note 2.
   (4)  "Gauds", ornaments.




ADVENTURE XXXIV. How They Cast Out The Dead.

The lordings sate them down for weariness. Folker and Hagen came forth
from the hall; upon their shields the haughty warriors leaned. Wise
words were spoken by the twain. Then Knight Giselher of Burgundy spake:
"Forsooth, dear friends, ye may not ease you yet; ye must bear the
dead from out the hall. I'll tell you, of a truth, we shall be attacked
again. They must no longer lie here beneath our feet. Ere the Huns
vanquish us by storm, we'll yet how wounds, which shall ease my heart.
For this," quoth Giselher, "I have a steadfast mind."

"Well is me of such a lord," spake then Hagen. "This rede which my young
master hath given us to-day would befit no one but a knight. At this,
Burgundians, ye may all stand glad."

Then they followed the rede, and to the door they bare seven thousand
dead, the which they cast outside. Down they fell before the stairway
to the hall, and from their kinsmen rose a full piteous wall. Some there
were with such slight wounds that, had they been more gently treated,
they would have waxed well again; but from the lofty fall, they must
needs lie dead. Their friends bewailed this, and forsooth they had good
cause.

Then spake Folker, the fiddler, a lusty knight: "Now I mark the truth of
this, as hath been told me. The Huns be cravens, like women they wail;
they should rather nurse these sorely wounded men."

A margrave weened, he spake through kindness. Seeing one of his kinsmen
lying in the blood, he clasped him in his arms and would have borne
him hence, when the bold minstrel shot him above the dead to death. The
flight began as the others saw this deed, and all fell to cursing this
selfsame minstrel. He snatched javelin, sharp and hard, the which had
been hurled at him by a Hun, and cast it with might across the court,
far over the folk. Thus he forced Etzel's warriors to take lodgement
further from the hall. On every side the people feared his mighty
prowess.

Many thousand men now stood before the hall. Folker and Hagen gan speak
to Etzel all their mind, wherefrom these heroes bold and good came
thereafter into danger. Quoth Hagen: "'Twould well beseem the people's
hope, if the lords would fight in the foremost ranks, as doth each of
my lordings here. They hew through the helmets, so that the blood doth
follow the sword."

Etzel was brave; he seized his shield. "Now fare warily," spake Lady
Kriemhild, "and offer the warriors gold upon your shield. If Hagen doth
but reach you there, ye'll be hand in hand with death."

The king was so bold he would not turn him back, the which doth now
seldom hap from so mighty a lord. By his shield-thong they had to draw
him hence. Once again grim Hagen began to mock him. "It is a distant
kinship," quoth Hagen, the knight, "that bindeth Etzel and Siegfried. He
loved Kriemhild, or ever she laid eyes on thee. Most evil king, why dost
thou plot against me?"

Kriemhild, the wife of the noble king, heard this speech; angry she grew
that he durst thus revile her before King Etzel's liegemen. Therefore
she again began to plot against the strangers. She spake: "For him that
slayeth me Hagen of Troneg and bringeth me his head, I will fill King
Etzel's shield with ruddy gold, thereto will I give him as guerdon many
goodly lands and castles."

"Now I know not for what they wait," spake the minstrel. "Never have I
seen heroes stand so much like cowards, when one heard proffered such
goodly wage. Forsooth King Etzel should never be their friend again.
Many of those who so basely eat the lording's bread, and now desert him
in the greatest need, do I see stand here as cravens, and yet would pass
for brave. May shame ever be their lot!"




ADVENTURE XXXV. How Iring Was Slain.

Then cried Margrave Iring of Denmark: "I have striven for honor now long
time, and in the storm of battle have been among the best. Now bring me
my harness, for in sooth I will encounter me with Hagen."

"I would not counsel that," spake Hagen, "but bid the Hunnish knights
stand further back. If twain of you or three leap into the hall, I'll
send them back sore wounded down the steps."

"Not for that will I give it over," quoth Iring again. "I've tried
before such daring things; in truth with my good sword I will encounter
thee alone. What availeth all thy boasting, which thou hast done in
words?"

Then were soon arrayed the good Knight Iring and Irnfried of Thuringia,
a daring youth, and the stalwart Hawart and full a thousand men.
Whatever Iring ventured, they would all fain give him aid. Then the
fiddler spied a mighty troop, that strode along well armed with Iring.
Upon their heads they bare good helmets. At this bold Folker waxed a
deal full wroth of mood. "See ye, friend Hagen, Iring striding yonder,
who vowed to match you with his sword alone? How doth lying beseem
a hero? Much that misliketh me. There walk with him full a thousand
knights or more, well armed."

"Say not that I lie," spake Hawart's liegeman. "Gladly will I perform
what I have vowed, nor will I desist therefrom through any fear. However
frightful Hagen be, I will meet him single-handed."

On his knees Iring begged both kinsmen and vassals to let him match the
knight alone. This they did unwillingly, for well they knew the haughty
Hagen from the Burgundian land. But Iring begged so long that at last
it happed. When the fellowship beheld his wish and that he strove for
honor, they let him go. Then a fierce conflict rose between the twain.
Iring of Denmark, the peerless high-born knight, bare high his spear and
covered him with his shield. Swiftly he rushed on Hagen before the hall,
while a great shout arose from all the knights around. With might and
main they cast the spears with their hands through the sturdy shields
upon their shining armor, so that the shafts whirled high in air. Then
the two brave men and fierce reached for their swords. Bold Hagen's
strength was mickle and great, but Iring smote him, that the whole hall
rang. Palace and towers resounded from their blows, but the knight could
not achieve his wish.

Iring now left Hagen stand unharmed, and hied him to the fiddler. He
weened to fell him by his mighty blows, but the stately knight wist how
to guard bin, well. Then the fiddler struck a blow, that the plates of
mail whirled high above the buckler's rim. An evil man he was, for
to encounter, so Iring let him stand and rushed at Gunther of the
Burgundian land. Here, too, either was strong enow in strife. The blows
that Gunther and Iring dealt each other drew no blood from wounds. This
the harness hindered, the which was both strong and good.

He now let Gunther be, and ran at Gernot, and gan hew sparks of fire
from his armor rings. Then had stalwart Gernot of Burgundy nigh done
brave Iring unto death, but that he sprang away from the prince (nimble
enow he was), and slew eftsoon four noble henchmen of the Burgundians
from Worms across the Rhine. At this Giselher might never have waxed
more wroth. "God wot, Sir Iring," spake Giselher, the youth, "ye must
pay me weregild (1) for those who have fallen dead this hour before
you."

Then at him he rushed and smote the Dane, so that he could not stir a
step, but sank before his hands down in the blood, so that all did ween
the good knight would never deal a blow again in strife. But Iring lay
unwounded here before Sir Giselher. From the crashing of the helmet
and the ringing of the sword, his wits had grown so weak that the brave
knight no longer thought of life. Stalwart Giselher had done this with
his might. When now the ringing gan leave his head, the which he had
suffered from the mighty stroke, he thought: "I am still alive and
nowhere wounded. Now first wot I of Giselher's mighty strength." On
either side he heard his foes. Wist they the tale, still more had happed
him. Giselher, too, he marked hard by; he bethought him, how he might
escape his foes. How madly he sprang up from the blood! Well might he
thank his nimbleness for this. Out of the house he ran to where he again
found Hagen, whom he dealt a furious blow with his powerful hand.

Hagen thought him: "Thou art doomed. Unless be that the foul fiend
protect thee, thou canst not escape alive."

Yet Iring wounded Hagen through his crest. This the hero wrought with
Waska, (2) a passing goodly sword. When Sir Hagen felt the wound, wildly
he brandished his weapon in his hand. Soon Hawart's liegeman was forced
to yield his ground, and Hagen gan pursue him down the stairs. Brave
Iring swung his shield above his head, but had the staircase been the
length of three, Hagen would not have let him strike a blow the while.
Ho, what red sparks did play above his helmet!

Iring returned scatheless to his liegemen. Then the tidings were brought
to Kriemhild, of that which he had wrought in strife with Hagen of
Troneg. For this the queen gan thank him highly. "Now God requite thee,
Iring, thou peerless hero and good. Thou hast comforted well my heart
and mind. I see that Hagen's weeds be wot with blood." For very joy
Kriemhild herself relieved him of his shield.

"Be not too lavish of your thanks," spake Hagen. "'Twould well befit a
knight to try again. A valiant man were he, if he then came back alive.
Little shall the wound profit you, which I have at his bands; for that
ye have seen the rings wot with blood from my wound doth urge me to the
death of many a man. Now first am I enraged at Hawart's liegeman. Small
scathe hath Knight Iring done me yet."

Meanwhile Iring of Denmark stood in the breeze; he cooled his harness
and doffed his casque. All the folk then praised his prowess, at which
the margrave was in passing lofty mood. Again Sir Iring spake: "My
friends, this know; arm me now quickly, for I would fain try again, if
perchance I may not conquer this overweening man."

His shield was hewn to pieces, a better one he gained; full soon the
champion was armed again. Through hate he seized a passing heavy spear
with which he would encounter Hagen yonder. Meantime the death-grim
man awaited him in hostile wise. But Knight Hagen would not abide his
coming. Hurling the javelin and brandishing his sword, he ran to meet
him to the very bottom of the stairs. Forsooth his rage was great.
Little booted Iring then his strength; through the shields they smote,
so that the flames rose high in fiery blasts. Hagen sorely wounded
Hawart's liegeman with his sword through shield and breastplate. Never
waxed he well again. When now Knight Iring felt the wound, higher above
his helmet bands he raised his shield. Great enow he thought the scathe
he here received, but thereafter King Gunther's liegeman did him more of
harm. Hagen found a spear lying now before his feet. With this he shot
Iring, the Danish hero, so that the shaft stood forth from his head.
Champion Hagen had given him a bitter end. Iring must needs retreat
to those of Denmark. Or ever they unbound his helmet and drew the
spear-shaft from his head, death had already drawn nigh him. At this his
kinsmen wept, as forsooth they had great need.

Then the queen came and bent above him. She gan bewail the stalwart
Iring and bewept his wounds, indeed her grief was passing sharp. At this
the bold and lusty warrior spake before his kinsmen: "Let be this wail,
most royal queen. What availeth your weeping now? Certes, I must lose
my life from these wounds I have received. Death will no longer let me
serve you and Etzel." To the men of Thuringia and to those of Denmark he
spake: "None of you must take from the queen her shining ruddy gold as
meed, for if ye encounter Hagen, ye must gaze on death."

Pale grew his hue; brave Iring bare the mark of death. Dole enow it
gave them, for no longer might Hawart's liegeman live. Then the men
of Denmark must needs renew the fray. Irnfried and Hawart with well a
thousand champions leaped toward the hall. On every side one heard a
monstrous uproar, mighty and strong. Ho, what sturdy javelins were cast
at the Burgundian men! Bold Irnfried rushed at the minstrel, but gained
great damage at his hands. Through his sturdy helmet the noble fiddler
smote the landgrave. Certes, he was grim enow! Then Sir Irnfried dealt
the valiant gleeman such a blow that his coat of mail burst open and
his breastplate was enveloped with a bright red flame. Yet the landgrave
fell dead at the minstrel's hands. Hawart and Hagen, too, had come
together. Wonders would he have seen, who beheld the fight. The swords
fell thick and fast in the heroes' hands. Through the knight from the
Burgundian land Hawart needs must die. When the Thuringians and the
Danes espied their lordings dead, there rose before the hall a fearful
strife, before they gained the door with mighty hand. Many a helm and
shield was hacked and cut thereby.

"Give way," spake Folker, "and let them in, for else what they have in
mind will not be ended. They must die in here in full short time. With
death they'll gain what the queen would give them."

When these overweening men were come into the hall, the head of many a
one sank down so low that he needs must die from their furious strokes.
Well fought the valiant Gernot, and the same did Giselher, the knight. A
thousand and four were come into the hall and many a whizzing stroke
of the swords was seen flash forth, but soon all the warriors lay slain
therein. Mickle wonders might one tell of the Burgundian men. The hall
grew still, as the uproar died away. On every side the dead men's blood
poured through the openings down to the drain-pipes. This the men from
the Rhine had wrought with their passing strength.

Those from the Burgundian land now sate them down to rest and laid aside
their swords and shields. But still the valiant minstrel stood guard
before the hall. He waited, if any would perchance draw near again in
strife. Sorely the king made wail, as did the queen. Maids and ladies
were distraught with grief. Death, I ween, had conspired against them,
wherefore many of the warriors perished through the guests.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Weregild" (O.E. "wer", 'a man', "gild", 'payment of
        money'), legal term for compensation paid for a man killed.
   (2)  "Waska".  In "Biterolf" it is the name of the sword of
        Walther of Wasgenstein and is connected with the old German
        name, "Wasgenwald", for the Vosges.




ADVENTURE XXXVI. How The Queen Gave Orders To Burn the Hall.

"Now unbind your helmets," spake the good Knight Hagen. "I and my
comrade will guard you well, and should Etzel's men be minded to try
again, I'll warn my lords as soon as I ever can."

Then many a good knight bared his head. They sate them down upon the
wounded, who had fallen in the blood, done to death at their hands. Evil
looks were cast upon the noble strangers. Before the eventide the king
and the queen brought it to pass that the Hunnish champions tried
again. Men saw full twenty thousand warriors stand before them, who must
perforce march to the fray. Straightway there rose a mighty storming
towards the strangers. Dankwart, Hagen's brother, the doughty knight,
sprang from his lordings' side to meet the foes without the door.
All weened that he were dead, yet forth he stood again unscathed.
The furious strife did last till nightfall brought it to a close. As
befitted good knights, the strangers warded off King Etzel's liegemen
the livelong summer day. Ho, how many a bold knight fell doomed before
them! This great slaughter happed upon midsummer's day, when Lady
Kriemhild avenged her sorrow of heart upon her nearest kin and upon many
another man, so that King Etzel never again gained joy.

The day had passed away, but still they had good cause for fear. They
thought, a short and speedy death were better for them, than to be
longer racked with monstrous pain. A truce these proud and lusty knights
now craved; they begged that men would bring the king to see them. Forth
from the hall stepped the heroes, bloody of hue, and the three noble
kings, stained from their armor. They wist not to whom they should make
plaint of their mighty wounds. Thither both Etzel and Kriemhild went;
the land was theirs and so their band waxed large. He spake to the
strangers: "Pray tell me, what ye will of me? Ye ween to gain here
peace, but that may hardly be. For damage as great as ye have done me,
in my son and in my many kinsmen, whom ye have slain, peace and pardon
shall be denied you quite; it shall not boot you aught, an' I remain
alive."

To this King Gunther answered: "Dire need constrained us; all my
men-at-arms lay dead before thy heroes in the hostel. How did I deserve
such pay? I came to thee in trust, I weened thou wast my friend."

Young Giselher of Burgundy likewise spake: "Ye men of Etzel, who still
do live, what do ye blame me with? What have I done to you, for I rode
in friendly wise into this land of yours."

Quoth they: "From thy friendliness this castle is filled with grief and
the land as well. We should not have taken it ill, in sooth, if thou
hadst never come from Worms beyond the Rhine. Thou and thy brothers have
filled this land with orphans."

Then spake Knight Giselher in angry mood: "And ye will lay aside this
bitter hate and make your peace with us stranger knights, 'twere best
for either side. We have not merited at all what Etzel here doth do us."

Then spake the host to his guests: "Unlike are my wrongs and yours. The
mickle grievance from the loss and then the shame, which I have taken
here, are such that none of you shall e'er go hence alive."

At this mighty Gernot spake to the king: "May God then bid you act in
merciful wise. Slay, if ye will, us homeless knights, but let us first
descend to you into the open court. That will make to you for honor.
Let be done quickly whatever shall hap to us. Ye have still many men
unscathed, who dare well encounter us and bereave us storm-weary men of
life. How long must we warriors undergo these toils?"

King Etzel's champions had nigh granted this boon and let them leave the
hall, but Kriemhild heard it and sorely it misliked her. Therefore the
wanderers were speedily denied the truce. "Not so, ye Hunnish men. I
counsel you in true fealty, that ye do not what ye have in mind, and let
these murderers leave the hall, else must your kinsmen suffer a deadly
fall. Did none of them still live, save Uta's sons, my noble brothers,
and they came forth into the breeze and cooled their armor rings, ye
would all be lost. Bolder heroes were never born into the world."

Then spake young Giselher: "Fair sister mine, full evil was my trust,
when thou didst invite me from across the Rhine hither to this land, to
this dire need. How have I merited death here from the Huns? I was aye
true to thee; never did I do thee wrong, and in the hope that thou wast
still my friend, dear sister mine, rode I hither to thy court. It cannot
be but that thou grant us mercy."

"I will not grant you mercy, merciless is my mood. Hagen of Troneg hath
done me such great wrongs that it may never be amended, the while I
live. Ye must all suffer for this deed," so spake King Etzel's wife.
"And ye will give me Hagen alone as hostage, I will not deny that I will
let you live, for ye be my brothers and children of one mother, and will
counsel peace with these heroes that be here."

"Now God in heaven forbid," spake Gernot; "were there here a thousand of
us, the clansmen of thy kin, we'd rather all lie dead, than give thee a
single man as hostage. Never shall this be done."

"We all must die," spake then Giselher, "but none shall hinder that we
guard us in knightly wise. We be still here, if any list to fight us;
for never have I failed a friend in fealty."

Then spake bold Dankwart (it had not beseemed him to have held his
peace): "Forsooth my brother Hagen standeth not alone. It may yet rue
those who here refuse the truce. I'll tell you of a truth, we'll make
you ware of this."

Then spake the queen: "Ye full lusty heroes, now go nigher to the stairs
and avenge my wrongs. For this I will ever serve you, as I should by
right. I'll pay Hagen well for his overweening pride. Let none at all
escape from the house, and I will bid the hall be set on fire at all
four ends. Thus all my wrongs shall be well avenged."

Soon were King Etzel's champions ready still stood without into the hall
with blows and shots. Mickle waxed the din, yet the lordings and their
liegemen would not part. For very fealty they could not leave each
other. Etzel's queen then bade the hall be set on fire, and thus they
racked the bodies of the knights with fire and flame. Fanned by the
breeze, the whole house burst into flames full soon. I ween, no folk
did ever gain such great distress. Enow within cried out: "Alack this
plight! We would much rather die in stress of battle. It might move God
to pity, how we all are lost! The queen now wreaketh monstrously on us
her wrath."

Quoth one of them within: "We must all lie dead. What avail us now the
greetings which the king did send us? Thirst from this great heat giveth
me such dole, that soon, I ween, my life must ebb away in anguish."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "Ye noble knights and good, let him whom
pangs of thirst constrain, drink here this blood. In such great heat,
'tis better still than wine. We can purvey us at this time none better."

One of the warriors hied him then to where he found a corpse, and knelt
him down beside the wound; then he unbound his helmet and began to drink
the flowing blood. However little wont to such a drink, him thought it
passing good: "Sir Hagen, now God requite you," spake the weary man,
"that I have drunk so well at your advice; seldom hath better wine been
proffered me. And I live yet a while, I shall ever be your friend."

When now the others heard this, it thought them good, and soon there
were many more that drank the blood. From this the body of each gained
much of strength; but many a stately dame paid dear for this through
the loss of loving kin. Into the hall the fire fell thick and fast upon
them, but with their shields they turned it from them to the ground.
Both the heat and the smoke did hurt them sore; in sooth, I ween, that
nevermore will such anguish hap to heroes.

Again Hagen of Troneg spake: "Stand by the sides of the hall. Let not
the firebrands fall upon your helmet bands, but stamp them with your
feet down deeper in the blood. Forsooth it is an evil feast which the
queen doth give us here."

In such dire woes the night did wear away at last, and still the brave
minstrel and his comrade Hagen stood before the hall, a-leaning on their
shields. More scathe they awaited from those of Etzel's band. Then spake
the fiddler: "Now go we into the hall. Then the Huns will ween, that we
all be dead from the torture that hath been done us here. They'll yet
see us go to meet them in the strife."

Now spake Giselher of Burgundy, the youth: "I trow the day dawneth, a
cooling wind doth blow. May God in heaven let us live to see a liefer
time, for my sister Kriemhild hath given us here an evil feast."

Again one spake: "I see the day. Sith we cannot hope for better things,
so arm you, heroes, think on your life. Certes, King Etzel's wife will
come to meet us soon again."

The host weened well, that his guests were dead from their toil and the
pangs of fire; but yet within the hall six hundred brave men, as good as
any knight that king ever gained, were still alive. Those set to guard
the strangers had well seen that the guests still lived, despite the
damage and the dole that had been done both to the lordings and their
men. In the hall one saw them stand full safe and sound. They then told
Kriemhild that many were still alive, but the queen replied: "It could
never be, that any should have lived through such stress of fire. Rather
will I believe that all lie dead."

The lordings and their men would still fain have lived, had any listed
to do them mercy, but they could find none among those of the Hunnish
land. So with full willing hand they avenged their dying. On this same
day, towards morning, men proffered them a fierce attack as greeting,
which brought the champions in stress again. Many a stout spear was
hurled upon them, but the bold and lordly warriors warded them in
knightly wise. High rose the mood of Etzel's men at the thought that
they should earn Queen Kriemhild's gold. Thereto they were minded to
perform whatso the King did bid them. Many of them because of this
must soon needs gaze on death. Of pledges and of gifts one might tell
wonders. She bade the ruddy gold be carried forth on shields and gave
it to whomsoever craved it and would take it. Certes, greater wage was
nevermore given against foes. To the hall a mickle force of well-armed
warriors marched.

Then cried bold Folker: "We're here again, ye see. Never saw I heroes
more gladly come to fight than these that have taken the king's gold to
do us scathe."

Then enow did call: "Nearer, heroes, nearer, that we may do betimes what
we must bring to an end. Here dieth none that is not doomed to die."

Soon their shields were seen sticking full of darts that had been
thrown. What more can I say? Full twelve hundred men tried hard to match
them, surging back and forth. The strangers cooled well their mood with
wounds. None might part the strife, and so blood was seen to flow from
mortal wounds, many of which were dealt. Each one was heard to wail for
friends. All the great king's doughty warriors died, and loving kinsmen
mourned them passing sore.




ADVENTURE XXXVII. How Margrave Rudeger Was Slain.

The strangers had done full well at dawn. Meanwhile Gotelind's husband
came to court. Bitterly faithful Rudeger wept when he saw the grievous
wounds on either side. "Woe is me," quoth the champion, "that I was ever
born, sith none may stay this mickle grief! However fain I would make
for peace, the king will not consent, for he seeth ever more and more
the sufferings of his men."

Then the good Knight Rudeger sent to Dietrich, if perchance they might
turn the fate of the high-born kings. The king of Berne sent answer:
"Who might now forfend? King Etzel will let none part the strife."

Then a Hunnish warrior, that saw Rudeger stand with weeping eyes, and
many tears had he shed, spake to the queen: "Now behold how he doth
stand, that hath the greatest power at Etzel's court and whom both lands
and people serve. Why have so many castles been given to Rudeger, of
which he doth hold such store from the king in fief? Not one sturdy
stroke hath he dealt in all this strife. Methinks, he recketh not how it
fare here at court, sith he hath his will in full. Men say of him, he be
bolder than any other wight. Little hath that been seen in these parlous
(1) days."

Sad in heart the faithful vassal gazed at him whom he heard thus speak.
Him-thought: "Thou shalt pay for this. Thou sayest, I be a craven, and
hast told thy tale too loud at court."

His fist he clenched, then ran he at him and smote the Hunnish man
so mightily that he lay dead at his feet full soon. Through this King
Etzel's woe grew greater.

"Away, thou arrant coward," cried Rudeger, "forsooth I have enow of
grief and pain, How dost thou taunt me, that I fight not here? Certes,
I have good cause to hate the strangers, and would have done all in my
power against them, had I not led the warriors hither. Of a truth I was
their safeguard to my master's land. Therefore the hand of me, wretched
man, may not strive against them."

Then spake Etzel, the noble king, to the margrave: "How have ye helped
us, most noble Rudeger! We have so many fey (2) in the land, that we
have no need of more. Full evil have ye done."

At this the noble knight made answer: "Forsooth he grieved my mood and
twitted me with the honors and the goods, such store of which I have
received from thy hand. This hath cost the liar dear."

The queen, too, was come and had seen what fortuned to the Huns through
the hero's wrath. Passing sore she bewailed it; her eyes grew moist as
she spake to Rudeger: "How have we deserved that ye should increase the
sorrows of the king and me? Hitherto ye have told us, that for our sake
ye would risk both life and honor. I heard full many warriors accord
to you the palm. Let me mind you of your fealty and that ye swore, when
that ye counseled me to Etzel, good knight and true, that ye would serve
me till one of us should die. Never have I, poor woman, had such great
need of this."

"There's no denying that I swore to you, my lady, for your sake I'd
risk both life and honor, but I did not swear that I would lose my soul.
'Twas I that bade the high-born lordings to this feast."

Quoth she: "Bethink thee, Rudeger, of thy great fealty, of thy
constancy, and of thine oaths, that thou wouldst ever avenge mine
injuries and all my woes."

Said the margrave: "Seldom have I denied you aught."

Mighty Etzel, too, began implore; upon their knees they sank before
the knight. Men saw the noble margrave stand full sad. Pitifully the
faithful warrior spake: "Woe is me, most wretched man, that I have
lived to see this day. I must give over all my honors, my fealty, and
my courtesie, that God did bid me use. Alas, great God of heaven, that
death will not turn this from me! I shall act basely and full evil,
whatever I do or leave undone. But if I give over both, then will all
people blame me. Now may he advise me, who hath given me life."

Still the king and the queen, too, begged unceasingly. Through this
warriors must needs thereafter lose their lives at Rudeger's hands, when
the hero also died. Ye may well hear it now, that he deported him full
pitifully. He wist that it would bring him scathe and monstrous woe.
Gladly would he have refused the king and queen. He feared full sore
that if he slew but one of the strangers, the world would bear him hate.

Then the brave man addressed him to the king: "Sir King, take back
again all that I have from you, my land with its castles, let not a whit
remain to me. On foot will I wander into other lands."

At this King Etzel spake: "Who else should help me then? I'll give thee
the land and all its castles, as thine own, that thou mayst avenge me on
my foes. Thou shalt be a mighty king at Etzel's side."

Then answered Rudeger: "How shall I do this deed? I bade them to my
house and home; in friendly wise I offered them both food and drink
and gave them gifts. How may I counsel their death? People will lightly
ween, that I be craven. No service of mine have I refused these noble
lordings and their men. Now I rue the kinship I have gained with them. I
gave my daughter to Giselher, the knight; to none in all the world could
she have been better given, for courtesie and honor, for fealty and
wealth. Never have I seen so young a prince of such right courteous
mind."

Then Kriemhild spake again: "Most noble Rudeger, take pity on our
griefs, on mine and on the king's. Bethink thee well, that king did
never gain such baneful guests."

To the noble dame the margrave spake: "Rudeger's life must pay to-day
for whatsoever favors ye and my lord have shown me. Therefore must I
die; no longer may it be deferred. I know full well, that my castles and
my lands will be voided for you to-day through the hand of one of these
men. To your mercy I commend my wife and children and the strangers (3)
who be at Bechelaren."

"Now God requite thee, Rudeger," spake the king, and both he and the
queen grew glad. "Thy people shall be well commended to our care. For
mine own weal I trust thou too shalt go unscathed."

Etzel's bride began to weep. Then body and soul he staked upon the
venture. He spake: "I must perform what I have vowed. Alas for my
friends, whom I am loth to fight."

Men saw him go sadly from the presence of the king. Close at hand he
found his warriors standing. He spake: "Ye must arm you all, my men,
for, alas, I must needs encounter the bold Burgundians."

They bade the squires run nimbly to where lay their arms. Whether it
were helm or buckler, 'twas all brought forth to them by their meiny.
Later the proud strangers heard told baleful tales. Rudeger was
now armed, and with him five hundred men; thereto he gained twelve
champions, who would fain win renown in the stress of battle. They
wist not that death drew nigh them. Then Rudeger was seen to march with
helmet donned. The margrave's men bare keen-edged swords, and their
bright shields and broad upon their arms. This the fiddler saw; greatly
he rued the sight. When young Giselher beheld his lady's father walk
with his helm upon his head, how might he know what he meant thereby,
save that it portended good? Therefore the noble prince waxed passing
merry of mood.

"Now well is me of such kinsmen," spake Knight Giselher, "whom we have
won upon this journey; from my wife we shall reap much profit here. Lief
it is to me, that this betrothal hath taken place."

"I know not whence ye take your comfort," spake then the minstrel; "when
have ye seen so many heroes walk with helmets donned and swords in hand,
for the sake of peace? Rudeger doth think to win his castles and his
lands in fight with us."

Or ever the fiddler had ended his speech, men saw the noble Rudeger
before the house. At his feet he placed his trusty shield, and now both
service and greeting he must needs refuse his friends. Into the hall
the noble margrave called: "Ye doughty Nibelungs, now guard you well
on every side. Ye were to profit by me, now I shall bring you scathe.
Aforetime we were friends, but of this troth I now would fain be rid."

The hard-pressed men were startled at this tale, for none gained aught
of joy, that he whom they did love would now fain fight them. From their
foes they had already suffered mickle stress of war. "Now God of heaven
forbid," spake Gunther, the knight, "that ye should give over your love
of us and your great fealty, on which we counted of a truth. Better
things I trow of you, than that ye should ever do this deed."

"Alas, I cannot give it over, but must fight you, for I have vowed it.
Now ward you, brave heroes, and ye love your life. King Etzel's wife
would not release me from mine oath."

"Ye declare this feud too late," spake the highborn king. "Now may God
requite you, most noble Rudeger, for all the love and fealty that ye
have shown us, if ye would only act more kindly at the end. I and my
kinsmen, we ought ever to serve you for the noble gifts ye gave us, when
ye brought us hither faithfully to Etzel's land. Now, noble Rudeger,
think on this."

"How gladly would I grant you," spake Knight Rudeger, "that I might
weigh out my gifts for you with full measure, as willingly as I had
hoped, if I never should be blamed on that account."

"Turn back, noble Rudeger," spake then Gernot, "for host did never give
his guests such loving cheer as ye did us. This shall profit you well,
and we remain alive."

"Would to God," spake Rudeger, "most noble Gernot, that ye were on the
Rhine and I were dead with passing honor, sith I must now encounter you!
Never did friends act worse to heroes."

"Now God requite you, Sir Rudeger," answered Gernot, "for your passing
rich gifts. Your death doth rue me, if such knightly virtues shall be
lost with you. Here I bear your sword that ye gave me, good knight and
true. It hath never failed me in all this need. Many a knight fell
dead beneath its edges. It is bright and steady, glorious and good;
nevermore, I ween, will warrior give so rich a gift. And will ye not
turn back, but come to meet us, and slay aught of the friends I still
have here, with your own sword will I take your life. Then will ye rue
me, Rudeger, ye and your high-born wife."

"Would to God, Sir Gernot, that this might come to pass, that all your
will might here be done, and that your kinsmen escaped unscathed! Then
both my daughter and my wife may trust you well, forsooth."

Then of the Burgundians there spake fair Uta's son: "Why do ye so, Sir
Rudeger? Those that be come with us, do all like you well. Ye encounter
us in evil wise; ye wish to make your fair daughter a widow far too
soon. If ye and your warriors match me now with strife, how right
unkindly do ye let it appear, that I trust you well above all other men
and therefore won me your daughter to wife."

"Think on your fealty, most noble and high-born king. And God let you
escape," so spake Rudeger, "let the maiden suffer not for me. For your
own virtue's sake, vouchsafe her mercy."

"That I should do by right," spake the youthful Giselher, "but if
my noble kinsmen here within must die through you, then my steadfast
friendship for you and for your daughter must be parted."

"Now may God have mercy on us," answered the valiant man. Then they
raised their shields, as though they would hence to fight the guests in
Kriemhild's hall, but Hagen cried full loud adown the steps. "Pray tarry
awhile, most noble Rudeger," so spake Hagen; "I and my lords would fain
have further parley, as doth befit our need. What can the death of us
wanderers avail King Etzel? I stand here in a fearful plight; the shield
that Lady Gotelind gave me to bear hath been cut to pieces by the Huns.
I brought it with friendly purpose into Etzel's land. O that God in
heaven would grant, that I might bear so good a shield as that thou hast
in thy hand, most noble Rudeger! Then I should no longer need a hauberk
in the fray."

"Gladly would I serve thee with my shield, durst I offer it before
Kriemhild. Yet take it, Hagen, and bear it on thine arm. Ho, if thou
couldst only wield it in the Burgundian land!"

When he so willingly offered to give the shield, enow of eyes grew
red with scalding tears. 'T was the last gift that ever Rudeger of
Bechelaren gave to any knight. However fierce Hagen, and however stern
of mood, the gift did touch him, which the good hero, so near to death,
had given. Many a noble knight gan mourn with him.

"Now God in heaven requite you, most noble Rudeger. Your like will
nevermore be found, who giveth homeless warriors such lordly gifts. God
grant that your courtesie may ever live." Again Hagen spake: "Woe is me
of these tales, we had so many other griefs to bear. Let complaint be
made to heaven, if we must fight with friends."

Quoth the margrave: "Inly doth this grieve me."

"Now God requite you, for the gift, most noble Rudeger. Howso these
high-born warriors deport them toward you, my hand shall never touch you
in the fight, and ye slew them all from the Burgundian land."

Courteously the good Sir Rudeger bowed him low. On every side they wept,
that none might soothe this pain of heart. That was a mighty grief. In
Rudeger would die the father of all knightly virtues.

Then Folker, the minstrel, spake from out the hall: "Sith my comrade
Hagen hath made his peace with you, ye shall have it just as steadfastly
from my hand, for well ye earned it, when we came into this land. Most
noble margrave, ye shall be mine envoy, too. The margravine gave me
these ruddy arm rings, that I should wear them here at the feasting.
These ye may yourself behold, that ye may later be my witness."

"Now God of heaven grant," spake Rudeger, "that the margravine may give
you more! I'll gladly tell these tales to my dear love, if I see her in
health again. Of this ye shall not doubt."

When he had vowed him this, Rudeger raised high his shield. No longer
he bided, but with raging mood, like a berserker, he rushed upon the
guests. Many a furious blow the noble margrave struck. The twain, Folker
and Hagen, stepped further back, as they had vowed to him afore. Still
he found standing by the tower such valiant men, that Rudeger began the
fight with anxious doubts. With murderous intent Gunther and Gernot let
him in, good heroes they! Giselher stood further back, which irked him
sore, in truth. He voided Rudeger, for still he had hope of life. Then
the margrave's men rushed at their foes; in knightly wise one saw them
follow their lord. In their hands they bare their keen-edged swords,
the which cleft there many a helm and lordly shield. The tired warriors
dealt the men of Bechelaren many a mighty blow, that cut smooth and deep
through the shining mail, down to the very quick.

Rudeger's noble fellowship was now come quite within. Into the fight
Folker and Hagen sprang anon. They gave no quarter, save to one man
alone. Through the hands of the twain the blood streamed down from
the helmets. How grimly rang the many swords within! The shield plates
sprang from their fastenings, and the precious stones, cut from the
shields, fell down into the gore. So grimly they fought, that men will
never do the like again. The lord of Bechelaren raged to and fro, as
one who wotteth how to use great prowess in the fray. Passing like to
a worshipful champion and a bold did Rudeger bear him on that day. Here
stood the warriors, Gunther and Gernot, and smote many a hero dead in
the fray. Giselher and Dankwart, the twain, recked so little, that
they brought full many a knight to his last day of life. Full well did
Rudeger make appear that he was strong enow, brave and well-armed. Ho,
what knights he slew! This a Burgundian espied; perforce it angered him,
and thus Sir Rudeger's death drew near.

The stalwart Gernot accosted the hero; to the margrave he spake: "It
appeareth, ye will not leave my men alive, most noble Rudeger. That
irketh me beyond all measure, no longer can I bear the sight. So may
your present work you harm, sith ye have taken from me such store of
friends. Pray address you unto me, most noble man and brave, your gift
shall be paid for as best I can."

Or ever the margrave could reach his foe, bright armor rings must needs
grow dull with blood. Then at each other sprang these honor-seeking men.
Either gan guard him against mighty wounds. So sharp were their swords,
that naught might avail against them. Then Rudeger, the knight, smote
Gernot a buffet through his helmet, the which was as hard as flint, so
that the blood gushed forth. But this the bold knight and good repaid
eftsoon. High in his hand he now poised Rudeger's gift, and though
wounded unto death, he smote him a stroke through his good and trusty
shield down to his helmet band. And so fair Gotelind's husband was done
to death. Certes, so rich a gift was never worse repaid. So fell alike
both Gernot and Rudeger, slain in the fray, through each other's hand.

Then first waxed Hagen wroth, when he saw the monstrous scathe. Quoth
the hero of Troneg: "Evil hath it fared with us. In these two men we
have taken a loss so great that neither their land nor people will e'er
recover from the blow. Rudeger's champions must answer to us homeless
men."

"Alas for my brother, who hath here been done to death. What evil tales
I hear all time! Noble Rudeger, too, must ever rue me. The loss and the
grievous wounds are felt on either side."

When Lord Giselher saw his betrothed's father dead, those within the
hall were forced to suffer need. Fiercely death sought his fellowship;
not one of those of Bechelaren escaped with life. Gunther and Giselher
and Hagen, too, Dankwart and Folker, the right good knights, went to
where they found the two men lying. Then by these heroes tears of grief
were shed.

"Death doth sorely rob us," spake Giselher, the youth. "Now give over
your weeping and go we bite the breeze, that the mailed armor of us
storm-weary men may cool. Certes, I ween, that God in heaven vouchsafeth
us no more to live."

This champion was seen to sit and that to lean against the wall, but all
again were idle. Rudeger's heroes lay still in death. The din had died
away; the hush endured so long, it vexed King Etzel.

"Alack for such services," spake the queen. "They be not so true, that
our foes must pay with their life at Rudeger's hands. I trow, he doth
wish to lead them back to the Burgundian land. What booteth it, King
Etzel, that we have given him whatso he would? The knight hath done
amiss, he who should avenge us, doth make his peace."

To this Folker, the full dapper knight, made answer: "This is not true,
alas, most noble queen. Durst I give the lie to such a high-born dame,
then had ye most foully lied against Rudeger. He and his champions be
cozened in this peace. So eagerly he did what the king commanded,
that he and all his fellowship lie here in death. Now look around you,
Kriemhild, to see whom ye may now command. The good Knight Rudeger hath
served you to his end. And ye will not believe the tale, we'll let you
see."

To their great grief 'twas done; they bare the slain hero to where the
king might see him. Never had there happed to Etzel's men a grief so
great. When they saw the margrave borne forth dead, no scribe might
write or tell the frantic grief of men and women, which there gan show
itself from dole of heart. King Etzel's sorrow waxed so great that the
mighty king did voice his woe of heart, as with a lion's roar. Likewise
did his queen. Beyond all measure they bewailed the good Knight
Rudeger's death.


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Parlous", older English for 'perilous'.
   (2)  "Fey", 'doomed to death', here in the sense of 'already
        slain'.  See Adventure V, note 2.
   (3)  "Strangers", i.e., those who are sojourning there far from
        home.




ADVENTURE XXXVIII. How All Sir Dietrich's Warriors Were Slain.

On every side one heard a grief so great, that the palace and the towers
rang with the wailing. Then a liegeman of Dietrich heard it, too. How
quickly he gan haste him with the fearful tales! To the lording he
spake: "Hear, my lord, Sir Dietrich, however much I've lived to see till
now, yet heard I never such a monstrous wail, as now hath reached mine
ears. I ween, King Etzel himself hath come to grief. How else might all
be so distressed? One of the twain, the king or Kriemhild, hath sorely
been laid low by the brave strangers in their wrath. Full many a dapper
warrior weepeth passing sore."

Then spake the Knight of Borne: "My faithful men, now haste ye not
too fast. Whatever the homeless warriors may have done, they be now in
mickle need. Let it profit them, that I did offer them my peace."

At this brave Wolfhart spake: "I will hie me hence and ask for tidings
of what they have done, and will tell you then, my most dear lord, just
as I find it, what the wail may be."

Then spake Sir Dietrich: "Where one awaiteth wrath, and rude questions
then are put, this doth lightly sadden the lofty mood of warriors. In
truth, I will not, Wolfhart, that ye ask these questions of them."

Then he told Helfrich (1) to hasten thither speedily, and bade him find
from Etzel's men or from the guests themselves, what there had fortuned,
for men had never seen from folks so great a grief. The messenger gan
ask: "What hath here been done?"

At this one among them spake: "Whatever of joy we had in the Hunnish
land hath passed away. Here lieth Rudeger, slain by the Burgundians'
hands; and of those who were come with him, not one hatch 'scaped
alive."

Sir Helfrich could never have had a greater dole. Sorely weeping, the
envoy went to Dietrich. Never was he so loth to tell a tale. "What
have ye found for us?" quoth Dietrich. "Why weep ye so sore, Knight
Helfrich?"

Then spake the noble champion: "I have good cause for wail. The
Burgundians have slain the good Sir Rudeger."

At this the hero of Berne made answer: "Now God forbid. That were a
fearful vengeance, over which the foul fiend would gloat. Wherewith hath
Rudeger deserved this at their hands? I know full well, forsooth, he is
the strangers' friend."

To this Wolfhart answered: "And have they done this deed, 'twill cost
them all their lives. 'Twould be our shame, should we let this pass, for
of a truth the hand of the good knight Rudeger hath served us much and
oft."

The lord of the Amelungs bade learn it better. In bitter grief he sate
him at a window and begged Hildebrand to hie him to the strangers, that
he might find from them what had been done. The storm-brave warrior,
Master Hildebrand, (2) bare neither shield nor weapon in his hand. In
courtly wise he would hie him to the strangers; for this he was chided
by his sister's son. Grim Wolfhart spake: "And ye will go thither so
bare, ye will never fare without upbraiding; ye must return with shame.
But if ye go there armed, each will guard against that well."

Then the wise man armed him, through the counsel of youth. Or ever he
was ware, all Dietrich's warriors had donned their war-weeds and held
in their hands their swords. Loth it was to the hero, and he would have
gladly turned their mind. He asked whither they would go.

"We will hence with you. Perchance Hagen of Troneg then will dare the
less to address him to you with scorn, which full well he knoweth how to
use." When he heard this, the knight vouchsafed them for to go.

Soon brave Folker saw the champions of Berne, the liegemen of Dietrich,
march along, well armed, begirt with swords, while in their hands they
bare their shields. He told it to his lords from out the Burgundian
land. The fiddler spake: "Yonder I see the men of Dietrich march along
in right hostile wise, armed cap-a-pie. They would encounter us; I ween
'twill go full ill with us strangers."

Meanwhile Sir Hildebrand was come. Before his feet he placed his shield,
and gan ask Gunther's men: "Alas, good heroes, what had Rudeger done
you? My Lord Dietrich hath sent me hither to you to say, that if the
hand of any among you hath slain the noble margrave, as we are told, we
could never stand such mighty dole."

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "The tale is true. How gladly could I wish,
that the messenger had told you false, for Rudeger's sake, and that he
still did live, for whom both man and wife may well ever weep."

When they heard aright that he was dead, the warriors made wail for
him, as their fealty bade them. Over the beards and chins of Dietrich's
champions the tears were seen to run. Great grief had happened to them.

Siegstab, (3) the Duke of Berne, then spake: "Now hath come to an end
the cheer, that Rudeger did give us after our days of dole. The joy of
all wayfaring folk lieth slain by you, sir knights."

Then spake the Knight Wolfwin (4) of the Amelungs: "And I saw mine own
father dead to-day, I should not make greater dole, than for his death.
Alas, who shall now comfort the good margrave's wife?"

Angry of mood Knight Wolfhart spake: "Who shall now lead the warriors
to so many a fight, as the margrave so oft hath done? Alas, most noble
Rudeger, that we should lose thee thus!"

Wolfbrand (5) and Helfrich and Helmnot, too, with all their men bewailed
his death. For sighing Hildebrand might no longer ask a whit. He spake:
"Sir knights, now do what my lord hath sent you here to do. Give us
the corse of Rudeger from out the hall, in whom our joy hath turned to
grief, and let us repay to him the great fealty he hath shown to us and
to many another man. We, too, be exiles, just as Rudeger, the knight.
Why do ye let us wait thus? Let us bear him away, that we may yet
requite the knight in death. More justly had we done it, when he was
still alive."

Then spake King Gunther: "Never was there so good a service as that,
which a friend doth do to a friend after his death. When any doeth that,
I call it faithful friendship. Ye repay him but rightly, for much love
hath he ever shown you."

"How long shall we still beseech?" spake Knight Wolfhart. "Sith our best
hope hath been laid low in death by you, and we may no longer have him
with us, let us bear him hence to where the warrior may be buried."

To this Folker made answer: "None will give him to you. Fetch ye him
from the hall where the warrior lieth, fallen in the blood, with mortal
wounds. 'Twill then be a perfect service, which ye render Rudeger."

Quoth brave Wolfhart: "God wot, sir minstrel, ye have given us great
dole and should not rouse our ire. But that I durst not for fear of my
lord, ye should all fare ill. We must perforce abstain, sith he forbade
us strife."

Then spake the fiddler: "He hath a deal too much fear who doth abstain
from all that one forbiddeth him. That I call not a real hero's mood."
This speech of his war comrade thought Hagen good.

"Long not for that," answered Wolfhart, "or I'll play such havoc with
your fiddle strings, that ye'll have cause to tell the tale, when ye
ride homeward to the Rhine. I cannot brook in honor your overweening
pride."

Quoth the fiddler: "If ye put out of tune my strings, then must the
gleam of your helmet grow dim from this hand of mine, however I ride to
the Burgundian land."

Then would he leap at him, but his uncle Hildebrand grasped him firmly.
"I ween, thou wouldst rage in thy silly anger. Then hadst thou lost
forever the favor of my lord."

"Let go the lion, master, he is so fierce of mood," quoth the good
knight Folker. "Had he slain the whole world with his one hand, I'll
smite him, and he come within my reach, so that he may never sing the
answer to my song."

At this the men of Berne waxed passing wroth of mood. Wolfhart, a
doughty knight and a good, snatched up his shield. Like a wild lion
he ran to meet him, swiftly followed by all his friends. But howsoever
great the strides he took towards the hall, yet did old Hildebrand
overtake him at the steps. He would not let him reach the fray before
him. At the hands of the homeless knights they later found the strife
they sought. Master Hildebrand then sprang at Hagen. In the hands of
both one heard the swords ring out. That both were angry, might be
plainly seen; from the swords of the twain streamed forth a blast of
fire-red sparks. Then they were parted in the stress of battle by the
men of Berne, as their strength did bid them. At once Hildebrand turned
him away from Hagen, but stout Wolfhart addressed him to Folker the
bold. Such a blow he smote the fiddler upon his good helmet, that the
sword's edge pierced to the very helmet bands. This the bold gleeman
repaid with might; he smote Wolfhart, so that the sparks flew wide. Enow
of fire they struck from the armor rings, for each bare hatred to the
other. Then Knight Wolfwin of Berne did part them--an' he be not a hero,
never was there one.

With willing hand Gunther, the champion, greeted the heroes of the
Amelung land. Lord Giselher made many a gleaming helmet red and wot with
blood. Dankwart, Hagen's brother, a fierce man was he; whatever he had
done before to Etzel's warriors in strife was as a wind to the fury with
which bold Aldrian's son now fought. Ritschart (6) and Gerbart, Helfrich
and Wichart had spared themselves full seldom in many battle storms;
this they now made Gunther's liegemen note full well. Wolfbrand, too,
was seen in the strife bearing him in lordly wise. Old Hildebrand fought
as though he raged. At Wolfhart's hands many good knights, struck by the
sword, must needs fall dead down into the blood. Thus the bold champions
and good avenged Knight Rudeger.

Then Lord Siegstab fought as his prowess bade him. Ho, what good helmets
of his foes this son of Dietrich's sister clove in the strife! Nor
might he ever do better in the fray. When sturdy Folker espied that bold
Siegstab hewed a bloody stream from the hard armor rings, wroth of mood
the hero grew. He sprang to meet him, and Siegstab lost his life full
soon at the fiddler's hands, for Folker gave him such a sample of his
art, that he soon lay dead, slain by his sword. This old Hildebrand
avenged, as his might did bid him.

"Alas for my dear lord," spake Master Hildebrand, "who lieth here dead
at Folker's hands. Now shall the fiddler no longer live."

How might bold Hildebrand ever be fiercer? Folker he smote, so that
on all sides the clasps flew to the walls of the hall from helmet and
shield of the doughty gleeman. Thus stout Folker was done to death. At
this the men of Dietrich pressed forward to the strife. They smote so
that the armor rings whirled far and wide, and high through the air
the sword-points wore seen to fly. From the helmets they drew the warm
gushing stream of blood. When Hagen of Troneg saw Folker dead, that was
the greatest sorrow, that he had gained at the feasting in kinsman or
in liegeman. Alas, how fiercely Hagen gan venge the knight! "Now old
Hildebrand shall not profit by this deed. My helpmate lieth slain by the
hero's hand, the best war comrade that I did ever win." Higher he raised
his helmet, and ran, slashing as he went.

Stout Helfrich slew Dankwart. Loth enow it was to Gunther and Giselher,
when they saw him fall in cruel need, but with his own hands he himself
had well avenged his death. Meanwhile Wolfhart raged back and forth,
hewing alway King Gunther's men. For the third time he was come through
the hall, and many a warrior fell, struck by his hands.

Then Lord Giselher cried out to Wolfhart: "Alas, that I have ever gained
so grim a foe! Noble knight and brave, now address you unto me. I'll
help to make an end; this may be no longer."

At this Wolfhart turned him in strife to Giselher, and each smote other
many a gaping wound. He pressed so mightily toward the king, that
the blood beneath his feet spurted high above his head. With grim
and fearful blows the son of fair Uta then greeted the brave knight
Wolfhart. However strong the warrior, he might not save his life. Never
could so young a king have been more brave; Wolfhart he smote through
his stout hauberk, that his blood streamed down from the wound. Unto
death he wounded Dietrich's liegeman. None save a champion had done such
deed. When brave Wolfhart felt the wound, he let fall his shield and
lifted higher in his hand his mighty sword (sharp enow it was); through
both helmet and armor rings the hero smote Giselher. Thus each did other
fiercely unto death.

Now was none left of Dietrich's men. Old Hildebrand saw Wolfhart fall;
never before his death, I ween, did such dole happen to him. The men of
Gunther all lay dead, and those of Dietrich, too. Hildebrand hied him to
where Wolfhart had fallen in the gore, and clasped in his arms the brave
knight and good. He would fain bear him from the hall, but he was a
deal too heavy, and so he must needs let him lie. Then the dying warrior
looked upward from the blood in which he lay; well he saw, that his
uncle would fain help him hence. Though wounded unto death, he spake:
"Dear uncle mine, ye may not aid me now. 'Tis well, methinks, that ye
should guard you against Hagen. A fierce mood he beareth in his heart.
And if perchance my kinsmen would mourn me after I am dead; pray tell
the nearest and the best, that they weep not for me; there is no need of
that. At the hands of a king I have met a glorious death and have also
avenged me, so that the wives of the good knights may well bewail it. If
any ask you of this, ye may boldly say, that full a hundred lie slain by
my hand alone."

Then Hagen, too, bethought him of the gleeman, whom bold Hildebrand
had robbed of life. To the knight he spake: "Ye'll requite me now my
sorrows. Through your hatred ye have bereft us of many a lusty knight."

He dealt Hildebrand such a blow, that men heard Balmung ring, the which
bold Hagen had taken from Siegfried, when he slew the knight. Then the
old man warded him; in sooth he was brave enow. Dietrich's champion
struck with a broad sword, that cut full sore, at the hero of Troneg,
but could not wound King Gunther's liegeman. Hagen, however, smote him
through his well-wrought hauberk. When old Hildebrand felt the wound, he
feared more scathe at Hagen's hand; his shield he slung across his back
and thus Sir Dietrich's man escaped from Hagen, though sorely wounded.

Now of all the knights none was alive save the twain, Gunther and
Hagen alone. Dripping with blood old Hildebrand went to where he found
Dietrich, and told him the baleful tale. He saw him sitting sadly, but
much more of dole the prince now gained. He spied Hildebrand in his
blood-red hauberk, and asked him tidings, as his fears did prompt him.

"Now tell me, Master Hildebrand, how be ye so wot with your lifeblood?
Pray who hath done you this? I ween, ye have fought with the strangers
in the hall. I forbade it you so sorely, that ye should justly have
avoided it."

Then said he to his lord: "'Twas Hagen that did it. He dealt me this
wound in the hall, when I would fain have turned me from the knight. I
scarce escaped the devil with my life."

Then spake the Lord of Berne: "Rightly hath it happed you, for that ye
have broken the peace, which I had sworn them, sith ye did hear me vow
friendship to the knights. Were it not mine everlasting shame, ye should
lose your life."

"My Lord Dietrich, now be ye not so wroth; the damage to my friends and
me is all too great. Fain would we have carried Rudeger's corse away,
but King Gunther's liegemen would not grant it us."

"Woe is me of these sorrows! If Rudeger then be dead, 'twill bring
me greater dole, than all my woe. Noble Gotelind is the child of my
father's sister; alas for the poor orphans, that be now in Bechelaren."

Rudeger's death now minded him of ruth and dole. Mightily the hero gan
weep; in sooth he had good cause. "Alas for this faithful comrade whom I
have lost! In truth I shall ever mourn for King Etzel's liegeman. Can ye
tell me, Master Hildebrand, true tidings, who be the knight, that hath
slain him there?"

Quoth he: "That stout Gernot did, with might and main, but the hero,
too, fell dead at Rudeger's hands."

Again he spake to Hildebrand: "Pray say to my men, that they arm them
quickly, for I will hie me hither, and bid them make ready my shining
battle weeds. I myself will question the heroes of the Burgundian land."

Then spake Master Hildebrand: "Who then shall join you? Whatso of living
men ye have, ye see stand by you. 'Tis I alone; the others, they be
dead."

He started at this tale; forsooth, he had good cause, for never in his
life had he gained so great a grief. He spake: "And are my men all dead,
then hath God forgotten me, poor Dietrich. Once I was a lordly king,
mighty, high, and rich." Again Sir Dietrich spake: "How could it hap,
that all the worshipful heroes died at the hands of the battle-weary,
who were themselves hard pressed? Were it not for mine ill-luck, death
were still a stranger to them. Sith then mine evil fortune would have it
so, pray tell me, are any of the strangers still alive?"

Then spake Master Hildebrand: "God wet, none other save only Hagen and
Gunther, the high-born king."

"Alas, dear Wolfhart, and I have lost thee too, then may it well rue me,
that ever I was born. Siegstab and Wolfwin and Wolfbrand, too! Who then
shall help me to the Amelung land? Bold Helfrich, hath he, too, been
slain, and Gerbart and Wiehart? How shall I ever mourn for them in
fitting wise? This day doth forever end my joys. Alas, that none may die
for very grief!"


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Helfrich" appears also in the "Thidreksaga", chap. 330,
        where we are told that he was the bravest and courtliest of
        all knights.
   (2)  "Master Hildebrand", see Adventure XXVIII, note 1.
   (3)  "Siegstab" is Dietrich's nephew.  He also appears in the
        "Thidreksaga", but in a different role.
   (4)  "Wolfwin" is mentioned in the "Klage", 1541, as Dietrich's
        nephew.
   (5)  "Wolfbrand" and "Helmnot" appear only here.
   (6)  "Ritschart".   With the exception of Helfrich (see Above
        note 1), these names do not occur elsewhere, though one of
        the sons of Haimon was called Wichart.




ADVENTURE XXXIX. How Gunther And Hagen And Kriemhild Were Slain.

Then Sir Dietrich fetched himself his coat of mail, and Master
Hildebrand helped him arm. The mighty man made wail so sore, that the
whole house resounded with his voice. But then he gained again a real
hero's mood. The good knight was now armed and grim of mind; a stout
shield he hung upon his arm. Thus he and Master Hildebrand went boldly
hence.

Then spake Hagen of Troneg: "Yonder I see Sir Dietrich coming hither; he
would fain encounter us, after the great sorrow, that hath here befallen
him. To-day we shall see, to whom one must give the palm. However strong
of body and grim of mood the lord of Berne thinketh him to be, right
well dare I match him," so spake Hagen, "an' he will avenge on us that
which hath been done him."

Dietrich and Hildebrand heard this speech, for Hagen came to where he
found the champion stand before the house, leaning against the wall.
Dietrich set his good shield upon the ground, and spake in grievous
dole: "Gunther, mighty king, why have ye so acted against me, banished
man? What have I done to you? I stand alone, bereft of all my comfort.
Ye thought it not enow of bitter need, when ye did kill Knight Rudeger,
our friend. Now ye have robbed me of all my men. Forsooth I never had
wrought you heroes sorrow such as this. Think on yourselves and on your
wrongs. Doth not the death of your kinsmen and all the hardship grieve
the minds of you good knights? Alas, what great dole Rudeger's death
doth give me! Never in all the world hath more of sorrow happed to any
man. Ye thought but little on me and on your pain. Whatsoever joy I had,
that lieth slain by you. Certes, I never can bewail my kin enow."

"Forsooth we be not so guilty," answered Hagen. "Your warriors came to
this hall in a large band, armed with care. Methinks the tale hath not
been told you rightly."

"What else should I believe? Hildebrand told me, that when my knights
from the Amelung land asked that ye should give up Rudeger's corse from
out the hall, ye did naught but mock the valiant heroes from above the
steps."

Then spake the king from the Rhine: "They said, that they would fain
bear Rudeger hence, and I bade this be denied them to vex King Etzel,
and not thy men, until then Wolfhart began to rail about it."

Then the hero of Berne made answer: "Fate would have it so. Gunther,
most noble king, now through thy courtesie requite me of the wrongs,
that have happed to me from thee, and make such amends, brave knight,
that I may give thee credit for the deed. Give thyself and thy men to me
as hostages, and I will guard you, as best I may, that none here do thee
aught among the Huns. Thou shalt find me naught but good and true."

"Now God forbid," quoth Hagen, "that two knights give themselves up
to thee, that still do stand opposed to thee so doughtily and walk so
unfettered before their foes."

"Gunther and Hagen, ye should not deny me this," spake Dietrich. "Ye
have grieved my heart and mind so sore, that it were but right, and ye
would requite me. I give you my hand and troth as pledge, that I will
ride with you, home to your land. I'll lead you in all honor, or else
lie dead, and for your sakes I will forget my grievous wrongs."

"Crave this no longer," answered Hagen. "'Twere fitting, that the tale
be told of us, that two men so brave had given themselves up to you. We
see none standing by you, save Hildebrand alone."

Then up spake Master Hildebrand: "God wot, Sir Hagen, the hour will
come, when ye will gladly take the peace, if so be any offer to keep it
with you. Ye might well content you with the truce my lord doth offer."

"Forsooth I'd take the truce," quoth Hagen, "or ever I'd flee from out
a hall so shamefully as ye did, Master Hildebrand. I weened, ye could
stand better against a foe."

To this Hildebrand made answer: "Why twit ye me with that? Who was it
sate upon a shield hard by the Waskstone, (1) when Walter of Spain slew
so many of his kin? Ye, too, have faults enow of your own to show."

Then spake Sir Dietrich: "Ill doth it beseem heroes, that they should
scold like aged beldams. I forbid you, Hildebrand, to speak aught more.
Grievous wrongs constrain me, homeless warrior. Let's hear, Knight
Hagen, what ye twain did speak, ye doughty men, when ye saw me coming
toward you armed? Ye said, that ye alone would fain encounter me in
strife."

"Certes, none doth deny," Knight Hagen spake, "that I will essay it here
with mighty blows, unless be, that the sword of Nibelung break in my
hand. Wroth am I, that we twain have here been craved as hostages."

When Dietrich noted Hagen's raging mood, quickly the doughty knight and
good snatched up his shield. How swiftly Hagen sprang toward him from
the steps! Loudly the good sword of Nibelung rang on Dietrich's head.
Then wist Dietrich well, that the bold knight was grim of mood. The
lord of Berne gan guard him against the fearful blows, for well he knew
Hagen, the stately knight. Balmung he also feared, a weapon stout enow.
Dietrich returned the blows at times in cunning wise, until at last he
conquered Hagen in the strife. A wound he dealt him, the which was
deep and long. Then Lord Dietrich thought him: "Thou art worn out with
strife; little honor shall I have, and thou liest dead before me. I will
try, if perchance I can force thee to be my hostage."

This he wrought with danger. His shield he let fall, great was his
strength, and clasped Hagen of Troneg in his arms. Thus the brave knight
was overcome by Dietrich. Noble Gunther gan wail thereat. Dietrich now
bound Hagen and led him to where he found the highborn queen; into her
hand he gave the bravest warrior that ever bare a sword. Then merry enow
she grew after her great dole. For very joy King Etzel's wife bowed low
before the knight. "May thy heart and body be ever blest. Thou hast well
requited me of all my woes. For this will I ever serve thee, unless be,
that death doth hinder me therefrom."

Then spake Lord Dietrich: "Pray let him live, most noble queen. And if
this still may be, how well will I requite you of that which he hath
done you! Let him not suffer, because ye see him stand here bound."

She bade Hagen then be led away to duress, where he lay locked in and
where none did see him. Gunther, the high-born king, began to call:
"Whither went the knight of Berne? He hath done me wrong."

At this Lord Dietrich went to meet him. Gunther's might was worthy
of praise; no more he bided, but ran outside the hall, and from the
clashing of the swords of the twain a mighty din arose. However much and
long Lord Dietrich's prowess had been praised, yet Gunther was so sorely
angered and enraged, for because of the grievous dole, he was his deadly
foe, that men still tell it as a wonder, that Sir Dietrich did not fall.
Great were both their prowess and their strength. The palace and the
towers resounded with the blows, when with the swords they hewed at the
sturdy helmets. King Gunther was of lordly mood, but the knight of Berne
overcame him, as happed to Hagen afore. The hero's blood was seen to
ooze through the armor rings, drawn forth by a keen-edged sword, the
which Sir Dietrich bare. Though weary, Sir Gunther had guarded him most
valiantly. The lord was now bound by Dietrich's hands. Though kings
should not endure such bonds, yet Dietrich thought, if he set free the
king and his liegeman, that all they met must needs fall dead at their
hands.

Dietrich of Berne now took him by the hand and led him bound to where
he found Kriemhild. At sight of his sorrow much of her fear took flight.
She spake: "Welcome, Gunther, from the Burgundian land."

Quoth he: "I would bow before you, dear sister mine, if your greetings
were but kinder. I know you, queen, to be so wroth of mood that ye do
give me and Hagen meagre greetings."

Up spake the knight of Berne: "Most noble queen, never were such good
knights made hostages, as I have given you in them, exalted lady. For my
sake, I pray you, spare these homeless men."

She vowed she'd do it gladly. Then Sir Dietrich left the worshipful
knights with weeping eyes. Later Etzel's wife avenged her grimly; she
took the life of both the chosen heroes. To make their duress worse she
let them lie apart, so that neither saw the other, till she bare her
brother's head to Hagen. Kriemhild's vengeance on both was great enow.

Then the queen went to Hagen. In what right hostile wise she spake to
the knight: "If ye will give me back what ye have taken from me, then ye
may still go home alive to Burgundy."

Grim Hagen answered: "Thou dost waste thy words, most noble queen.
Forsooth I have sworn an oath, that I would not show the hoard, the
while and any of my lords still live; so I shall give it to none."

"I'll make an end of this," quoth the high-born wife. Then she bade her
brother's life be taken. His head they struck off, and by the hair she
bare it to the knight of Troneg. Loth enow it was to him. When sad of
mind the warrior gazed upon his master's head, he spake to Kriemhild:
"Thou hast brought it to an end after thy will, and it hath happed, as I
had thought me. The noble king of Burgundy now lieth dead, and Giselher,
the youth, and Sir Gernot, too. None knoweth of the treasure now save
God and me, and it shall ever be hid from thee, thou fiend."

Quoth she: "Ye have requited me full ill, so I will keep the sword of
Siegfried, the which my sweetheart bare, when last I saw him, in whom
dole of heart hath happed to me through you."

From the sheath she drew it, nor could he hinder her a whit. She planned
to rob the knight of life. With her hands she raised it and struck off
his head. This King Etzel saw, and sore enow it rued him. "Alack!" cried
the lording, "how lieth now dead at a woman's hands the very best of
knights, that ever came to battle or bare a shield! However much I was
his foe, yet it doth grieve me sorely."

Then spake old Hildebrand: "Forsooth it shall not boot her aught, that
she durst slay him. Whatso hap to me, and however much it may bring me
to a dangerous pass, yet will I avenge bold Troneg's death."

Hildebrand sprang in wrath towards Kriemhild. For fear of him she
suffered pain; but what might it avail her, that she shrieked so
frightfully? He dealt the queen a grievous sword-blow, the which did
cut the high-born dame in twain. Now all lay low in death whom fate had
doomed. Dietrich and Etzel then began to weep; sorely they mourned
both kin and liegemen. Their mickle honors lay there low in death; the
courtiers all had grief and drearihead. The king's high feast had ended
now in woe, as joy doth ever end in sorrow at the last. I cannot tell
you, that which happed thereafter, save that knights and ladies and
noble squires were seen to weep for the death of loving kinsmen. The
tale hath here an end. This is the Nibelungs' fall. (2) (3)


   ENDNOTES:
   (1)  "Waskstone", see Adventure XXXV, note 2.
   (2)  "Fall".  The word "not", translated here "fall", means
        really 'disaster', but as this word is not in keeping with
        the style, "fall" has been chosen as preferable to 'need',
        used by some translators.  The MS. C has here "liet" instead
        of "not" of A and B.
   (3)  The "Nibelungenlied" is continued by the so-called "Klage",
        a poem written in short rhyming couplets.  As the name
        indicates, it describes the lamentations of the survivors
        over the dead.  The praises of each warrior are sung and a
        messenger dispatched to acquaint Gorelind, Uta, and Brunhild
        with the sad end of their kinsmen.  It closes with
        Dietrich's departure from Etzel's court and his return home.
        Although in one sense a continuation of our poem, the
        "Klage" is an independent work of no great merit, being
        excessively tedious with its constant repetitions.  A
        reprint and a full account of it will be found in Piper's
        edition of our poem, vol. I.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nibelungenlied, by Unknown

